Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Friday 24 April 2009 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago marked the fifth anniversary of the biggest enlargement in the history of the European Union .
On 1 May 2004 , seventy-five million people from ten countries in Central and Eastern Europe , as well as the Mediterranean - namely Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Slovenia , Malta and Cyprus - expressed their pleasure at becoming citizens of the European Union .
This enlargement was followed in 2007 by the accession of Romania and Bulgaria .
The fact that this was possible was one of the most amazing developments of our time .
After the people of Central and Eastern Europe had suffered sixty years of oppression , the enlargement of the EU represented the completion of the reunification of our continent , based on the shared values of freedom , democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights and human dignity .
As a result of this process , the EU has gained in strength , diversity and cultural richness .
The enlargement process was , and is , an enriching experience for every single Member State , as well as for the EU as a whole .
Five years after that historical moment , enlargement has proved to be a great success for the EU .
Its significance for the everyday lives of our citizens has continued to increase .
After the servitude of Communism , the enlargement process contributed to making democracy a reality and to strengthening stability on our continent .
Enlargement improved the standard of living in the new Member States and provided a powerful stimulus for the whole European economy , as the old Member States also benefited from the new export and investment opportunities , as well as a larger market .
In essence , the accession of twelve new countries has strengthened the position of the EU worldwide , and has lent it more weight as an international political and economic actor .
During the five years that have passed since enlargement , we in the European Parliament , and the other institutions of the European Union , have succeeded in integrating our new members .
We have learnt to meet each other half way and to work together more closely .
However , a larger and more diverse EU requires closer cooperation and the a greater capacity to take action .
The Treaty of Lisbon contains the core reforms necessary to adapt the EU 's institutions to the consequences of enlargement and to place them in a position to meet the challenges we face .
Even if the discussion about the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon has yet to be completed , we should be confident that we will have a positive result at the beginning of next year and we are hoping for a positive result in the Czech Senate next Wednesday .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we should be extremely pleased that we are part of this community today and , as it is so beautifully put in the Berlin Declaration of 25 March 2007 : ' we have united for the better ' .
We have cause to be pleased and thankful .
Now we must turn to a rather worrying fact : I wish to express our profound concern regarding the tragic situation facing the US-Iranian journalist Roxana Saberi , who has been sentenced to eight years in prison for allegedly spying on behalf of the US , and is currently being held in the Evin prison in Tehran .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to join the President of the European Council , and the President of the US , in demanding Roxana Saberi 's immediate and unconditional release .
( Applause )
The case of Roxana Saberi reflects the dramatic overall situation in Iran in terms of human rights , which , since 2005 - especially in relation to civil and political rights - has continued to deteriorate , in spite of the fact that , within the framework of existing international instruments , Iran has made a commitment to promoting and protecting human rights .
The sentencing of Mrs Saberi comes at a critical moment : two months before the presidential elections in Iran , and only a short time after efforts were initiated by the US and the EU to improve relations with Iran .
I am deeply concerned that , in the light of the political developments underway , Mrs Saberi could be used as a bargaining chip , and I would like to condemn in the strongest possible terms a move that is so clearly politically motivated .
I would like to assure Mrs Saberi 's family of our solidarity and the strong commitment of the European Parliament to ensuring unconditional respect for human rights and democracy in Iran and throughout the world .
( Applause )
I would like to add that we have been informed that a young woman in Iran , who was accused of having committed a crime when she was a minor , has now been executed .
This is contrary to all the rules of international law and we raise our voices against this crime .
( Applause )
Finally , I would like to inform you that after the tragic events which took place in Appeldoorn , in the Netherlands , last week , I have conveyed , on behalf of all of us , our deepest condolences to the Dutch Queen , the families of the victims and the Dutch people , and that , across Europe , we stand shoulder to shoulder with our Dutch friends .
These were some items of news .
We will now return to our usual business .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
( NL ) Mr President , Queen 's Day in the Netherlands is the annual occasion when the entire Dutch population celebrates with the House of Orange-Nassau .
These celebrations were brutally disrupted , and we have barely recovered from the shock .
We remember the victims and express our condolences to their relatives .
On behalf of the Dutch delegation , I should like to thank you for the letter you sent on behalf of the European Parliament to our queen Beatrix .
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigenda ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Announcement by the President : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this sitting , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 30 April 2009 , pursuant to Rule 132 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Wednesday :
The GUE / NGL Group has requested that the joint statement on the Leinen , Dehaene , Brok , Guy-Quint and Kaufmann reports on the Treaty of Lisbon be removed from the agenda .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , on behalf of my group I request that this package of reports be struck from the agenda of this session .
I think that this House should show some measure of humility and some respect for the democratic process .
We all know that Ireland has rejected the Lisbon Treaty and so it is of some wonderment to me that this House persists in debating that matter .
It is not democratically appropriate that this House should set aside the verdict of Ireland or that this House should be used to ratchet up pressure on Ireland in the coming months to adopt a treaty that is clearly not in our interests or in the interests of the European people .
I remind Members that Ireland , and Ireland alone , had a democratic vote on this treaty and , in the only place where it was put to a democratic decision , the people rejected it .
I ask at this time , only weeks from the European elections , when the issue of the quality of our democracy is so crucial , that these reports be struck from the agenda and that we turn our attention rather to economic matters and the issue of unemployment - issues that really affect our citizens .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I find this line of argument beyond belief .
It is not a question of ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon here today .
We only want to be prepared for when it is ratified .
If it is not , then everything we have decided will be wasted .
However , if it is ratified - and this would then take place in October - this Parliament will have to work differently from November onwards .
It would be really irresponsible of us not to be prepared .
That is why this debate is necessary and why a decision must be taken .
Furthermore , Mrs McDonald , I find it especially unfair to your colleague Mrs Kaufmann , who is unfortunately leaving this Parliament , that you have not even given her the chance , at the end of her time here , to see such an important report adopted in the European Parliament .
On behalf of your colleague Mrs Kaufmann , I must disagree with you .
( Applause )
Mr President , we propose including on the agenda a debate on the reform of the common fisheries policy , bearing in mind the presentation by the European Commission on 22 April of the Green Paper on the reform of this important common policy , and also bearing in mind the profound implications for this strategic sector and for fishermen of some of the proposals contained in that Green Paper .
For that matter , a proposal to include this issue on the agenda has already been made by this Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries , given the political importance and topicality of this debate .
This part-session is the last opportunity for the current Parliament to express its opinion on this issue .
Mr President , the problem is quite simply that we will not have the time .
It is not practical to start a debate , today , in the very few hours that remain , on a subject that will only be concluded in 2012 or 2013 .
We discussed it in committee , during the meeting of 30 April .
The opinion of all of my colleagues is that we should wait until the next parliamentary term to start to examine matters .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , thank you for your congratulations on the anniversary of the enlargement of the European Union .
At the end of this term , I should like to pay tribute to the activities of Parliament 's Baltic Europe Intergroup , which has drawn practical conclusions from the last enlargement , with the Baltic Sea becoming , in fact , the Union 's internal sea .
It has initiated a new European policy - the Baltic Sea strategy .
We can be truly satisfied that , under the creative and skilful leadership of Christopher Beazley , the Baltic Sea strategy has won the support of the Commission and will soon be introduced by the Swedish Presidency .
Therefore , I strongly suggest that the activities of this intergroup be continued in the next European Parliament .
Implementation of the Baltic Sea strategy will be a long process that needs parliamentary supervision and , occasionally , reports .
I also hope that the activities of the intergroups , as a basic form of parliamentary democracy , will not be restricted in the next European Parliament .
Here I am repeating the message delivered by my colleague Mr Bushill-Matthews .
Mr President , I want to urge you to intervene with the Commission on behalf of a group of my constituents .
The citizens of Gibraltar , whom I have had the honour of representing formally for five years and informally for two decades before that , are gravely concerned about the cancer clusters that have recently been discovered both in Gibraltar and on the Spanish side of the border .
It is difficult when you are in Gibraltar not to see , and occasionally smell , the smoke and pollution from the refineries adjacent to the border , and the concern is that these are the causes of the cancer clusters .
What we would like to see is a joint investigation on both sides and jointly agreed terms of reference , to try and alleviate the worries and concerns that people on both sides of the border have about the problems of pollution and its consequences .
Mr President , on behalf of one of my constituents I want to raise the case of a young man with dual British / Greek nationality named John Zafiropoulos .
Last year he was convicted by a first-degree Greek court to serve an unconscionably severe sentence in prison in Greece .
From the information I have been given , Mr President , I consider that the crucial rules relating to Greek legislation , as well as the provisions for fair trials , have been violated .
These fair trial provisions are defined by all of Europe and are the rights of every European citizen .
At the start of this year I wrote to the Greek Minister of Justice in Athens to alert him to my concerns .
The response which I received , three months later , was signed by minor Ministry employees and made no reference to the matter which I had raised with the Minister - in other words , the breaking of the rules about fair trials .
I am very concerned about this , Mr President , and for this reason I am raising it in Parliament right now , hoping that Athens will both send me a proper reply and deliver a full and fair review of the case of Mr Zafiropoulos .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to comment on the way in which the European Parliament works .
I think that voting on important documents only a few minutes after closing the debate is not wise .
Not all the arguments come to light before the sittings of the political groups , and when there is a large number of amendments it is worth considering moving the vote to the next day .
This is a matter which should be considered in the next parliamentary term .
Unfortunately , in the meantime two events have occurred which are very significant to me , and I would also like to say something about them .
Firstly , Russia has signed an agreement with Abkhazia and Ossetia which secures the presence of Russian troops in these provinces of Georgia .
What right , then , do we have to say that the situation in Chechnya is an internal matter ?
I hope that in the next term Parliament will also comment on this matter .
Over the last year in Poland a further 114 000 men have lost their jobs .
This is not only the effect of the crisis .
A series of announcements of plans for group redundancies is reaching employment offices , and this includes over 80 000 Polish shipyard workers who have had their jobs taken away by the European Union , which allows the use of state funds to support other jobs in other countries .
This is discrimination .
( DE ) Mr President , last week , Slovenia stepped up its opposition to Croatia 's accession .
I would like to describe this conflict in clear terms , as this behaviour seems to me to be inappropriate and unworthy of a Member State of the European Union .
Croatia is a candidate country , waiting to join the European Union , and has shown a strong willingness to implement reforms .
Although not all of the criteria have been met , the direction being taken is clear .
Slovenia must stop behaving in a petty manner , so that a solution may quickly be found .
The Treaty of Lisbon and the enlargement process will allow the European Union to develop further , and Croatia will become a Member State !
( PL ) Mr President , out of concern for the future of Europe , I would like today , in Strasbourg in the last session of this parliamentary term , to recall the words of our great countryman , the Holy Father John Paul II , who said , ' There will be no European unity until unity is based on unity of the spirit ' .
It was Christianity which gave Europe this deepest foundation of unity and strengthened it for centuries , the Christian Gospel with its understanding of mankind and its contribution to the development of history , peoples and nations .
This does not mean we are using history for our own ends , for the history of Europe is like a great river , into which flow manifold tributaries and streams , and the diversity of traditions and cultures which have created Europe is its great wealth .
The basis of European identity is itself built on Christianity , and the present lack of spiritual unity is mainly the result of the crisis in our awareness of that Christian identity .
Mr President , over the last five years I have watched in horror the EU 's endless scandalous institutionalised looting of taxpayers ' money .
I watched in horror an already overcrowded UK deluged by hundreds and thousands of uninvited foreign workers who arrive for their benefit and claim our welfare .
I watched in close-up a legislative system that permits anonymous bureaucrats to generate so-called law without any regard for the damage they do to the British economy and its businesses .
I watched in close-up -
( Interjection from the floor : ' From Her Majesty 's prison ! ' )
this expensive , ineffectual talking shop of a parliament , masquerading as an elaborate illusion of accountable democracy , a monstrous deceit on the electors who sent us here .
President Gorbachev was right : the EU is the old Soviet Union dressed in Western clothes .
You will one day realise that you cannot be masters in someone else 's house .
You are speaking in a free Parliament .
If the Parliament was not free , you would not even have been able to make that speech .
( Applause )
( SL ) On 2 April , this House adopted a resolution on European conscience and totalitarianism by a large majority .
I love my homeland , Slovenia , but it saddens me that this European Parliament resolution has failed to fall on fertile ground in Slovenia and has failed to help us to resolve the painful problems of the past .
On the contrary , there are some people who want to elevate Tito to the status of a hero and name a street in the Slovenian capital after him , despite the fact that he was responsible for mass killings after the war .
Since Tito was never brought to justice , many people do not want to admit that these postwar mass killings constitute a crime and that those who ordered them were criminals .
Perhaps it might be appropriate for the European Parliament or you , Mr President , to call on the national parliaments to familiarise themselves with this resolution and then to endorse or supplement it , taking their specific national circumstances into account .
In so doing , they would contribute to a clearer and fairer understanding of their national and European histories .
Mr President , we have often deplored the supposed lack of information for the public in the run-up to the European elections .
I would submit , after the recent intervention from Mr Mote , that the greater problem is the wilful misinformation , if not downright lies , that are peddled before the public .
In my country at the moment the so-called UK Independence Party - the party that Mr Mote was elected for - has posters across the country claiming that the European Union costs us EUR 400 million per day in membership .

That would be EUR 15 billion per year - a figure that is actually five times higher than the factual figure , which you can get from the House of Commons library .
Not to be outdone , their donor , Stuart Wheeler , has said it costs GBP 120 billion per year , some 36 times the real figure .
But the truth is that the European budget , anyway costing only EUR 3.3 billion , is a simple 1 % of GDP .
It is a rather small budget , quite small when compared to the huge economic benefits , which amount to some EUR 2 000 per family in my country - an enormous benefit , well worth the price of membership , well worth the benefit of mentioning .
As you yourself said , Mr President , the price of freedom is the right for some people to give misinformation and to tell lies .
We have to pay that price , but we must be vigorous in defending the truth .
( Applause )
Mr President , the Director of Operations for UNWRA in Gaza , John Ging , spoke to Members of this Parliament last week and informed us that there were still no materials for reconstruction going into Gaza following the bombing , nothing for business or industry , and that only 60 % of the calorific needs of the population were being met by the UN .
Mr President , you have seen the situation for yourself , but it continues , and it is a case of collective punishment applied by Israel against innocent people there .
Just within the last few days we have heard , astonishingly , Israel threatening the European Union and saying that if Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner continues refusing to upgrade the Israel-EU Association Agreement , then European influence will be diminished , undermined , and we will have no role to play in the peace process .
It is time to call a halt .
Israel 's behaviour is an affront to humanity , to civilisation .
It is time for us not simply not to upgrade that agreement , but to suspend that agreement .
( PL ) Mr President , only 13 % of Polish citizens will vote in the coming elections to the European Parliament .
The lot of the majority will be decided by the minority , and that is a great pity .
In the face of global challenges we need the EU , and people can see the value of international solidarity .
However , recently nothing has been done to increase the engagement of society in this area .
Debate in Poland is dominated by squabbles between two parties .
Public money is senselessly spent on billboard posters showing the flat faces of those who do not know how to get out and meet the people .
Prime Minister Tusk is as interested in a real debate on European affairs as Mr Kaczyński was before him .
The last time I spoke in this Chamber I asked if the European Parliament anticipated any spectacular last minute efforts to persuade people to vote .
Unfortunately , the debate was presided over by Mr Siwiec , who , it seems , still cannot get used to the idea that democracy without the engagement of the people amounts to nothing .
Therefore I ask once again : is the European Parliament able to do anything at all , so that as an institution it can fulfil expectations in relation to the elections ? Thirteen per cent is not only an unlucky number , it is a downright disgrace .
Mr President , I would just like to respond to some of the criticism on ' green ' light bulbs that has appeared again in the media , particularly the Eurosceptic media , over this weekend .
Silence lends assent , so I would just like to say that energy-efficient light bulbs are not a danger to the public if properly handled by the consumer , by the householder , and if produced in a proper working environment where the health of the employees and the environment are both respected .
The onus is on European multinationals that have light bulbs manufactured in places like China to ensure that they meet the standards of manufacture we would require if they were manufactured in the European Union .
The end product , the light bulb itself , is perfectly safe when used according to instructions , as safe as any existing light bulbs or batteries , for example , are today .
They must be properly disposed of and handled according to the instructions .
I think there is an agenda here - an anti-Europe agenda - in relation to the manufacture of modern , greener , cleaner light bulbs , and I think we have to stand up to those who wish misinformation to be the order of the day on these most important products .
( FR ) Mr President , President Mitterrand used to say that there were two ways of doing politics : the clerks ' way and the cooks ' way .
If I mention these two options , it is with the accession process of the countries of the former Yugoslavia and of Albania in mind .
Listening to and reading the positions adopted by the Commission and by my fellow Members , I rather feel that it is the profession of clerk that they identify with , with their strict , scrupulous noting of the chapters accomplished , and their adding , where necessary , of additional stages such as bilateral problems between Slovenia and Croatia .
I believe that we are making a fundamental mistake .
In the case in point , it would be better to identify with the cook , so as to marry delicately and subtly the ingredients and the cultural diversities , to spice up the dishes , and to benefit from these new countries and all that they offer in terms of enriching our Europe .
Europe remains an ideal of respect , tolerance and diversity ; it remains a force for peace , especially for the Western Balkans ; and it demands a shared vision , a vision of a common destiny .
Nothing would be worse in this period of major economic crisis than for us to withdraw into ourselves and take refuge in a panic-stricken fear of others , of foreigners .
Let us remember the approach of Europe 's founding fathers and let us apply it to these countries of the Western Balkans .
( SL ) The enlargement of the European Union has brought growth , peace and stability , as well as making democratisation possible .
The most recent enlargement , which took place five years ago , has been a success story , but today we are faced with an economic situation which requires fast and effective action .
We can see and feel the benefits of full integration into the European Union and the enlargement of the euro zone .
The bulwark provided by the euro has proved a successful safeguard , not only for economic interests within the European Union , but also for those of Wider Europe .
In the European Union , we are experiencing , not 27 economic crises , but one single one , a very serious and deep crisis .
The fastest way for us to solve it will be to team up with other European countries and take coordinated , timely and decisive action .
Protectionism is a retrograde step , but populism is a recipe for economic collapse .
Companies which are growing and expanding have a future .
Similarly , the future of the European Union lies in its continued enlargement and in creating and building on new possibilities and better opportunities .
- ( SK ) 1 May this year marked the 5th anniversary of Slovakia 's accession to the EU .
Various activities took place on the day , at which we weighed up our activities in the EU .
I took part in celebrations on the Slovak-Polish border at the border bridge of Čirč-Leluchov .
This symbolic bridge , which was constructed with pre-accession funding from the EU , has united Slovak and Polish communities in the border region and has kick-started cooperation between citizens on both sides of the border .
After Slovakia and Poland joined the Schengen area in December 2007 border controls were eliminated and with them the administrative barriers which had created problems for local people , hindering cooperation .
Today we can see many successful projects financed from EU structural funds which are contributing to the long-term sustainable development of these areas .
Mr President , I would like to express my great joy and gratitude for the fact that Slovakia , together with its neighbours , belongs to the EU .
I am delighted that , as one of the 14 MEPs representing Slovakia in the European Parliament , I was able to take part in writing this successful chapter in EU history during this election period .
( BG ) We have witnessed over recent months a number of incidents involving the hijacking of ships by Somali pirates for ransom .
There is a danger that this practice is turning into a well-organised form of maritime terrorism and a lucrative business , with consultancy and law firms even becoming involved as intermediaries .
A happy ending for the hostages in these cases must not be greeted with delight as the ship owners and countries affected pay a high price for it .
Piracy is becoming a threat to shipping on a global scale .
This activity has started affecting an ever-increasing number of European citizens too .
There are currently 16 Bulgarians who are being held captive on the ship Malaspina Castle .
Monitoring the negotiations with the pirates cannot be accepted as an adequate policy .
We need greater clarity as to what commitments the European Union assumes in such situations .
The measures currently being taken by various institutions are important , but are obviously completely inadequate .
This is why I am insisting on urgent action at the highest level to free the hostages and bring this activity under control , which is a disgrace in the 21st century .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been here for 30 years just as you have , but perhaps if we were to take stock of those 30 years we would see that they have failed to live up to the hopes we had in 1985 when in this Parliament we made a qualitative leap from an old and failed Europe of states towards the United States of Europe .
Today we have returned to that inauspicious past - a Europe of states but not a European state - and to our enclosure , and the people around us who hailed us as a great hope , as an opportunity to seize , are in fact people who will soon vote half-heartedly , and will once again condemn the fact that we are representing , through an ill-fated metamorphosis , Mr President , the evil we came out against and deceived ourselves that we had conquered .
Thank you very much , Mr Pannella .
I remember well that , when we were elected in 1979 , you tabled thousands of amendments - back then still in hard copy .
In the meantime , however , you have left us once , while I have remained here the whole time .
You returned to work in Parliament in Rome .
( EL ) Mr President , we are celebrating the anniversary of the accession of new countries to the European Union and we were all delighted and moved by your statement .
However , I imagine that the present Commissioner , like me and many other fellow Members , is thinking that one of the countries which joined , namely Cyprus , is still occupied in the north and that there are foreign troops there .
The European Union is being called on again today to ensure that the Community acquis applies to the whole of the island of Cyprus .
( RO ) The economic crisis has had a serious impact on the global economy .
It is estimated that all Member States will have negative growth rates this year .
At a European level there has been an alarming rise in the number of unemployed , with many companies scaling down their activities and laying off staff or making employees technically unemployed .
Europe 's citizens are losing their jobs and having difficulties in paying off the loans they have taken out .
Their quality of life is also deteriorating .
I believe that during this period of economic and financial crisis the EU must invest primarily in people .
The well-being of Europe 's businesses is down to employees .
This is why I believe that we have a duty , first and foremost , to support them .
I think that the Employment Summit which will take place in Prague on 7 May must urgently identify specific solutions to halt the alarming rise in unemployment .
I take this opportunity to urge the European Council meeting in June to make it its priority to preserve jobs and find solutions for reducing unemployment in the European Union .
Mr President , today is 4 May and this will be my last speech here .
However , 30 years ago today Mrs Margaret Thatcher was elected as British Prime Minister and she faced similar Socialist-caused problems to those that we face today : crippling debts , rising unemployment and public unrest .
She understood the solution was small government , individual freedoms and national self-determination .
Today the EU imposes big government , increasing central control and the erosion of the nation state .
I can also remember her saying ' no ' , ' no ' , ' no ' , words the EU ignores or does not understand .
She went on to make that now famous speech in Bruges that sparked opposition to the project .
The EU is a 50-year-old attempted answer to a 200-year-old problem .
I maintain if the EU was the answer , it must have been a very silly question .
And , as they say in Star Wars , may the fourth be with you .
If you would allow me this comment , I think she was , and is , a great lady .
She was a prime minister who agreed that the legislation concerning the single market could be done by majority voting .
So Margaret Thatcher agreed to majority voting in the Council : this was a great decision .
( HU ) Mr President , two weeks ago I was similarly standing here describing the EU 's enlargement as a success story where old and new Member States mutually benefited in what is known as a ' win-win situation ' .
Today , Mr President , I would like to say that while we are in the midst of an economic crisis , the political elite must show an example of moderation .
In Germany restrictions have been imposed on the managers of companies subsidised by the State .
US President Obama has taken similar steps , while the Hungarian Government is cutting ministers ' salaries by 15 % .
Mr President , it would be good if the European Commission could also set an example in this regard .
After all , at a time of crisis , it would have a significant impact on the EU 's reputation , trustworthiness and prestige if commissioners were to give up part of their hefty severance pay .
Even if it is a symbolic gesture , it would give a signal to Europe 's citizens that during an economic crisis , EU leaders are also prepared to make sacrifices and are showing solidarity with those on more modest incomes .
Mr President , the Republic of China , better known to us as Taiwan , has finally achieved its just objective of being able to attend the World Health Assembly ( WHA ) as an observer .
The People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) has consistently blocked this move since 1971 , when it replaced Taiwan in the United Nations .
As a doctor , I firmly believe that public health issues should never play a part in international relations , and the European Parliament , to its credit , has consistently rejected Beijing 's petty policy of blocking Taiwan 's attempts to be present at WHA meetings .
I congratulate Taiwanese President Ma on his new successful policy of rapprochement between Beijing and Taipei , and at last the PRC has seen the folly of its bullying ways towards its neighbour .
I too look forward to better relations between the two governments , which is a win-win situation for all parties concerned and in particular now for the good health of the hard-working Taiwanese people .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on a personal note , I would simply like to reiterate that contrary to your assertion , and other than this you have been consistent throughout this parliamentary term , for the last 30 years I have always been re-elected to this Parliament .
What happened was that within the team spirit of the Radical Party , and having advised the voters in advance , I gave up my seat to other colleagues such as Olivier Dupuis , who served in this House and elsewhere .
What you said was therefore incorrect , let me repeat , I was re-elected every time , for 30 years .
Unfortunately , this time , Mr President - although you were in fact here in the days of Otto von Habsburg and Altiero Spinelli , who encouraged our Parliament to make a real stand against the Council 's demands by refusing to issue opinions - well , Mr President , this time we have both witnessed this Parliament content to behave like a ' taxi parliament ' when faced with the desire to impose non-parliamentary timelines on us - and you did impose them - in relation to the failed Lisbon project .
Thank you very much , Mr Pannella .
Your words do not contradict what I said .
I am satisfied that between 1996 and 1999 you were absent from the European Parliament .
You were elected , as you stated , and that does not contradict what I said .
I would like to explicitly assure you of my respect for your activities and your work in the European Parliament .
Mr President , I rise to express my concern about thousands of innocent civilians who have been turned into refugees in their own homeland by the Taliban in the Swat Valley .
We are all familiar with the stories about mistreatment of women by the Taliban .
However , the news coming out of the valley in the last month reports closing of barbershops , banning of music and disabling of satellite television receivers .
Also robbing of banks and looting of homes or women 's jewellery at gunpoint are common occurrences , especially of those that oppose or that stand up to the Taliban .
The introduction of Sharia law in the Swat Valley has also resulted in all non-Muslims living in the valley having to pay jizya , an ancient form of tax , and I understand that the Sikhs living in the area were kidnapped or threatened until they agreed to pay .
As the only Sikh MEP , I have been contacted by numerous constituents who are horrified as to what is happening in the Swat Valley - people who have lived there for 60 years are discriminated against in this way .
This Parliament has a proud history and record of fighting against these forms of violations of human rights and denouncing those that are exercising these intimidatory actions .
However , we need to go beyond just statements and ask for concrete action from the Commission to make sure that we have a strategy as to how we address the Taliban and their rising influence in that region .
Taliban are the real threat to all the values that we hold dear , human rights , equality and democracy .
I urge you to write to the Commissioner to take some action .
Thank you , Mrs Gill .
This is also the last time that I will preside over the one-minute speeches .
I have always tried to allow as many people to speak as possible .
We have often been able to get through the entire list - as we were indeed able to do this evening - for it is one of the privileges of the MEPs to be able to speak , and Monday evenings always provide an opportunity to do so .
Therefore , I would also like to thank you sincerely for what you have told us .
That concludes this item .
Flu epidemic ( debate )
The next item is a statement by the Commission on the flu epidemic .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to address Parliament , in its final week , on the global spread of the influenza A ( H1N1 ) virus .
Let me first brief you on the current situation , and then on what the EU has been doing to manage this crisis .
The latest European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) report states that there are currently 94 confirmed cases of A ( H1N1 ) influenza within the EU and EFTA countries , and 20 probable cases .
Most of these people have been to affected areas outside Europe , but not all .
Eight human-to-human transmissions have been reported , in one instance even to a health-care worker .
However , we may be glad that none of the patients infected with this virus in the EU has yet died .
For over a week we have observed the spread of infections in Mexico , in the USA , in Canada , in EU Member States and in other countries .
In Mexico the impact on public and economic life has grown to a serious scale .
We appreciate and acknowledge the enormous efforts the Mexican authorities have made to contain the spread of the virus and to help those suffering from infection .
EU legislation on communicable disease obliges Member States to report on such outbreaks and on the measures they propose to take to mitigate them .
The ECDC operates the surveillance networks which follow the number of cases reported .
We therefore have a fairly accurate picture across Europe of the developing situation , and this provides the basis for responsibly taking appropriate and effective decisions on how to best make use of our limited resources .
The worldwide picture of infection was severe enough to trigger the WHO to decide on 29 April to upgrade its pandemic alert to phase 5 , recognising that human-to-human transmission had taken place in at least two regions .
The Commission has worked throughout in close contact and cooperation with the WHO .
My services are working hard to implement the actions to take , as defined by the Community pandemic influenza preparedness plan , in order to address the challenges posed by the current outbreak .
The Commission launched its public health operations facility on 24 April and since then my services have been at permanent operational level .
The Commission has called daily meetings of the Communicable Disease Network of Member States and of the EU Health Security Committee since Saturday 25 April .
These meetings review the epidemiological situation , discuss and decide on measures and on appropriate legislative acts .
Information for the public on how to prevent infection and to make informed choices about travel has been discussed to ensure a coherent message from all Member States , based on scientific advice by the ECDC , in coordination with the WHO .
We decided to extend the surveillance for seasonal flu , which should normally have ended at week 20 , in order to identify infections with this new flu virus .
The Commission adopted on 30 April a legally binding case definition on the basis of the EU communicable disease legislation , and this decision was published in the Official Journal on 1 May .
Since medical countermeasures such as antivirals and vaccines are at the heart of our public health response to this threat , I met with the European manufacturers on Wednesday 29 April to learn the latest information on which products are in development , on timelines for new vaccines , and to see if EU intervention can speed up delivery .
With the Member States , we are examining how to best optimise the use of existing stocks of antivirals , using the coordination mechanism of the EU Health Security Committee .
I can also inform Parliament that , following my request to the Czech Presidency , the Health Council met on 30 April and adopted a set of strong conclusions reiterating the need for a coordinated response to the new influenza threat .
The Council recalled the legal obligation on Member States to coordinate their surveillance and response to health threats , and agreed that restricting travel to affected areas was not a justified public health response .
However , the Council also agreed that good public information was essential and that travellers should be able to make informed judgements .
The Commission is now examining a road map for the urgent implementation of the points included in the Council conclusions of 30 April .
These will include development of vaccines , vaccine strategy , guidance on best use of stockpiles of vaccines and antivirals , protective and preventative measures and public communication and information .
It is clear that we all benefit from our integrated European economy and society .
However , that benefit also brings a responsibility .
It means that we must work together to take only those measures that are justified by the evidence .
This is essential if we are to avoid a health crisis becoming an economic crisis as well .
But we should not focus unduly on the negative aspects of these events .
Thanks to the preparation led by the Commission after avian influenza a few years ago , the EU has the systems in place to respond collectively and effectively to this threat .
I know that in recent times , as the European elections approach , this House has debated what Europe really means for citizens .
In these difficult days , I think we can see some things more clearly .
Europe means solidarity in standing together to face this threat .
It means cooperation , sharing information , expertise and capacity so that we can act together on the basis of the best available knowledge .
It means innovation , with European-funded research helping to bring a vaccine to production as quickly as possible .
It means capability , through the European institutions enabling all Member States to respond immediately and effectively to a shared crisis .
That is what Europe brings to citizens .
So , yes , the situation is serious but we are better prepared than ever to meet this threat .
And having seen the determination of the health ministers of Europe last week - and all 27 were there - I am confident of our ability to respond in the coming weeks .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all thank you for the information you have given us , which was comprehensive , and I welcome the measures which you have taken .
I should like to draw your attention to three basic issues , which you also mentioned and which I consider to be necessary in order for us to address a possible pandemic .
The first is the plans which we have and which have already been processed by the Council , the European Commission and Parliament in connection with avian influenza .
We therefore have plans which are , in fact , quite good , despite the fact that certain omissions were criticised by specialist scientists .
I should therefore like to ask if these plans have been completed , if the Member States have adopted them and if they are ready to be applied , as the weakest link is very important here , and finally , there is the coordination which you have mentioned ; I am delighted to hear that you are ready to undertake it jointly with the Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for this entire influenza story .
The second issue that I want to mention is that of antiviral drugs .
An obligation was introduced for the Member States to have an adequate quota .
Antiviral drugs are also used for treatment , but of course they are for prevention and there needs to be guidelines here , because they cannot be used randomly ; they must be used properly .
The third issue that I should like to raise is that it would be useful if we could find a vaccine for the new influenza .
This vaccine will be very important and I believe that today , with the techniques at our disposal , companies could have it ready in three to four months .
So I would like you to exert pressure in this direction to ensure that an effort really is made to ensure that we have a new vaccine which , together with the vaccine for seasonal influenza , which you have rightly extended in order to combat this influenza for all the known scientific reasons , would constitute the best barrier to a possible influenza pandemic .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , it would seem that the flu pandemic is not as bad as expected .
We have been lucky again , just as we were with SARS - yet this is not down to the decision-makers , Mr President .
When the flu threat became known during the weekend , they agreed to meet for urgent talks on the Thursday - which strikes me as a redefinition of the word ' urgent ' .
Subsequently , nothing much was decided .
What happens if there is a real crisis ?
What happens in the event of the ' big one ' - which the World Health Organization is convinced is coming , and may well claim eight to 10 million lives ?
The ministers met to exchange information , and plans were made .
Yet what was the quality of the plans , and of the exchange of information ?
What measures have been taken , and are these actually coordinated ?
Is the Commission receiving all the necessary information ?
I have my doubts .
Taking the example of the antiviral drugs : who has , and who does not have , these ?
Also , are the ministers now prepared , at long last , to create a European emergency stockpile ?
Although I am not convinced that France 's proposal to ground all flights to Mexico was a good one , the Council 's decision that everyone should make up their own minds whether to do this is , of course , crazy .
With our open borders , what is the point of one country doing it if another does not ?
The countries should have taken that decision together .
The only solution to this is to empower the Commission to take this kind of emergency measures .
You , Commissioner , by order of the Council , should be able to take contingency measures within 24 hours on such issues as quarantine , disinfection measures at airports and travel restrictions .
I am not blaming the Commission , then .
Commissioner , you and your officials acted correctly .
Where was the Council , though ?
We look around the proverbial dusty Mexican square and there , in the sun , by the little station , sits the Council .
We run towards it crying ' flu , flu ' , and the sombrero lifts slowly and the Council replies ' mañana mañana ' and goes back to its siesta .
It is hard to do anything with this Council .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to join those who have thanked you , Commissioner , for the comprehensive information you have given us .
Yet I agree with Mr Trakatellis and Mr Maaten .
We did hold an extensive debate in this House in June 2006 .
We adopted a resolution , on which we worked hard at the time in Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
I have looked again at that resolution and I must say that , like Mr Trakatellis , I fear that there are a great many gaps , many weaknesses in the current approach .
Back then , we strongly recommended ensuring an exchange of information and also constructive cooperation between Member States , with a coordinating role for the Commission and in constructive cooperation with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
Anyone who now takes a good look round - and Mr Maaten raised this point very emphatically - will see that there are a great many gaps , that things are going incredibly slowly .
As for the stockpiles of antiviral drugs ; you yourself told us a few days ago that stocks were sufficient to cover 16 % of the population , when we had said that the figure needed to be 30 % .
Therefore , things are well below par , not to mention as regards the exchange of information on the nature of the virus .
This exchange of information is essential , as vaccines cannot be developed unless the nature of the virus is known .
Scientists I have contacted in recent days say that they have no information , that they cannot get hold of any .
Information on the nature of the virus is protected , is kept secret .
We have all these research institutes , but we cannot do what we need to do .
Something must be done about this .
We cannot tolerate this ; the threat is really too great .
Mr President , speaking on the subject of the threat posed by the influenza virus I would like to quote some of the opinions of Internet users which have appeared as a response to the panic in the media , which has been given an additional stimulus by comments made by the World Health Organization .
It is being said that the cause of the media hysteria is a desire to get rid of stocks of vaccines and the ineffective drug Tamiflu which are taking up shelf space in pharmaceutical warehouses , and an attempt to divert attention from the world crisis .
These reactions of society are not only testimony to a mistrust of authority , but they may also cause people to disregard a real threat of a pandemic in the future .
I think it would be wiser to release information about the danger of a possible pandemic of influenza or other disease after somewhat longer observations of cases of the illness and careful investigation of the virus and its virulence .
This would prevent the release of incomplete information , panic and , for example , the slaughter of pigs which is taking place .
- ( SK ) Commissioner , I too would like to thank you for your active and immediate response to the case in question .
Because of globalisation and large movements of tourists , travellers and ordinary people today there is no place on earth where this disease could not appear .
We can already see this from the cases that have appeared in locations as far away from Mexico as New Zealand , Australia , Europe and Africa .
Despite the subsidiarity of healthcare , infectious diseases know no boundaries and oblige us to take joint action .
There can be no solution within the framework of a single country .
It is time for solidarity .
Slovakia is sufficiently prepared even for an expansion of the influenza infection into a larger epidemic , perhaps because of the earlier avian influenza .
We have 700 000 Tamiflu doses in national reserves for 5 million inhabitants and I must say that it is also perhaps on account of the earlier threat of avian influenza that the populace is definitely well-prepared .
In case of an epidemic it is very important to keep the public informed , because where there is no information there will be plenty of disinformation .
We can see this from a number of African countries , for example Egypt where the current threat of an influenza epidemic coupled with the idea that the disease was spread by pigs has led to 300 000 - 400 000 pigs being slaughtered .
However , we should perhaps show solidarity in this case in other ways , since travel agencies were selling holidays in these destinations but now people are travelling there only in case of need .
As we have Eurolat , we should also think about supporting Mexico , where it is believed that this infection will cause GDP to decline by up to 4 - 5 % from current levels .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to say that we need to send realistic messages to our citizens , as the Commissioner has tried to do .
Science is much better prepared to face this pandemic than it was four years ago , and this can be seen from the low number of deaths occurring .
A great deal more is known about avian and human cases and about the transmission history of this swine influenza .
A good deal more is known about the solutions and I believe , therefore , we should trust in research , promote research and demand far more research into vaccines , as Mr Trakatellis also said .
We also know that society is much better prepared than it was a while ago , thanks to the wealth of experience and the organisational efforts made in every country , particularly those in Europe , in an effort to prevent further spread , stockpile medicines and provide citizens with a comprehensive service .
Nevertheless , I am concerned that those citizens may not be receiving enough information .
If we look at the press we can see that 90 % - or even more - of the material being printed focuses on falling infection rates , but very little is said of cures or how citizens should act .
I believe a great deal more information is needed .
I also feel that greater political effort is required with regard to our citizens .
To give an example , I am struck by the fact that not a single Member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has come to the debate , that all their seats are empty and nobody has asked for the floor in order to justify this situation , when this matter goes beyond individual parties and is of concern to all governments .
I also wish to stress that we can give third countries a helping hand , as the speaker before me said .
We need to give our support to all those countries that do not have the conditions , the basis or the capacity to provide assistance to all their citizens .
Therefore , the Europe of solidarity must take action , as must the Europe of communication .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to address the commissioner in order to voice my concern .
The development of the virus seems to be stabilising in Mexico , in Europe and so on , and , only today , I have heard comments on the radio to the effect that we may have gone too far , that our fellow citizens may have been made to worry unnecessarily .
Well , what concerns me , Commissioner , is not what is happening now , but what is going to happen in October when winter approaches .
It is well known that viruses do not like high temperatures .
The danger is therefore not there at present , but it will resurface in the winter - in October or November .
Thus , what we should like to know , Commissioner , is what you are doing precisely to ensure that we are fully prepared to tackle this virus that is liable to develop , that may mutate between now and then .
We are told that vaccines must be made , but is it certain that those vaccines that are going to be developed will be fit for use in all cases ?
Those are all of the questions that I am wondering about .
The concern is for next winter .
Communication is therefore necessary ; it must be explained to our fellow citizens that , whatever happens , it is not a question of letting their guard down , and that they must remain vigilant .
Might it be possible , Commissioner , for you to distribute a kind of small guide to help our fellow citizens adopt good habits ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would be interested to know whether there are any statistics available on face masks .
How many masks are available in Europe , and what quantities could be produced in the event of an outbreak of this kind of disease ?
The same goes for the medication available , of course .
Is there an overview of how much medication is currently stored in Europe and how much could be produced in the event of an outbreak ?
Do you think that it would be possible to also provide information for doctors in the 23 languages of the European Union , so that information could be provided rapidly and efficiently ?
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you first of all for your integrated and detailed presentation .
I was the European Parliament rapporteur on preparations by the 27 Member States to deal with avian influenza .
At that time , we established together with the Commissioner 's office that certain countries were lagging behind others , mainly in terms of stocks of antiviral drugs . I should like to ask you if this still applies today , or not , which would mean that the Member States are better prepared .
I should also like to ask you to do something as regards the popular press and unofficial rumours that are circulating throughout the European Union and causing panic among the citizens .
I believe that this is also the responsibility of the Member States and that perhaps your office should issue a recommendation on this .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for being here and for getting here so quickly .
If we compare this situation with the case of avian influenza , then - even as an impatient MEP - I am very satisfied with the way in which the European Union , the WHO , and also the Member States themselves , have responded .
Certain Members have said that there is insufficient information .
In Germany , I feel that I have been provided with sufficient information on how I should behave .
I also do not wish to always make Europe responsible for everything .
It is the Member States that are responsible for providing this information .
We should also take this opportunity to remind them that they need to fulfil their duty to provide information .
I have also heard , on a number of occasions , that there are still certain shortcomings , particularly relating to the stockpiling of vaccines .
I would be interested to know whether this is really the case , whether the Member States really do not want to share vaccines and whether they are only storing them for use on their territory , or whether they have agreed to share the vaccines .
Then we would be at the same stage as the Commission is now .
I would like to express my thanks for this rapid and excellent work . Congratulations !
That concludes the ' catch-the-eye ' period .
Before giving the floor to the Commissioner , I too should like to thank her for her initial speech .
I should also like to thank her in advance for all the information that she will shortly give us on an extremely important and topical issue .
This shows that both the European Union and the Member States are tackling this situation in a very positive manner and as close as possible to the people .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank Members for their contributions .
It is very important for me to hear your views on this very important matter .
First of all , let me assure you that all the structures we have established in order to meet any health threat of this size have been working well and that we have utilised all the tools at our disposal .
As I said in my introductory statement , since 25 April 2009 we have been in close contact on a daily basis with all the Member States , and we have been assured that the directives we have given them have been put in place and are working .
However , in view of the experience of the present crisis we are continuously updating our structures and tools , which makes sense because it is only in a real time of crisis that we can see the deficiencies of any structure .
Many speakers mentioned antivirals and the sufficiency of stocks .
Unfortunately , as you know , my predecessor discussed this problem of stockpiling on an EU basis with the health ministers but unfortunately those ministers did not want Europe to take over this coordination .
We discussed the same problem last year in Angers during the French Presidency and , again , the health ministers insisted that each Member State should be free to decide for itself how many stocks it wanted .
We know that there are many differences between the stocks from one state to another , and we are concerned about that .
However , in view of the conclusions reached by the health ministers on 30 April 2009 , we decided that the Commission would work closely with the Member States and that if a Member State needs assistance then , in the spirit of solidarity , we shall call for assistance and try to coordinate the needs of the Member States .
As far as the new vaccine is concerned , as I said , I had a meeting with industry and we discussed at length the need both for antivirals and for the new vaccine .
We hope that on 11 May 2009 we shall have the seed stocks to give to the industry in order for it to begin production of the new vaccine .
I cannot say when it will be ready , as it will depend on the efficacy of the stock , but we estimate that it will take between 8 and 12 weeks .
In response to Ms Grossetête 's question , I agree completely with her that we have to remain vigilant in order to meet the needs that may arise , certainly after the summer , and with the creation of the new vaccine I hope that we shall be able to meet the needs of our people .
However , I want to reiterate the fact that the situation is serious but we should not panic .
I agree with Mr Adamou that everybody should be as reasonable and realistic as possible in this situation - panicking does not help anybody .
The debate is closed .
Equal treatment between men and women engaged in a self-employed capacity - Pregnant workers ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity and repealing Directive 86 / 613 / EEC - C6-0341 / 2008 - ;
the report by Mrs Estrela , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 92 / 85 / EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding - C6-0340 / 2008 - .
Mr President , 22 years after the vote on a text that was already aimed at ensuring equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity , including their assisting spouses , the Commission has at last submitted a new proposal to replace the ineffective and toned-down 1986 text , but it has done so using a more solid legal basis .
I should like first to mention a major improvement , namely that the establishment of a company between spouses or recognised life partners shall no longer be prohibited in any Member State .
This is an effective way of improving the situation of assisting spouses , those millions of invisible workers employed in agriculture , craft occupations , commerce , SMEs and the liberal professions .
Their fate has been a matter of concern for the European Parliament since the 1990s .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's proposal is still too weak on one essential point : the social security of assisting spouses and recognised life partners .
Experience shows that , where assisting spouses have to take it upon themselves and apply to join a social security scheme , the large majority of them do not do so .
None of these people realise that , in the event of divorce , often after more than 20 years of marriage and work in the family business , they will lose all welfare benefits , especially pension rights .
We also wish to retain the old provision concerning the recognition of the work of assisting spouses , in order to provide for compensation , notably in the case of divorce , where the assisting spouse is in a precarious situation after years of work for the family business .
Lastly , as regards maternity protection , we have found a formula that is best suited to the specific circumstances of female self-employed workers and assisting spouses .
They must have the right to take maternity leave of the duration of their choice , provided that the total length does not exceed that specified in the Directive on female workers .
Those are the amendments that we feel are most important in order to prevent the publication of another diluted directive , which will not enable us to guarantee equal treatment between men and women in this area .
We have been informed of a dozen amendments tabled by Mr Cocilovo , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which concern the definition of assisting spouses and life partners .
I am a little surprised , since , in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , we - and here I refer to all of the groups - had agreed to abide by the definitions contained within the Commission 's proposal , which is legally sound and acceptable to everyone , to the effect that assisting spouses should also be understood to mean the life partners of self-employed workers recognised by national law .
This definition is clear ; it is precise .
Why table amendments that are vague and legally unsound ?
I call on the ALDE Group to withdraw these amendments .
I assume that there is a misunderstanding between the shadow rapporteur of that group and Mr Cocilovo .
I am working on this point at present .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has unfortunately adopted another report containing 74 amendments , the majority of which have no direct link with the initial objective presented in the Commission 's proposal , which was to strengthen the foundation of maternity protection by improving the health and safety of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
I should like to make it clear that this directive does not concern female self-employed workers , female assisting spouses or the partners of self-employed workers .
Their specific situation will be examined within the framework of the new directive on equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity , which will be the subject of a report .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I should like to thank the following people : the shadow rapporteurs ; the draftsmen of the opinions of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs ; the secretariats of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ; the social partners ; the NGOs ; the experts who took part in the public hearings held in Brussels and Lisbon ; the Commission and Council representatives ; and my assistants .
I thank everyone for their support and suggestions .
The proposals in my report are therefore the result of a highly participatory process and of many working meetings with all those interested in equipping the European Union with a directive on maternity leave appropriate to our times .
The main aims of my proposed amendments are : firstly , to reinforce the rights of female workers during pregnancy , after birth and while breastfeeding ; secondly , to promote the reconciliation of professional , family and private life ; and thirdly , to help Europeans who want to have children to do so , thereby increasing the birth rate .
I therefore propose extending the protection against dismissal to 12 months , removing the obligation to perform night work and overtime if the woman so wishes , and reducing the working day by two hours for the purpose of breastfeeding , without the loss of any privileges .
However , the most innovative proposal in relation to the European Commission 's proposal concerns paternity leave .
Community law must enshrine the principle of shared leave to encourage a fairer distribution of private and family responsibilities between men and women and to thus improve the quality of life and well-being of children .
Fathers must be involved in family responsibilities , from the birth or adoption of a child .
We must also combat the economic , social and cultural prejudices associated with the right to paternity leave , and change mentalities .
Whereas , for example , in Sweden , a man who does not share the parental leave is regarded by society as a poor father , in the countries of southern Europe , the reverse is true : fathers are coerced by employers and work colleagues into not taking the leave to which they are legally entitled .
I therefore propose that two weeks ' paternity leave should be mandatory , non-transferable and paid at 100 % , without the loss of any professional rights .
It has been proven that the sharing of family responsibilities between men and women is the first step towards the essential reconciliation of family and professional life .
While having the same right as men to a professional career , women cannot , however , do the same work as men outside the home and triple the amount within the home .
Family life is one of the reasons why there are more unemployed women than men .
Furthermore , a common question in job interviews is whether applicants intend to marry or have children .
Women 's personal lives are scrutinised and they end up losing out if they exhibit the natural desire to be mothers .
Motherhood cannot be viewed as a problem for employers or for the economy .
On the contrary , it is a service provided to society , as it allows us to tackle the low birth rate and ageing population and , at the same time , guarantee the sustainability of the social security system .
It is therefore unacceptable for women to be penalised because they are mothers .
However , the truth is that they frequently cannot make progress in their careers , they do not receive the usual productivity bonuses or share of the profits , and they have to accept more menial and less professionally gratifying work .
We need to change this situation .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Estrela and Mrs Lulling for their report .
I appreciate their efforts and the support the European Parliament has given to the Commission proposals within the package of measures adopted last autumn for harmonising working and family life .
As you know , the task of harmonising working , family , and private life is one of the priorities of the Commission 's gender equality plan .
The process of promoting policies focused on these issues is of key importance for enhancing women 's participation in the labour market and for coping with problems connected with the changing forms of the family , the ageing population , and support for the equal treatment of men and women .
Seen in this context , I think it is necessary to improve legislation in the sphere of maternity and parental leave .
In a similar vein , it is crucial to improve the status of women engaged in a self-employed capacity .
I am delighted with the progress made on both of the legislative proposals tabled by the Commission .
I am also pleased with the success of negotiations between the social partners on parental leave .
I hope that before the summer holiday I will be able to submit a formal motion to make their agreement binding .
I would now like to mention in brief the Commission 's objectives for the amendment to the maternity leave directive , which are : to promote high levels of safety and health protection for mothers , to encourage women to have as many children as they want , and to support women 's participation in the labour market .
In this respect , the Commission 's proposal is aimed primarily at extending maternity leave from 14 to 18 weeks , increasing maternity benefits to enable women to interrupt their jobs and look after their children while feeling financially secure , and providing the greater flexibility that should be given to women in terms of arranging their maternity leave and the work conditions for their return to employment .
I am aware of the difficulties in attaining the right balance between enhancing protection and making these additional measures economically acceptable to employers and to the Member States .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission welcomes the numerous amendments made by Parliament , which will help to strengthen or clarify this draft . These include : Amendment 11 on demographic trends , Amendment 25 stressing the need for better harmonisation between working and family life , Amendment 50 on support for Member States in promoting part-time work , Amendment 35 on optional maternity leave before birth , Amendment 53 clarifying that women on maternity leave may have their salaries raised , and Amendment 56 on workers ' retirement rights .
The Commission is also prepared to accept a number of other amendments , either in principle or in their entirety .
I also welcome the amendment that would make it possible , under certain conditions , to count parental leave as maternity leave .
Such a provision would take into consideration the differences between the Member States , and would accommodate the requirements of those Member States with advanced systems of leave for family reasons , such as the Nordic countries .
Nevertheless , I would like to avoid a situation where the revision of Directive 92 / 85 / EEC is used as an opportunity to introduce topics that should be addressed in another context .
In my opinion , this would undermine the aims of the Commission 's proposal , which include , first and foremost , enhanced protection for mothers and , secondly , support for women 's participation in the labour market .
Seen in this light - even though I fully support your proposal for the introduction of paternity leave - I do not think that the current directive , focused as it is on the protection of mothers , is a suitable instrument for such a goal .
The Commission therefore rejects the amendments relating to paternity leave .
In spite of that , the Commission thinks it is right to address this issue in the future , with a view to reaching final agreement among the European social partners on parental leave .
I was also pleased to note Parliament 's request to introduce leave in the case of child adoption ( Amendment 44 ) .
The idea is sound , but even in this case I believe that a revision of Directive 92 / 85 / EEC is not the right way to go about it . We have to realise that the situation of a mother who adopts a child is different .
However , just as in the case of paternity leave , the Commission believes it is right to address that question later on , particularly in connection with parental leave .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission welcomes your proposal for 20 weeks of maternity leave .
This is consistent with the logic of the Commission 's own proposal , which provides for maternity leave in excess of 18 weeks to be granted in some instances .
However , it is vital to show the impact of this extension on the other provisions of the Commission 's proposal .
As for breast-feeding , women with maternity leave lasting 18 weeks would have sufficient time to breast-feed their children , without having to adjust their working hours .
Under these circumstances , I would not support the idea of introducing a legal obligation concerning adjustment of working hours for breast-feeding women .
Instead I would rather call on the Member States to consider the possibility of taking other measures enabling women to keep on breast-feeding even after their 18 weeks of maternity leave .
Similarly , on maternity benefits , the Commission 's proposal introduces the principle of paying salaries in full .
In actual fact , many Member States have already been applying this principle .
The Commission 's proposal also allows Member States to set maximum levels for such benefits .
The Commission is not in favour of the proposal tabled by Parliament for salaries to be paid in full for a specific period of time and maximum amounts to be introduced for the rest of maternity leave , because this would discourage mothers from drawing their maternity leave in full .
That is why the Commission does not recommend that these amendments be approved .
The Commission also believes that some amendments either water down the effects of the proposal , introduce too many details or go beyond the scope of the powers of this directive .
This applies , for instance , to Amendment 30 concerning the right to refuse night work .
I believe that pregnant or breast-feeding women should have the possibility any time of refusing night work without having to state their reasons for doing so .
The same applies to the issue of sanctions .
In this respect , the Commission holds the view that it is important to specify that compensation should not be restricted by any upper limit laid down at the national level .
This significant principle has been established by the European Court of Justice .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept Amendment 68 .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would now like to deal in greater detail with the report by Mrs Lulling .
First of all , let me underline the great importance the Commission attaches to this proposal .
In fact , it is vital to improve the situation regarding equal treatment between men and women engaged in a self-employed capacity , since women are underrepresented in this area , accounting for only one in three business persons in the European Union .
It is likewise essential to improve the status of assisting spouses .
We cannot agree with the current situation , where people regularly involved in the activities of a family business have no social protection .
I am pleased to see that the opinions of Parliament and the Commission coincide to a great extent .
That is why the Commission is in a position to accept ( either in their entirety or in principle ) a substantial majority of the amendments presented by the rapporteur : primarily Amendment 15 on maternity leave for women engaged in a self-employed capacity and Amendment 18 , which is aimed at reintroducing Article 7 of Directive 86 / 613 / EEC relating to recognition of the work of assisting spouses . This also involves a large number of amendments which the Commission can accept in their entirety or in principle .
In most cases , these amendments clarify the Commission 's proposal and therefore aim for greater legal certainty .
I would , nevertheless , like to point out that the Commission cannot accept Amendment 14 concerning social protection for assisting spouses .
It is clear to me that this is a significant aspect for the European Parliament .
However , this particular amendment poses some specific problems .
First and foremost , the voluntary approach introduced in the Commission 's proposal represents a substantial improvement compared to the current status .
The proposal of the Commission stipulates - and this is a statutory obligation laid down for the Member States - that assisting spouses should have , at their request , the same level of protection as that enjoyed by persons engaged in a self-employed capacity .
The mandatory inclusion of assisting spouses in the system of social protection would also have significant financial impacts .
At this time of economic crisis , we should be trying to ensure that businesses , especially small family businesses , do not incur further expenses against their will .
Therefore , I think that assisting spouses should be given the option to choose .
Furthermore , this amendment would greatly complicate the possibility of reaching agreement with the Council .
In conclusion , I would like to say that the Commission 's position regarding the various amendments to both legislative proposals has been given to Parliament in writing , and will be attached to the minutes of the plenary session .
Mrs Madeira has tried to ensure real equality for pregnant workers and any women of childbearing age in terms of accessing and remaining in the labour market .
Ladies and gentlemen , women are frequently faced with a choice between professional life and family life , particularly on the issue of motherhood , which ends up preventing them from feeling like complete individuals in terms of their physical and mental health .
We must therefore adopt an approach which is not prejudicial to the rights and protection of women , in line with the European social model .
We should also like to include parental leave in this framework , which , as we have seen , was not the choice of the Commission .
Commissioner , anyone who spends 18 weeks out of the workplace needs special training on resuming their work in order to maintain their legitimate career prospects and prevent them from suffering a double penalty in their professional life .
We therefore need to ensure the following : their job must be protected for 12 months so that they can reorganise their domestic life on returning to work , training and new routines .
The increase from six to twelve months is therefore simply good sense .
It is vital that each Member State legislates on the rights of self-employed women , and this is therefore a clear political signal to which we should like the Commission to react .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this adjustment in working hours after birth should not be the exclusive right of women , as the spouse , partner or parent should also be able to request this from their employer .
This proposal is very important and must be monitored by regulators in the Member States .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , we believe that this approach is more consistent with the European social model to which we aspire .
This issue is not just about women ; it is also about society .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say from the outset , to save time , that I agree in essence with the illustration given by Mrs Lulling , who served as rapporteur for the main committee on this report .
The subject is ' equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity ' .
There are several amendments that were adopted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and which I tabled again on behalf of my group .
Some , I think , can be withdrawn since they actually overlap with the texts already adopted by the main committee .
We too will insist on Amendment 14 , concerning Article 6 , because we believe that to make optional for the assisting spouse or life partner that which is , however , obligatory for the main worker is to lower protection and to open the door to conditions that undermine the Commission 's aims .
For the rest , I think we will also come to an agreement with Mrs Lulling to push for reference to be made to ' assisting life partners ' as well as spouses in every passage of the Commission text , rather than leaving it open to interpretation .
This is frankly a secondary issue , however , to the main aim shared by everyone .
Mr President , the purpose of the Council directive from 1986 was to apply the principle of equal treatment of women and men engaged in a self-employed capacity , to give assisting spouses a clearly defined professional status and to establish their rights and minimum guarantees .
The present motion of the Commission is still not ambitious enough , and contains little in the way of binding solutions .
The proposal to ensure that women who are self-employed have the possibility of taking up to 14 weeks of maternity leave , including two weeks of mandatory leave , is deserving of support , as is the proposal to give them the right to benefit from social security cover for assisting spouses on the same basis as self-employed workers .
On the other hand , the proposal to release self-employed people , and in particular assisting spouses , from the obligation to be members of social insurance schemes is disturbing .
This solution will not contribute to the equal treatment of women and men , and therefore it is advisable that the competent body in matters of equal rights covered by the directives should oversee the correct application of this directive .
Finally , I would like to congratulate both authors on a superbly prepared document .
I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Estrela , for her report and the effort she has put into this .
I believe that improving Directive 92 / 85 provides a solution to a genuine , serious problem which Europe is facing .
I am referring to both the ageing population and the population decline which we have been talking about for so long .
From our point of view in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , having the family as a fundamental value certainly entitles us to devise a political measure focusing on this issue , which is also why we welcome what is happening with regard to the directive on maternity and to maternal health .
I was pleased to hear in this House Commissioner Špidla supporting the extension of the maternity period , as was approved by our Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I do not think that this is related to equal access to the labour market for women .
We are also all aware that the World Health Organization and UNICEF support the fact , corroborated with scientific arguments , that women who have given birth actually need 24 weeks to completely recover their working capacity .
I believe that we must not make young women choose between a home life and a career .
Indeed , our discussion today about amending the directive will actually provide a basis for achieving this work-life balance .
I welcome the introduction of the notion of paternity leave , even though it is not necessary at the moment , because it allows us at least to send a signal to young families which are expecting something like this from us , the European Parliament .
I believe that having both parents at home is vital for babies during their first weeks of life .
I also think that motherhood and fatherhood are a fact of life , which is why I agree with treating this matter in the way it deserves and not like a problem or possibly an inconvenience .
As a Romanian MEP and mother of two children born , unfortunately , under the Communist regime which my country lived through , I can assure you that I have additional reasons for supporting the measures proposed .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has provided a good contribution here towards ensuring a social Europe , and I would like to sincerely thank both of the rapporteurs , Mrs Estrela and Mrs Lulling .
For us in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , two aspects of this matter are very important , as I would like to briefly point out .
On the one hand , it is necessary to include fathers in the framework strategy to improve the balance between professional and family life .
We do not , as the Commission states , want eighteen weeks of maternity leave , as this is already in place in almost all European countries , with the exception of Germany and Malta .
We want to go one step further , namely to introduce two weeks of paternity leave .
For us , it is also important for both directives to offer the same rights for same sex couples .
This is important in the case of the directive on assisting spouses and the assisting member of unmarried couples .
I would also like to point out that these protection systems must be obligatory , otherwise they become arbitrary .
I would , once again , like to return to the argument put forward by the employers , namely that this directive on extended maternity leave would be too much for companies to cope with in a time of crisis .
That simply cannot be the case .
In Germany , we have a system where , in the case of a pay-as-you-go scheme , the costs are refunded - even up to a hundred percent !
That is why I am also asking the Conservative group to show understanding and to follow us in improving legal protection for working mothers .
Before the European elections , we want to send people , especially fathers and mothers , a clear and definite signal that , in times of crisis , the concept of a social Europe will not be abandoned , and clearly state that we aim to invest in people , in future generations and in demographic change .
I would also like to ask Commissioner Špidla , in connection with the inclusion of fathers in the legislation , to think again and , together with us , to fight in the Council for progress with regard to maternity leave and ensuring a better balance between work and family life .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate and thank Mrs Estrela for her report and the quality of it .
It is time for the Commission and Parliament to take up this issue .
Measures are urgently needed to protect pregnant women and women who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding , and it is essential to ensure that their rights are respected .
From this point of view , the report is well balanced : it deals with the regulation of night work ; protection against dismissal ; rights linked to social protection and employment contracts and the defence of such rights , in particular those concerning maternity pay .
However , I do not agree with Mrs Estrela 's proposals on obligatory paternal leave and the length of maternity leave .
It cannot be denied that motherhood is still a hindrance to young women 's careers .
The very important part on mothers returning to work must therefore not be neglected .
Maternity leave must not penalise women .
Maternity leave that is too long will , inevitably , result in fewer chances for women to return to good conditions in the employment market .
This is why the Commission 's proposal to set maternity leave at 18 weeks , and accompany it with realistic measures , is an excellent one , because it takes the situation of both workers and employers into account .
If we want to fight discrimination and defend women 's rights , we need to ensure that women must not resign themselves to saying goodbye to their careers , that doing so remains an active lifestyle choice .
We need to expose the hypocrisy of the idea of free choice , which is often a direct result of inequalities in the salaries of men and women and insufficient childcare facilities .
I do not think that paternity leave has a place in this directive .
However , if it must remain part of it , it must be more flexible .
The vote in committee for the compromise of reducing paternity leave from four to two weeks is a step forward ; but why should paternity leave be obligatory ?
I agree that fathers should have a role , but it should not become a poisoned chalice and , if we want the presence of both the father and the mother to benefit them and their baby , we need to preserve the notion of choice .
Reconciling professional and family life is at the heart of the European social project and such an important cultural change should be freely agreed upon before it is approved .
Mr President , this motion , which aims to extend the minimum length of maternity leave and which contains other regulations which will make it easier to combine family and work is a step in the right direction .
We support the motion , although we do not think it goes far enough .
At a time of drastic demographic collapse in Europe , every form of support for the family is valuable .
The contact which a small child , and especially a baby , has with its mother fosters the proper emotional development of the child .
Breastfeeding a child is very important for its immunity and biological health .
However , the proposed change is still not sufficient .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity individual Member States should always be looking for better solutions .
I would also like to draw attention to two problems .
Women 's entitlement to a retirement pension usually either does not take into account periods spent caring for children , or does so insufficiently .
Women and mothers who are in families where there are many children suffer discrimination both in the job market and from the pension system .
We should aim to introduce remuneration for caring for children .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I am pleased to see that issues relating to equality between men and women and , in particular , to non-discrimination between the sexes are gradually becoming more prominent in social and political spheres .
Nevertheless , the debates we have had in the last few weeks in the context of the reform of these two directives show that there is still a great deal to be done in the way of discussing and convincing .
I am with those who maintain that true equality will only be achieved when we succeed in establishing adequate frameworks so that women are not discriminated against in public life or at work ; also , however , when those frameworks enable and , indeed , oblige men to assume their responsibilities in the private and domestic fields .
With that in mind , I wish to stress that Europe-wide maternity leave should be at least 24 weeks , as the World Health Organization and the European Women 's Lobby are , in fact , demanding ; I also insist on the need for an urgent move towards joint , equal responsibility for couples , so as to share the load , as well as equal responsibility for bringing up children .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Lulling has undertaken a difficult but necessary task .
In most EU Member States , carers and helpers , especially wives or husbands , have no legal status and their work is not recognised , in spite of the fact that their activities account for more than 11 % of self-employed work in the European Union .
An accompanying feature is the absence of social insurance for these people .
If this remains a matter of free choice , many people choose not to pay insurance because of the costs involved .
The result is frequently a situation where people who cooperate in this way find themselves alone , due to their partner 's departure or death , for example , and without any means of support or any entitlement to social benefits or a pension .
That is why I am endorsing the proposal to make social insurance in the countries of the European Union mandatory .
I would like to add , however , that insurance should be a motivating factor for these people , and it should therefore be affordable .
- ( SK ) I congratulate Mrs Lulling and Mrs Estrela on the reports they have submitted and I firmly believe that these reports will help many families , banishing discrimination in the sphere of commerce and in the area of maternity support .
Many women assist their husbands in business and current social security arrangements do not provide them with any protection .
I support an arrangement whereby wives or husbands who help out in family firms receive protection in the same way as independently employed persons .
Of course this must not involve fictional work but work which is part of a company 's routine workload .
The remuneration provided for this assistance must also be proportionate to the work carried out .
I agree with the rapporteur that , in contrast to the Commission , we have not supported registration on a voluntary basis but instead the right of an assisting spouse to be registered in the same social security systems as independently employed persons , thereby covering the costs of sickness , old age and invalidity .
The proposed directive is very important for eliminating discrimination against women who help out in their husbands ' businesses and who receive no maternity or old age support , which makes them dependent or highly vulnerable people .
These situations often arise particularly in the new Member States , where the business activities of self-employed people still lack proper planning .
( HU ) The family is the fundamental value of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
We are all obviously aware of the current demographic crisis .
Although there is less mention of it nowadays , its consequences are at least as serious as those of the economic crisis .
Against this background , the occupational safety regulations relating to mothers deserve particular attention .
Nevertheless , the proposed directive divides European public opinion , as it does Parliament .
It is not a good idea to extend the occupational safety regulations which apply exclusively to pregnant women and nursing mothers to fathers as their occupational safety arrangements do not require any change as a result of them becoming fathers .
If we agree to extend the regulation 's legal basis to cover Article 137 of the EC Treaty and we extend the scope of the regulation to cover parental leave , two regulations would apply concerning parental leave , including paternity leave as well .
If we asked the social partners to come to an agreement on Directive 96 / 34 / EC on parental leave , which was also mentioned by Commissioner Špidla , why are we trying to prejudge what kind of agreement will be reached ?
In some countries the discrepancy between jurisdiction and practice is so great that the task of amending the directive really requires a huge amount of attention .
It would not be appropriate if Parliament waded into the discussion like a bull in a china shop .
A poorly drafted protection regulation may , in some circumstances , go against employing young women since the cost of employing them would become more expensive than employing their male colleagues .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Estrela warmly on her splendid work .
Parliament 's proposal to extend maternity leave to 20 weeks on full pay , six of them after the birth , has by no means been plucked out of the air .
Many countries already provide for more than 18 weeks for mothers , on 80-100 % of their pay .
Therefore , I fail to understand why my fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats wish to reduce Europe 's ambitions to a meagre 16 weeks .
I would say to those who consider the cost too high that women must not lose out on account of becoming mothers .
It is often the case nowadays that women have to resort to other forms of parental leave , but not all women have a right to these .
In addition , these are much lower paid , and thus are not feasible for women who are less well-off .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is also important to us that paternity leave and co-maternity leave be regulated here , as this directive also concerns equal treatment between women and men .
Fair sharing of childcare responsibilities means that fathers , too , must be granted leave upon the birth of their child .
To be frank , ladies and gentlemen , two weeks is a very modest start , but one that is important in those countries where fathers are yet to be given any place in a young family .
Ladies and gentlemen , the social partners failed to reach an agreement on paternity leave or adoption leave , and so we , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , consider it our duty to regulate the area in this directive for the benefit of fathers and adoptive parents .
I am sure that the majority in this House will support us in this .
( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Better reconciliation of work with family and private life is one of the six priority areas of activity identified in the guidelines on equality between women and men .
After all , we are well aware that the European Union faces demographic problems such as a low birth rate and an increasingly high proportion of elderly people .
Yet the best solution would definitely not be to establish financial concessions for employers if they encourage their female employees to have children .
I am unable to support the proposed Amendment 22 , especially the second part of it .
Motherhood and fatherhood are fundamental rights that are very important to ensure balance in society .
It is also very important that both parents participate in a child 's life from the very first months .
I cannot , however , agree with the suggestion to implement compulsory paternity leave .
By doing so , we would do a disservice to the newborn child 's family - fathers usually earn more .
The regulation of paternity leave must be flexible - that is the only way we can achieve a positive result .
Finally , I would like to thank Mrs Estrela for the work she has done with such enthusiasm .
( EL ) Mr President , the report by Mrs Lulling on self-employed workers is a full report and she personally has worked so much on this issue that I do not think that we need say any more about her .
However , we do need to draw the Members ' attention to the report by Mrs Estrela who , of course , is well disposed to protect women but who has , perhaps , missed the point , because here in Parliament we consider that we are minor gods and we think that , with our decisions , we can make our dreams come true .
The problem is not for us to do what we want , but to do what is feasible , what is truly in women 's interests .
We have a directive which relates solely to women , because only they give birth , only they get pregnant and only they can nurse .
We therefore want in this directive to set out rights for men , while there is the other social partners ' directive on parental leave which can cover men in the manner decided by the social partners .
So we should not ' sell ' women 's rights in a period which is unique in their life , by giving others the right to benefit from everything that women go through physically and we should not punish women by forcing them to stay away from work due to excessive leave , which is not in the interest of any employers , who will wait until they are forty years of age before they recruit them .
( RO ) Some subjects are important to the European Union 's institutions , others are less important .
The important issues are discussed at events with maximum participation and publicity , or at least solutions are sought during them and answers offered .
Unfortunately , we have to say that women 's rights have not featured among these issues .
The attitude that resolving gender issues is of secondary importance is shared among the Conservatives in Parliament , the Commission and Member States , but not to an equal extent .
As this is the final plenary debate of this parliamentary term on this subject , we must acknowledge that Parliament has definitely been the European institution which has taken most seriously the rights and socio-economic status of women , including pregnant and self-employed women .
We have tried through legislation and own-initiative reports to put into practice some of the principles already enshrined in treaties so that we can put ' invisible ' groups on the public agenda .
Admittedly , this has happened most often in the small hours of the night or when we are coming directly from the airport .
However , there is a lack of political will .
This is very apparent when it comes to implementing and enforcing the necessary and much-awaited legislation which we draft .
Delays and inadequate enforcement are common in Member States .
We urge the European Commission and Member States not to use the crisis as an excuse to ignore other crucial issues , issues linked to the application of European legislation in this area , whether current or older .
Sacrificing women and their rights on the altar of some alleged economic interests leads to social decline .
I do not know whether women are the future of men , but one thing for sure is that the future of our society depends on women and their health .
( NL ) Mr President , research by the World Health Organization indicates that 16 weeks ' maternity and childbirth leave is too short , and even recommends 24 weeks .
Like the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) , the Commission has now proposed 18 weeks .
Parliament has decided on 20 weeks , although there is still a difference between our group and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament : we are in favour of 16 weeks plus four and the PSE Group of 20 weeks .
In the end , I can go along with 20 weeks .
My second point concerns parental , paternity and adoption leave .
I am strongly in favour of fathers , too , being involved in the first few weeks after the birth of a child , but all of us here know , and I should like to thank Commissioner Špidla for his clarity , that this cannot be regulated in the present directive .
After all , this directive concerns health and safety and not parental leave .
These are different arrangements , which are to be worked out with the social partners .
My third point concerns maternity and childbirth leave for self-employed women and assisting spouses .
I think that Mrs Lulling has done an excellent job on this .
( BG ) Examining the amendments to the directive on motherhood at this particular time makes a great deal of sense , as it allows us not only to demonstrate responsibility for resolving certain problems affecting society , but also focus this responsibility on Europe 's future .
With Mrs Estrela 's report we are incorporating a new philosophy into the care we provide for mothers , pregnant women , nursing mothers , as well as for parents in general .
It is particularly important that fathers are included in bringing up children .
This is what will strengthen the role of the family .
Let us use this to restore the balance which is also important in raising children from their early years .
This will supplement all our other decisions relating to the European Union 's anti-discrimination policies .
It is crucially important for us to provide pregnant women with security and safety , both in the family and at work .
We must also give equal access to jobs , provide flexible working hours and specific healthcare services , as well as fully enforce the legislation .
It is unacceptable to refuse to appoint a woman to a job who is pregnant and is due to go on maternity leave .
We must ensure that women on maternity leave can also automatically enjoy any changes introduced while they are on leave .
My country , Bulgaria , offers extremely favourable maternity legislation , with a long period of paid maternity leave and other options for women to choose from .
The dual combination of the right and the freedom of choice , as well as family obligations and a career is a good practice which may be recommended to all Member States .
In fact , this is part of the integrated policy on equal treatment for women and men .
( DE ) Mr President , the Member States are clearly responsible for legislation in the field of healthcare .
Europe has laid down minimum standards for maternity leave .
We have varied legislation in the Member States , which cannot be compared .
In certain countries , maternity leave is paid out of tax revenue .
In others , as is the case in Germany , it is paid through health insurance companies , and enterprises bear the main share of the costs .
Both the length of , and the financial support for , maternity leave vary .
In all cases , however , the mother is assured protection in case of illness , even after the maternity leave has ended .
You are confusing two issues here : maternity leave and parental leave are two different things - as you pointed out , Commissioner Špidla .
What I would like to know is whether , in Germany , for example , the combined total of maternity leave and parental leave would meet the requirements of the new directive ?
The extension of maternity leave , which focuses on the health of the mother , is not always an advantage for women .
Companies will employ fewer women , as men do not take maternity leave .
Moreover , stricter legal protection against dismissal does not help in the search for a new job . We also have to ensure that women are able to find employment and work on equal terms .
In this respect , companies are called on to help to ensure a family-friendly working environment .
( SL ) In my neck of the woods , we have a saying that children are our greatest treasure , because they are our future .
Unfortunately , it seems that we Europeans are showing no interest in that treasure and this is why European culture and identity are coming under threat .
I welcome the Estrela report , because it seeks to ensure the best possible healthcare for pregnant women and mothers .
At the same time , this will mean better health for children and fewer problems as they are growing up .
In some of the less wealthy countries of the European Union , women have much longer maternity leave than those in the wealthier , Western nations .
I am of the opinion that the European Parliament should support the best possible solutions for mothers and children alike .
Savings made at the expense of children are the worst kind of investment in the future .
We women want to be mothers , but at the same time , of course , we also have to attend to our own social security in an uncertain world and at a time when one cannot rely on marriages being secure .
Combining family and professional life should be our foremost priority in resolving Europe 's demographic problems .
( PT ) Mr President , I want to talk about Mrs Estrela 's report on improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers .
This is a small step forward in the protection of motherhood and fatherhood , which are fundamental rights and values of our society .
On behalf of my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , I called for more progress in the protection of motherhood and fatherhood , specifically 22 months ' leave paid at 100 % .
The report has only proposed 20 months , and not all this time is guaranteed at 100 % pay .
I therefore do not understand the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which does not even want to accept this .
The small step proposed in this report needs to be approved here today so that the rights of women , children and families can be promoted .
It is not enough to say that we defend these rights .
We need to take small steps forward in the promotion and defence of these rights .
- ( SK ) Motherhood is the greatest miracle which God has bestowed on women .
It should not be a ground for discrimination against women , but , on the contrary , should be valued by society both during the course of a woman 's active life and in her old age .
However , we must be realistic because well-intentioned proposals can sometimes create problems .
The EU Member States have different social systems .
The Scandinavian countries are advanced in this area but the new EU-12 have some catching up to do and it would therefore probably be very difficult to establish harmonised rules which could be introduced throughout the EU .
Despite the fact that the Estrela report brings some very positive amendments to the draft directive , there are also some contentious points which in my opinion do not belong in this report and which must be removed , as Commissioner Špidla has already mentioned .
The amendment proposals of my political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , deal with some of the points , for example the duration and the amount of maternal allowance and extensions in case of premature or multiple births or breast-feeding , free time for the purposes of breast-feeding and the employment rights of women returning to work after maternity leave .
I hope that these amendment proposals will be passed in the vote .
( ET ) It is clear that we must recognise the need to implement more effectively the principle of equal treatment regarding men and women working as sole proprietors and the spouses who assist them .
Unfortunately , assisting spouses do not form a large and united target group , their status is not regulated in any Member States and their work is not recognised .
They lack social protection , their risk of poverty is high , and in the event of a divorce they become complete outlaws from the point of view of social protection .
Thus I believe that it should be made compulsory for assisting spouses to join the social protection system , and a framework of minimal guarantees should be established .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for a discussion that has tackled the proposal from many different perspectives .
I think it is unnecessary to mention all of the proposals .
A great majority of the justifications were quite clear , as I pointed out in my opening speech .
Nevertheless , I think there were two proposals which cropped up repeatedly from various sides and which were discussed from a number of different perspectives .
The first was the issue of paternity leave .
I would like to state clearly that , even though I am in favour of paternity leave , I am still convinced that a directive that is designed to protect the health of mothers is not a suitable instrument for the introduction of this particular principle .
In my opening speech I stated that the social partners had reached an agreement over parental leave , and it would be logical to include the possibility of paternity leave in this agreement .
So there are tools other than the directive , in my view .
The other issue to be mentioned was Amendment 14 , namely the introduction of mandatory insurance .
In this respect , I would like to add that , even though I understand the argument , I still think it is not appropriate to take such a radical step , primarily because it would seriously threaten the possibility of reaching a compromise .
On the other hand , I would like to stress that the proposals we have tabled mark a major step forward , because in some countries there is no opportunity to join such a system at present , not even on request .
This means that a new obligation will now be introduced .
In my view , this is a typical example of upward harmonisation .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , I am sorry that the Commissioner is opposed to the key amendment of my report , supported by all the political groups , calling for assisting spouses and recognised partners to be entitled to the same social protection as self-employed workers on a mandatory basis and not just at their request .
Experience proves that , if they are not obliged to make social security contributions , they do not , for the same unfortunate reason that you mentioned , Commissioner : cost .
Of course , social protection costs money , for self-employed workers as well as for employed workers .
The desire to save money on social contributions is a huge mistake that must be avoided .
Of course , if , within a Member State , there is no social protection for self-employed workers , we cannot demand that it be made obligatory for their partners .
But partners should be entitled to it at their request .
I shall make an oral amendment on this , in line with Mr Cocilovo .
Allow me to add a few words on maternity protection , because our position has been very badly misunderstood .
If we want to strengthen maternity protection by increasing maternity leave , we should not forget that extending it to 18 weeks , of which only a third would coincide with the obligatory six weeks to be taken after the birth , goes against the objective of better protection for the health of the mother and the baby .
That is why , in our opinion , the best solution would be six obligatory weeks and an increase to 20 weeks for multiple births and breastfeeding .
Let us not forget the problems of recruitment and promotion that women of childbearing age already face .
With regard to age , it is absurd to wish fathers to take the same leave as that of pregnant women .
Of course , Madam President , the increasing infertility of men in Europe is worrying , but not as much , in my opinion , as the continued inequalities between men and women in the sharing of family responsibilities , as this inequality is the reason why many women decide not to have children .
In addition , we will not solve Europe 's demographic problem through over-protection , as this only serves to make women unemployable .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am shocked at the European Commission 's position on my proposal for paternity leave .
It is a conservative and unacceptable position , which is out of touch with reality .
Commissioner , I have not talked about parental leave , but about paternity leave .
These are two very different concepts .
If paternity leave does not fall within the scope of this directive , why has the Commission proposed extending the legal basis , and why is this not based solely on Article 137 relating to the protection of health ?
Why has the Commission introduced Article 141 of the EC Treaty relating to the promotion of equal opportunities for men and women ?
Commissioner , and members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , motherhood and fatherhood are eminent social values which must be respected and brought together .
It is here in this directive that paternity leave and maternity leave must be brought together .
We must think about children , Commissioner .
We must think about the welfare of children because , if they are supported by their father and mother from an early age , their physical and psychological development can be greatly improved .
Furthermore , Commissioner , you cannot be unaware that paternity leave already exists in the national legislation of many Member States .
Is the Commission actually trying to remain out of touch with the reality that already exists in Member States ?
I am very surprised at this position , Commissioner .
It is precisely because the European institutions are out of touch with reality that the people are remote .
This is precisely why abstention is so high .
We have to give our citizens reasons to go out and vote .
As a result , Commissioner , we must adopt legislation that helps them .
If they can see that the decisions taken in the European Parliament improve their lives , they will certainly have more reason to go out and vote next month .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 6 May at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Even during a crisis , equal treatment should be high on the political agenda .
Women will suffer from the present crisis in the long run , and will be hit in the second wave of redundancy .
They will have to cope with their unstable social and economic situation and their growing burden of juggling earning money and care responsibilities .
In such circumstances , we may not allow women 's rights to be taken away from them .
Self-employment is of great importance for women because it could be of great help in avoiding unemployment or in better reconciling professional and family life .
In this way , women would have an efficient tool for contributing to the development of the economy .
Women should have equal chances to engage in self-employed activities and establish companies ; maternity-leave systems should ensure that self-employed women can benefit from them in the same way as employed workers .
In parallel with this , safety and health for pregnant workers and those who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding is of crucial importance .
Not only does this help Europe not to lose women 's talent and presence in the workforce but it also contributes to facing the present demographic challenge and ensuring children 's healthy physical , emotional , and mental development .
As a Social Democrat and mother , I support this directive as it concerns the following issues : the health and safety of pregnant workers , of women who have recently given birth or are nursing their child , equal treatment issues , as well as the right to return to the same or an equivalent job , the right to a career , regulations on leave and labour contract rights or granting more generous financial support during maternity leave .
At present , the length of maternity leave varies from 14 weeks in some Member States to 28 weeks in others .
Indeed , in some cases it can last up to 52 weeks , but with benefit provided only for part of it .
I therefore think that the option of extending the length of maternity leave and increasing the relevant benefit paid during this period is an adequate way of improving women 's health and safety , as well as allowing them to balance their professional and family obligations , thereby promoting equal opportunities for men and women on the labour market .
Stressful conditions in the workplace can have an impact on the state of mind of a woman who is pregnant or has recently given birth .
This is why we must take a preventive approach which will ensure that an adequate risk assessment is carried out at the workplace .
Organisation of working time ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Chair of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the organisation of working time
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the conciliation procedure relating to the Working Time Directive has failed .
In this case , Article 65 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure provides for the Chairman of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee to make a statement in plenary .
For this reason , I will now make a brief statement on the progress of the negotiations on the Working Time Directive .
After several trialogues and three sessions of the Conciliation Committee , it became clear in the last session shortly after midnight and shortly before the expiry of the deadline that it would not be possible to come to an agreement .
The European Parliament delegation had previously voted with a clear majority of 15 votes in favour , none against and five abstentions to oppose the final conciliation attempt of the Commission .
This proposal was not accepted as the basis for a genuine compromise .
At the same time , it was also rejected by the Permanent Representatives Committee which was meeting in the neighbouring room .
In a letter dated 29 April 2009 , the two co-chairmen of the Conciliation Committee informed Parliament and the Council of Ministers that it was not possible to come to an agreement on a joint text within the deadline specified in Article 251 ( 5 ) of the EC Treaty .
I very much regret that the two institutions did not succeed in finding any common ground .
However , if we consider the three points which remained in dispute until the end - the opt-out from weekly working time , the conditions of on-call time and the multiple contracts per worker - the differences in positions were so great that there was no possibility of reaching an agreement which would have been compatible with the European Parliament resolution of 17 December 2008 .
The Council in particular did not move an inch on the question of the opt-out .
Parliament offered several compromises which would have given the employers ' side a great deal of flexibility on working times .
Parliament was particularly cooperative on the question of the conditions of on-call time , because the majority of Member States , in this case nine , use the opt-out exclusively for on-call time .
However , a blocking minority in the Council prevented every attempt to introduce a derogation .
Not even a suggestion of an end to the opt-out was accepted .
On the subject of on-call time , the Court of Justice of the European Communities has made it clear that on-call time is working time .
Even the inactive part of on-call time cannot be considered in whole or in part to be a rest period , as the Council demanded .
It was also obvious to the Parliament delegation that on-call time is necessary when a continuation of work is required .
The Council was not prepared to accept this restriction .
What is the result of this ?
If a waiter sits in an empty restaurant , this counts as inactive on-call time which will , of course , be evaluated differently .
This must not be the case .
Taking a flexible approach , Parliament also supported the proposal for a maximum working time of 48 hours per worker and not per contract .
In this case we could not even agree on this principle being laid down in a recital .
It was clear to the Parliament delegation that no compromise is better than a bad compromise at the expense of the workers .
Parliament submitted numerous proposals to the Council until we felt that we had reached the end of our tether .
However , there was a group in the Council that was not prepared to compromise in any way .
I also believe that at some points the Commission could have submitted proposals which offered more of a balance between the position of the Council and that of Parliament .
During this parliamentary term , Parliament has adopted 389 legal acts in the codecision procedure . Of these , 24 were concluded at the third reading following successful conciliation .
This demonstrates clearly that there is a culture of cooperation between the institutions .
For the first time since the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , the Conciliation Committee has failed to reach an agreement in the case of the Working Time Directive .
I hope that the new Commission will very soon present a new proposal which will , I hope , lead to an agreement .
Finally , I would specifically like to thank the Conciliation Committee secretariat for its excellent groundwork .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Czech Presidency , I would like to inform you about the Council 's position regarding the completion of negotiations on the revision of the Working Time Directive .
As you are undoubtedly aware , the Council spent four long years discussing an amendment to this directive before finally reaching a common position on the content - after some highly complex negotiations .
A qualified majority of Member States have agreed that the key disputed issue of the opt-out will be left in the directive , but with strongly defined conditions which will tighten up its application considerably .
The Council , for example , wanted to reduce the maximum weekly working time when using the opt-out from 78 hours to 60 or 65 hours and proposed banning the use of opt-outs when signing an employment contract or limiting the period of consent given by employees to work in an opt-out regime to one year .
The Council 's aim was to restrict the use of opt-out in the Member States , but primarily to enhance the protection of employees who are using the opt-out .
The Council viewed its draft directive as a well-balanced document promoting employee protection , and hoped it would also prove acceptable to Parliament , which was expected to approve it at the second reading .
Since the vote last December , the Czech Presidency has been well aware of the different attitudes of the two institutions towards the draft directive , but has not regarded the negotiating procedure as a fight for prestige between the two institutions .
Instead , it has taken a pragmatic , non-ideological and realistic approach , taking account of the realities of the European labour market .
It is an indisputable fact that the opt-out is used today by 15 of the 27 EU Member States .
Since January this year , when the Czech Republic took over the Presidency , we have pursued very intense negotiations at all levels in an effort to find space for a possible compromise with Parliament .
The first meeting of the Member States on this topic was held in Prague on 13 January .
At least eight rounds of informal trialogues have been held to date , as well as three rounds of the negotiating process proper .
At this point I would like to thank the Commission , and especially Commissioner Špidla , for its specialist assistance and constructive approach in searching for a possible compromise over the wording of the directive .
The Council was willing to agree and to compromise on the common position , but despite this no agreement has been reached .
Over the past four months , the Czech Presidency has been very active and responsible in holding talks with Parliament and submitting many compromise solutions to Parliament on various issues regarding the directive in a bid to find a final solution acceptable to the Council and to Parliament .
Today I can state that the Council made a number of concessions to meet the demands of Parliament , and yet these were not enough for Parliament .
For example , the Council was prepared to abandon the common position and to endorse Parliament 's view that all on-call time is indeed work time .
The Council also made concessions during the debate on harmonising work and family life in the deadline for providing supplementary daytime rest and in the definition of top-ranking employees , and I could list further examples .
The Council wanted to come to an agreement with Parliament over the key issue of the opt-out and was prepared to accommodate Parliament 's demands and to accept its other proposals , for example a ban on arranging opt-outs during the probationary period and removal of the maximum weekly working time for the opt-out , even though we naturally felt that we were acting against the interests of employees .
We were even prepared to accept the idea of introducing registration of hours actually worked in the opt-out .
However , Parliament did not even go half way to meet the Council 's position .
Speaking on behalf of the Czech Presidency , I am frankly sorry that Parliament was unwilling to compromise and to agree on a revised directive , which has been awaited not only by Member States but also by EU citizens for five long years .
Agreement on a revised directive would contribute to greater protection for employees , would help in solving the problem of on-call time and rest , and would pave the way towards a gradual reduction in the use of opt-outs in the Member States .
However , the MEPs in the negotiating committee were deaf to these proposals .
They refused to accept them and they refused to accept the Council 's counter proposals and the compromises offered by the Commission , insisting instead on their own ideological position .
Since Parliament was unwilling to respect the situation in the Council and the realities of the current situation , the existing directive will remain in force .
Use of the opt-out will not be restricted , no monitoring will be introduced , and workers will have to continue working up to 78 hours a week .
In all probability , the attitude of Parliament will lead to greater use of the opt-out .
The European Commission has received signals today from another two Member States that are intending to introduce the opt-out , and consequently any hopes for its future abolition are further reduced .
The Council wanted to prevent this but Parliament has ruled otherwise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very sorry indeed that the Council and Parliament have failed to reach an agreement in the final round of bargaining over the revision of the Working Time Directive .
The Commission has done everything in its power to find a compromise , submitting a range of proposals on all of the main issues in order to help both lawmaking bodies come closer to a final version .
In the end , however , the Council and Parliament insisted on their differing standpoints concerning the future of exceptions and the opt-out , which could not be reconciled .
I understand and respect the wish of Parliament to end the use of exceptions with definitive effect .
That would also be the ideal solution for me , and we incorporated it into the Commission 's amendment to the directive in 2005 .
Nevertheless , after several years of negotiations , it became quite clear that this element would not facilitate an agreement in the Council , and that it would not overcome the blocking minority .
Too many Member States simply insisted on using individual exceptions and on retaining this provision in the directive .
That was why the Commission tabled alternative proposals for improving the legal protection of employees who use exceptions , thus weakening their use in practical terms .
The Commission also proposed introducing consistent monitoring of the use of exceptions at national and European levels , and imposing restrictions on the simultaneous use of exceptions , which would have reduced the incentive for Member States to grant exceptions .
I firmly believe that this approach would in practice actually improve conditions for workers and more importantly , would enhance the long-term prospects for Member States eventually to agree on scrapping exceptions altogether .
Parliament took the view that there is no better arrangement than a complete abolition of the opt-out .
I respect the grounds for such a decision , but I hold a different opinion .
As I have mentioned on many previous occasions , I firmly believe that the failure to reach agreement on the amendment is a bad message for European workers and enterprises , for European institutions and , by extension , for Europe as a whole .
Firstly , this means that the problem of exceptions has not been resolved and exceptions will continue to be used under the existing directive , with no date for their termination , with a very limited number of restrictions and without any special review at all .
I know that many of you have raised the objection that workers would work 65 hours a week , and I fully understand those concerns , but the fact is that the current directive allows for a working week of up to 70 hours .
Secondly , even though the ruling of the Court of Justice in the matter of on-call time and supplementary time for rest will remain unchanged , I am afraid that in many cases this will not lead to better protection for workers in practice .
Many Member States have areas with a high rate of on-call time , and they are facing real problems in adhering to the rules stemming from the SIMAP and Jaeger judgments .
The result so far is that more and more Member States have now started using exceptions in order to solve this problem .
At present , there are 15 such countries , and I am afraid that now , since there is no agreement in place for on-call time , even more Member States will start using the opt-out in order to comply with the ruling of the European Court of Justice , as they will have no other option available .
With an increasing number of Member States using exceptions , it will be much more difficult to reach agreement in the Council on ending the exceptions .
Thirdly , the failure of the negotiations means that a series of very significant special guarantees approved by the Council for workers all over Europe who are currently using the exceptions , will not be valid , and will not come into force .
And lastly , we have also missed an opportunity for improvement in terms of the measures aimed at harmonising work and family life , and clarifying the definition of the variations for self-employed workers .
However , both lawmaking bodies have now taken their decision and the immediate result is that no special reviews of exceptions will be made , as the existing directive requires .
I respect that decision .
Together with the other members of the Commission we will now have to consider the situation that has arisen as a result of the lawmakers ' failure to reach an agreement .
However , I would also like to note that after five years of negotiations , during which a number of partial proposals were tabled and many attempts made to find a solution , no solution was found .
This means that it will not be easy to submit a new proposal that might miraculously solve the situation .
I therefore consider it necessary to review the situation very carefully with the social partners .
Only then can the Commission proceed to another decision and another course of action .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to state on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that it is not in the interests of European workers that the conciliation procedure on new working time legislation has failed and that the old working time legislation continues to apply .
I would also like to say that it is a myth that this is purely the fault of the Council , while the majority of those in Parliament , like knights in shining armour , have sacrificed themselves in the interests of the workers .
The reality is that both parties are at fault .
In is true that the Council did not move an inch on the question of the opt-out , but the majority in Parliament was equally inflexible in insisting that a solution was only possible if the opt-out was abolished .
As a result , both parties passed like ships in the night and the result was easy to predict .
This is a lost opportunity .
For example , it would have been possible to put in place a European on-call time regulation which specified for the whole of Europe that ' on-call time is working time ' , as the Court of Justice of the European Communities has laid down .
In order to achieve this it would have been necessary for the majority in Parliament to have moved a very small distance on the question of the opt-out , for example when it was a case of determining the conditions under which an opt-out is possible , which should be as strict as possible , and who takes the decision about the opt-out .
The two sides of industry should have been involved .
However , none of this happened .
The insistence on the removal of the opt-out at all costs became a sacred cow .
This was the other side of the irreconcilable behaviour which resulted in the failure of the new solution .
This is a very regrettable situation .
As I have said , it is not in the interests of the workers .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , though futile efforts lead to melancholy , I wish to repeat that the opt-out should come to an end , because it was intended to last for a ten-year period - which finished in 2003 - and its end is extremely important for people 's health , for combining family and professional life , for us to have a discussion that fits with the one we had half an hour ago and the one that will follow , for the international conventions of the International Labour Organization to be respected , for European social law to become a reality , for workers ' organisations to remain intact , and for citizens to continue to have faith in European institutions .
As our President has said , an agreement has not been reached because the Council 's proposal has always been to move backwards , back beyond the 19th century , making employment law merely a bilateral relationship between the worker and the employer , without laws or regulations , without anything to respect beyond so-called ' free choice ' , forgetting that there is always an imbalance of power between the worker and the employer .
This is not true ; they are fooling themselves .
Parliament has stirred ; it has provided every kind of alternative to solve real problems , but this is an ideological problem .
The Council did not want to put an end to the opt-out .
A minority in the Council wanted the opt-out , which was temporary in 1993 , to become permanent and , with Parliament 's vote , to be forever , leaving the hope and dignity in this battle to us .
They did not want to ; they merely wanted to give the opt-out a superficial make-over , but to do so permanently , destroying one of the fundamental instruments of European social law .
That is the truth , and it is not true to say it was a reduction in the working day - with the proposal from the Commission and the Council working hours totalled 78 per week - because there were to be 60 and 65 hours calculated over three months .
So please stop saying things that are not true .
Stop deceiving public opinion .
Admit that you wanted to make permanent what was temporary in 1993 , and admit that you wanted to turn what was exceptional into something normal .
They proposed that it be a derogation , as in Article 20 ; a derogation , not an exception : that it be something normal .
At the same time , moreover , the proposal was an unrestrained assault on the legislation of the Court of Justice .
It took away doctors ' rights and it took away their working conditions .
They have never even come close to our idea , or to that of the Court of Justice regarding compensatory rest for doctors .
It was an unrestrained attack on workers .
What is more , they have accused us of doing this during an election period .
It is an honour to listen to citizens and workers .
We are experiencing a major social crisis ; there is a vast distance between the citizens and our institutions .
Fortunately , Parliament has not fallen to its knees before the Council and fortunately , Commissioner , there will be a new Parliament here , a new executive Council and there will probably be changes in Member States ' governments ; the workers of Europe have hope : the mandate of 17 December has been retained , and we will continue our fight , Commissioner .


( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , obviously we know that there was stalemate , but better no agreement than a bad agreement in my view .
We always knew that it would be inevitable , but it took so long to actually acknowledge it .
I think that is more to do with some parliamentarians wanting to appear tough to their electorate than with anything else .
Once a majority for the Parliament voted to get rid of the opt-out , there could of course be no deal as 15 countries use it , as we have already heard .
I support the opt-out of the 48-hour limit of the Working Time Directive as long as it is voluntary .
I attempted during committee to tighten this up and make sure that you could not sign the opt-out at the same time as the contract and that you could opt out of the opt-out at any time .
Indeed , that is what the Council also proposed .
It is important for flexibility , for the worker and the employer alike .
Why should someone not be allowed to earn overtime if that is what they choose to do ?
My fear also was that people could be forced into illegal work and would not then be covered by health and safety legislation , including the dangerous machinery directive .
Far more of a problem are multiple contracts and the definition of autonomous work .
These are abused far more than the opt-out , but the Council did not really move substantially on this and Parliament did not really push that point either .
As far as ' on-call ' time is concerned , I believe that all ' on-call ' time should be classed as working time .
I was pleased that there was movement from the Council on that .
As I said at the outset of this debate five years ago , we should deal with the Court rulings of SIMAP and Jaeger and nothing else .
Maybe we will do that in the future and address the health sector alone .
Finally , I must say I am pleased that we have kept the opt-out of the 48-hour limit , particularly for fire-fighters in the UK who would have had extreme difficulty providing cover if the opt-out had been lost , and I congratulate them on their campaign .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Špidla , at election time we would have liked to have been able to present the citizens of Europe with a Working Time Directive which offered minimum health and safety standards .
This would have been our contribution to the concept of improving the quality of work .
Our resolution would have set minimum standards and , at the same time , would have offered a degree of flexibility which would have represented a solution for hospitals .
However , the Council has blocked this over a number of weeks and it has finally failed .
Unfortunately , the Commission is also partly responsible in this case , because it has not contributed to the process of finding a solution .
The Commission proposals have ridden roughshod over labour law and called into question something which would generally have been regarded as a legal minimum standard .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , together with a large majority of the Conciliation Committee , were not prepared to vote in favour of legalised exploitation .
It is well-known that the German Labour Minister and social democrat , Olaf Scholz , was one of the hard core of objectors in the Council .
In all seriousness , he wanted to introduce exceptions to a long-term solution which would allow people to work up to 78 hours per week .
In Germany he claims to be the representative of the workers , while in Brussels he acts as the spokesperson for those members of the Council who are opposed to the interests of European workers .
He has stabbed the Social Democrats in the back .
Madam President , we welcome the lack of agreement between the European Parliament and the Council on the amendment of the Directive on the organisation of working time , because what was proposed was worse than what currently exists , in relation to both the average working day and on-call time .
In fact , what the European Commission and the Council were trying to do was open the door to greater devaluation of work and an attack on the negotiating right of trade unions and on collective bargaining .
This would have been achieved by allowing simple administrative provisions to regulate the organisation of working time and its payment , thereby jeopardising on-call time and the right to rest periods , in a backward step of 100 years in labour rights .
The obligation to give full pay for on-call time , including rest periods , whether in the health and emergency services or in the fire service or in any other sector of activity , therefore remains in force , in accordance with existing law .
We will continue to bring to public attention the workers ' struggle against the notorious opt-out and for the appropriate valuation of work .
We will continue to argue for a reduction in the working day without any loss of pay , which is an important requirement in a time of recession in order to create jobs and reduce unemployment .
We will also continue to promote the health and safety at work of workers and the reconciliation of work and family life .
We want a genuine social Europe that is not forgotten after the elections to the European Parliament .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , President Klaus remarked on 18 February that the EU structure is a dogma which contradicts the experience of heritage .
Member States have a heritage .
They do things their own way , including the way they work .
When I pointed this out at the first conciliation meeting and remarked that Member States should not be forced into a strait jacket , a fellow MEP actually queried whether I should have been invited to the meeting .
There is democracy for you !
The Commissioner 's document produced later that night included the text ' preferences and needs of workers make it impossible to fix a date to end opt-outs ' - it is nice to hear an echo !
As President Klaus said , there is a great distance between the citizen and elected EU representatives , but much less within Member States , which makes the EU undemocratic .
I agree , and I for one insist on being more representative of the citizens .
After all , where there were but four Member States wanting opt-outs in 2004 , there are now 15 .
Does that not tell you anything ?
And MEPs had the nerve to call 15 states out of 27 a blocking minority - Parliament is in denial !
( PT ) Two issues stood out in this negotiation : so-called on-call time and the opt-out clause .
With regard to on-call time , I want to say that we were very close to a compromise but that , at the last moment , the Council inexplicably back-pedalled .
As for the opt-out , Parliament could never have accepted its undefined generalisation because , in practical terms , this would have simply meant the deregulation of the labour market .
The fact that there are currently 15 countries using the opt-out is because the proportion of on-call time is not sufficient to meet actual needs .
The on-call system is not sufficient to meet actual needs , particularly in the area of health .
This was resolved in Parliament 's proposal , and it would not have been necessary for so many countries to use the opt-out .
This was even recognised by the Presidency during the negotiations .
What is absolutely clear is that the opt-out has nothing to do with flexibility .
Flexibility can be fully achieved by making the reference period a year , as proposed by Parliament in 2005 .
Parliament has always fought on this issue so that we could at least glimpse a future date when the opt-out will end .
However , a blocking minority in the Council not only accepted this opt-out , but also wanted to make its application a rule , rather than an exception .
I would remind you that the opt-out was accepted in 1993 , but as a clear exception .
Ladies and gentlemen , employment contracts cannot be compared with any other contracts in which the parties are in an identical situation .
Employment law and science exist in Europe because for a long time it has been accepted that one of the parties is at a disadvantage and must therefore be protected .
The blocking minority in the Council , with its clear attitude of inflexibility , wanted to end this protection , which , in my opinion , is absolutely unacceptable to anyone who defends the fundamental values that form the very foundation of the European social model .
( SV ) Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues on the negotiating team for their constructive cooperation .
It is regrettable that agreement will not be reached .
That is due to the situation that we have at present , which is that 15 Member States are using the opt-out .
No doubt there may be a few more , and that is not a good situation .
I can also tell you that we made some progress during the negotiations .
Where on-call time and time off in lieu are concerned , I consider it progress that we all said that on-call time counted as working hours .
I believe we could have reached agreement there .
The reason we did not reach agreement was the opt-out .
On the one side was the Council , with a blocking minority that absolutely did not want to remove the opt-out , and on the other - and this is often forgotten - a large majority in the European Parliament that does very much want to get rid of the opt-out because it has nothing to do with health and safety .
We Members of Parliament tried , we made a proposal that the Council itself should come up with an end date .
In the end we were even willing to say : ' We will simply set a date for further negotiations and for coming up with an end date ' .
The Council was not willing to accept even this .
It then became impossible .
It was not the case , Mr Sedláĉek , that the Council accepted all the conditions set by Parliament as regards conditions for the opt-out .
When we started negotiations on the last day more or less every suggestion was rejected .
I can confirm that there is actually a majority in favour of removing the opt-out .
There is a large majority in Parliament and a majority on the Council , but unfortunately it is a minority on the Council that is allowed to decide that the opt-out must remain .
This is unsatisfactory .
I hope that the Commission will come back , that people will accept their responsibility and that the starting point for a new proposal will be what the directive is about , which is health and safety for workers , and that then the opt-out will have to be phased out .
( FR ) Madam President , Parliament and its rapporteur have been forced to reject a poor compromise , which they were right to do .
Our delegation has remained true to the position adopted by a very large majority in plenary who called for the eventual elimination of any exception to the statutory working time .
However , the truth is that Parliament was alone in wanting to make progress .
The representatives of the European people had gone beyond partisan divisions in order to end this anachronism of the opt-out .
We were alone in proposing a genuine compromise text , which the Council has brilliantly ignored , just like the Commission .
The Council and the Commission have aligned themselves with the position of those who fiercely oppose any progress in workers ' rights in Europe .
President-in-Office of the Council , it is clear that you have achieved your aims .
The Court of Justice is forcing you to regard all on-call time as working time ; you have therefore lost nothing on that score .
The opt-out that you want still exists in practice , as opposition to progress has carried it through .
More than ever , the new Members elected in June will have to fight for top-down harmonisation of social standards .

( EL ) Madam President , the Council , hand in hand with the Commission , bears full responsibility for the failure to find a compromise and the reason is simple : it is because you insisted that we accept a compromise which would maintain the opt-out perpetually ; you wanted to deceive and humiliate us and millions of workers by turning a provisional exemption granted to Great Britain in 1993 into a permanent , anti-labour regulation .
Fortunately , the large majority in the European Parliament said no .
Anyone with any doubts as to who bears responsibility need only listen to the speech by the representative of the Czech Presidency : dogmatic neo-liberalism , hard-line ideology , arrogance and a cheap attempt to deceive the European citizens .
Mr Špidla , you do not have the right to interpret and apply judgments by the European Court of Justice ' à la carte ' ; you have to apply the case law of the European Court of Justice and to institute infringement proceedings against Member States which have failed for years to apply the judgments of the Court .
You cannot say that we do not do so , because we are going to revise the directive .
Understand one thing : there is no way that Parliament will agree to a compromise which does not abolish the opt-out .
- ( SK ) Following the initial hopes that we were approaching agreement on the revised Working Time Directive it is truly regrettable that this has not happened .
There are at least two reasons why this was not the best report for our voters ahead of the elections .
The first involves an interesting and unexpected development which is taking place in the new Member States .
Some investors , especially from East Asian countries , are attempting not only to introduce the East Asian work ethic , against which employees are requesting protection under the law , but are bringing a new phenomenon to the labour market : an attempt to replace domestic workers with East Asian workers who are used to a different work culture and unlimited working hours .
In the current crisis situation , with increasing unemployment , the asymmetric relationship between employer and employee is becoming increasingly clear .
Therefore limiting working times is all the more necessary , bearing in mind the need for workers ' freedoms .
The second problem which remains unresolved and which has serious consequences for the new Member States is the calculation of on-call time .
Under the circumstances we are obliged to go for an opt-out , which we wanted to avoid but without which we could not guarantee basic care .
Madam President , I do not want to point the finger but I would like to believe that in the new election period we could find an acceptable solution to these pressing problems .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the failure of the Working Time Directive was inevitable .
The Council maintained a provocative position , as we heard in this House earlier , by ignoring the parliamentary vote , which was then repeated at second reading , years later .
It is with that vote that we go before the electorate - I would like to say to Mrs Lynne - since we do in fact have a mandate from the electorate .
The worrying thing is the subject of that extremism .
The Council wants to keep both the opt-out and the yearly calculation of working time .
The 78-hour week , I would point out to the Commissioner and to the Council , is arrived at by postponing the rest periods provided by the text that the Council has defended .
It therefore represents a worse situation than the previous directive ; frankly it is difficult to understand what concept the Council has of work and working conditions , but also of trade unions and contracts .
If we continue with the opt-out approach , if we do not work towards harmonising working conditions , then we are not working for Europe , but against it , in other words we are creating conditions that weaken the social fabric of Europe and prevent it from tackling the real reasons behind the current crisis .
The responsibility for the failure therefore lies fairly and squarely with the Council .
Parliament has done its duty .
( ES ) Madam President , recognising a failure is the first step towards being in a position to achieve success .
The conciliation has indeed failed , but not the chance to rebuild the dialogue , starting today .
The difficulty lay not in the practicalities of individual derogation from the maximum 48-hour working week , because it was precisely to overcome that difficulty that Parliament offered long transitional periods ; the problem stemmed from highly differing points of view when it came to establishing a Community rule with the ultimate aim of ensuring health and safety at work .
The subsequent problem was also regulating on-call time in accordance with Court of Justice rulings .
With regard to the main problem of the opt-out , it is my view that what the Council was offering was legally contradictory and , above all , went against what I consider to be essential elements for a Europe that cannot , and should not , relinquish its social dimension without losing its identity .
It was unthinkable to allow into Community legislation a general , permanent law that went against the recommendation of the Commission which , in its social agenda , urges Member States to comply with the International Labour Organization convention .
It was also possible to reach an agreement by acting on the set of exceptions and general rules ; in addition , we could have made use of the contribution of social stakeholders who , if their independence is respected , can provide fair , effective agreements .
In short , Parliament 's proposals contained solutions that could provide what companies need , that is , flexibility to adapt working hours to different workloads , because the fact is that no two sectors are the same , nor companies within each sector , and because what we need and what my country in particular needs - we hold the sad record of having the highest unemployment rate in the European Union - is for our companies to create more employment and fewer redundancies .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am among those who are convinced that we need urgent reform of our social systems ; I , too , believe it is entirely possible to reconcile economic efficiency with the hope for social improvements and to reconcile freedom with justice , which is precisely why we must establish limits and minimum social standards for all Member States .
Madam President , when future generations come to judge this Parliament and its work on the working time dossier , I suggest that they will view how MEPs behaved during the trialogue process with sheer incredulity .
They will see that here was a directive born and bred in the early 1990s when the Socialists were the largest party in this House and when the Left was running the majority of Member State governments ; that here was a directive which , however well intentioned , reflects the standard Socialist dogma that people cannot be relied upon to make their own choices about their own work / life balance , that politicians always know best and that , of course , European politicians know best of all ; that here was a directive on working time that has simply never worked .

The opt-out , originally devised for the UK , became an opt-out that 14 other countries progressively needed to use , and we heard from the Czech Presidency today that at least two others are now joining that group .
Meanwhile , 21 out of 27 countries could never make the directive work as far as their national health services were concerned , so the Commission came up with proposals to resolve this .
We have a directive which clearly cannot be implemented , and what has been the reaction of this Parliament ?
That the people are wrong ; that the Member States are wrong ; that the Commission is wrong and that all must be forced into this one-size-fits-all strait jacket , which plainly does not fit anybody .
Understandably , the Council refused to give way because , like MEPs , Member State governments were elected to open up opportunities for people , not to restrict their freedom .
They , however , remembered what certain MEPs have forgotten .
So the opt-out remains for the present , but so do the problems , and the issue now rolls forward to the next generation of MEPs in the next mandate .
I just hope that our new colleagues , right across the House , will show more sense , will show that they are listening to the people and not dictating to them , will bin the directive rather than ban the opt-out , and will start afresh .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is a fact that after five years of intensive efforts to amend the directive on the organisation of working time we are bringing the fiasco of our endeavours to a close today .
Parliament has not managed to reach an understanding with the Council and adopt new and better legislation which would improve the situation of workers , including by reducing the maximum length of the working week permissible with the consent of the worker from 78 hours to 65 hours .
I regret that I have to say - and here I differ from the previous speakers , especially those from the left-hand side of the Chamber - that a significant part of the responsibility for this ending rests with our Parliament , which adopted an unrealistic negotiating strategy .
Many countries of Europe have a saying which runs , ' the better is often the enemy of the good ' .
Unfortunately , I noticed that during the negotiation period this piece of folk wisdom seemed to have been completely forgotten by most of my fellow Members , especially from the left-hand side of the Chamber .
I would like to say something , although doing so will not bring me any satisfaction .
I will remind Parliament that during the first meeting of the Conciliation Committee I proposed adoption of a compromise approach , along with recognition that since in most Member States flexible principles of organising working time have been applied for years with the consent of the worker , expecting radical changes is unjustified and may result in blocking of the negotiations .
Unfortunately , that is what happened , and I fear this was done with the pre-election campaign in mind , and not with the interests of European workers .
Madam President , it is really bizarre that the Council should blame Parliament for the breakdown in these talks .
Parliament made all the running ; it made all the compromise proposals .
Late in the day , the Commission came forward with a compromise proposal , but the Council did not budge one inch , so it should not blame Parliament for this breakdown .
Now we have Philip Bushill-Matthews talking tonight about freedom of choice for workers - the freedom to work the hours they want .
Well , Philip , look at the situation in the United Kingdom , the very Member State that has used the general opt-out the longest .
According to the European Labour Force Survey , there are 3.5 million workers there working more than 48 hours per week on a regular basis .
According to that same survey , 58 % of them - almost 60 % - say they would like to work less than 48 hours per week .
2.2 million of those 3.5 million in the UK receive no payment for that additional work they do each week .
They are not crazy , but are of course being forced to work those hours , and have been put in a position where they have to work additional hours .
That is the reality of the use of the opt-out .
( PL ) The Council was intent on retaining the opt-out procedure permanently and so on a real extension of the working week .
The Council did not show any flexibility .
The problem of on-call time is a problem first and foremost for those who work in public services , and mainly in the health service , where extending working time means not only worse conditions for doctors and nurses , but also a threat to the safety and health of patients , and in addition civil responsibility of the doctor for malpractice .
Freedom of choice in this matter meant that in a hospital in the town of Radom in Poland nobody was employed who did not agree to the procedure .
This means that in practice freedom of choice does not exist .
Separation of the on-call period into active and inactive parts is an attempt to classify time which is in reality spent in the service of the employer as rest time - time spent at the place of work and which cannot be organised independently .
In practice this is , therefore , stealing the employee 's time .
There is no reason for us to accept solutions which we consider to be harmful .
( NL ) Madam President , back in 1817 , the socially minded British entrepreneur Robert Owen advocated the introduction of the eight-hour working day .
In his view , prosperity for everyone was possible if people worked for eight hours and the work was well organised .
Then , exactly 125 years ago , the initial impetus was given for the introduction of the eight-hour working day in the United States .
It is one of the democratic convictions of our European community that shortening the working week contributes to a life compatible with human dignity .
Fortunately , in recent decades , this has been joined by greater attention to the sharing of work and care responsibilities .
Madam President , in this context , it is a great shame that we in Europe are still having to fight to limit the maximum working week .
To require workers to systematically work overtime and put in long working weeks is to destroy jobs .
Various studies have shown that Robert Owen was right : working longer than eight hours is counterproductive .
In these times of growing unemployment , the majority of the Council and the Commission have taken completely the wrong direction .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , this was a very interesting debate for me .
I would like to respond briefly to some of the initiatives .
Firstly , I would like to say something that has not been mentioned here , and which must be stated quite frankly .
Is it not , by chance , true that Europe has the highest levels of employee protection in the world ?
I believe this is the case , so any talk about efforts aimed at dismantling this kind of protection , or returning to the 19th century is simply not true .
We are only trying to adapt it to the current economy and the global economic situation .
We are not living in the 20th century .
This is the 21st century , and we work - I would not like to specify the hours - but we work all the time .
Can you see this mobile phone , can you see these computers ?
Each of us receives e-mail messages every day and it is normal to receive them 24 hours a day .
At the same time nobody ever calculates how many hours he or she really works .
So the attempt being made here - we are talking about some kind of flexibility -is merely an attempt by Europe as whole to adjust to global competition .
You were right , Mr Nassauer , when you said we should agree on the issues , for example the question of on-call time .
I would like to say that in this respect the Council has gone quite a long way to meet Parliament and has agreed that on-call time would be regarded as work time , contrary to the common position , which was quite different .
The Council even proposed to Parliament that this directive should regulate the issue of on-call time only and leave the issue of the opt-out for another time , but Parliament did not respond to this .
Mr Figueredo said that the Council 's proposals have undermined the position of working people , but I would like to reiterate a basic point .
The Council proposed reducing the number of hours when using opt-out from 78 to 60 or 65 , but Mr Cercas rejected that .
The Council proposed restrictions both on monitoring and on the introduction of opt-outs .
The Council agreed to this but it was still not passed .
Mr Andersson is perhaps confused when he says that the Council was unwilling to accept the Commission 's compromise proposals .
On the contrary , it was the Council - at its COREPER session - that approved those proposals .
So the compromise proposed by the Commission was accepted by the Council , but not by Parliament .
I would also like to add that I do not know who talks to which members of the public in the EU .
We also talk to members of the public in the EU , but they tell us they want more freedom , they do not want anyone to impose new obligations on them and they do not want politicians to keep interfering in their personal lives .
We are now coming up to the 20th anniversary of the Velvet Revolution - the anniversary of the end of communism in Europe - and people want to celebrate that occasion by actually defending their freedom .
They do not want more and more regulations and obligations imposed on them .
Mr Hughes , I believe I indicated quite clearly in my speech the points on which the Council was prepared to compromise , so it is quite wrong to say the Council did not move an inch .
I would like to add , since the rapporteur voiced hopes of government changes in Europe , that I can hardly imagine - if such a change were to take place in Great Britain - that a Conservative government would have different views to those of Prime Minister Brown 's government .
I would like to say in conclusion only that we are extremely disappointed not to have reached an agreement , but if you keep on refusing to see the reality of everyday life , which is that 15 of the 27 Member States are using the opt-out and that there are currently not enough workers in many professions to do the job , especially in the new Member States , then the opt-out simply has to continue being the reality of the day .
Let us return to this issue in 10 years , when the situation in the Member States may be quite different .
Let us create the conditions for Member States not to have to use the opt-out , and then we might be surprised at how quickly we reach a compromise .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate featured arguments that have been used many times before and for good reason .
I think this is quite natural , as the debate has gone on for five years , and has affected us all , and I would like to thank everyone who played a serious part in it .
However , the fact remains that we did not achieve a good result or a stable result , and we will probably have to respond to that .
I would like to note how typical it was that the debate barely covered any topic beyond the opt-out and , perhaps to a rather limited extent , on-call time .
It paid no attention to additional rest , for example , nor did it take account of changes within the framework of night work , among other things .
Virtually all of the changes , which went far beyond the issues of on-call time and the opt-out , have , to a certain extent , fallen hostage to the two main issues .
A directive was approved in 1993 which accepted the exception .
This directive envisaged certain types of revision , but not a revision focused only on the opt-out so much as on the directive as a whole .
In 2003 , the European Court of Justice ruled that on-call time spent at the workplace counts as working hours .
The ruling has its own logic and it is quite comprehensible to me .
Since that point , the number of Member States using the opt-out has risen sharply .
The reason for that is quite simple .
In most Member States , working hours spent at the workplace were not treated as real work time , and as soon as they had to be counted as fixed working hours , the Member States began to opt out in order to comply with the directive .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I have already indicated , the situation is complex , and has its own inner dynamic .
Virtually all of the possible routes forward have been explored during the five years of debates , which have been very far-reaching .
I think that our debate has not yet ended , however , and that it is vital to keep seeking other solutions because the current situation is not satisfactory .
There are several reasons why it is unsatisfactory and these reasons go beyond on-call time ( which I myself regard as the most serious aspect ) and beyond the opt-out , which is undoubtedly a substantial issue .
The other reasons include night work , additional leave and a whole range of other issues , which can - and in my opinion gradually should - be explored to improve safety and the protection of health at work , since this particular directive deals with health and safety at work .
The organisation of working time which is expressed through the directive includes this particular aspect and not only the universal aspect .
Ladies and gentlemen , the two lawmaking bodies have failed to reach agreement following a serious and lengthy debate lasting five years .
We are where we are and therefore we have to look for another way forwards .
The Commission , for its part , is ready and waiting .
Madam President , I have asked to make few more brief remarks because I believe that it is necessary .
The President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Sedláček , has told us that the Council accepted the proposal at the beginning of last week .
I must state quite clearly that the information which we were given in the trialogue was quite different .
We received the information that the Commission proposal would not be accepted , that there would be no possibility of an opt-out during the trial period and that the period of six months would not be accepted .
It was also made clear that on-call time would not be regarded as a necessary continuation of working time .
We were also told exactly what has been said here , that there was a willingness to toe the line .
This was not the position of Parliament .
I would like to make it clear that we did receive this information .
The problem may be that you came later , not until after midnight , but we did receive this information .
Secondly , Mr Bushill-Matthews gave the impression that the negotiations were biased and one-sided .
I would like to explain one thing .
The negotiating delegation consisted of the rapporteur , Mr Cercas , the chairman of the Committee , the shadow rapporteur , Mr Silva Peneda , from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and myself .
We were in agreement on every single case .
The guidelines in this House ensure that my group does not have the majority in the delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
The results were quite clear : 15 votes in favour , none against and five abstentions .
The debate today has quite clearly demonstrated that a broad majority of Parliament supports this position .
I would not like anyone to go away with this impression of bias .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Agenda : see Minutes
Organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities ( debate )
The next item is the report by Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities - C6-0354 / 2008 -
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , Directive 2002 / 15 / ΕC really did need revising and , following a report which it was obliged to present , the European Commission tabled suitable amendments to help this industry , in order to safeguard the health and safety of its workers and , at the same time , to facilitate healthy competition .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs accepted the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and , despite my recommendation , rejected the Commission proposal ; in other words , it did not agree to exempt self-employed drivers from the scope of the directive .
I must point out that the 2002 directive made provision for self-employed drivers to be included as of 23 March 2009 .
Developments are not as they appear in the wake of the impressions and excitement caused by the debate on a directive on road transport .
As far as driving times and rest periods are concerned , there have been significant developments since 2002 , because Regulation ( EC ) No 561 / 2006 , which entered into force in 2007 , applies to all lorry drivers and ensures they have suitable driving times and rest periods .
Therefore , to include self-employed drivers in a directive on working time would be to misunderstand the concept of self-employment , because when someone is self-employed , they set their own working time .
This would therefore be a serious , harmful action against small and medium-sized enterprises , it would restrict entrepreneurial freedom and we would be helping to create additional administrative burdens .
This would set a precedent for starting a debate on the integration of self-employed persons in other sectors , thereby limiting their ability to work as long as they like .
This leaves a serious problem : who is self-employed and who is a ' false ' self-employed person ?
It is clear that certain workers claim to be self-employed but are not .
The European Commission had proposed that we lay down criteria so that we can distinguish ' false ' self-employed persons .
However , this would not be possible , because controls are still carried out nationally .
If , therefore , European legislation stipulated who was a ' false ' self-employed person and who was not , this could not be made visible from national controls .
Thus we have the facility now , with our new proposals , to determine at Member-State level who will and who will not be included in the directive on persons performing mobile road transport activities .
We also call on the European Commission in our proposals to re-determine the results of the application of the directive .
I call on my fellow Members to reject the amendment which aims to refer the proposal back to committee and to support my group 's proposals , which are also supported by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Independence and Democracy Group .
Madam President , honourable Members , you know that road safety is one of the priorities of my work as Commissioner for Transport .
It is also important to emphasise from the outset that , while road safety is of course a key element when discussing an issue such as drivers ' working time , our debate today is not about road safety but about social legislation , not driving time but working time .
The question we must answer today is this : should self-employed contractors be subject to restrictions on working time on the same terms as employees ?
This is something we must look at very carefully , because there are no precedents in European law establishing how long a self-employed person can work for in an office or laboratory .
In 1998 , when the Council and Parliament first debated the directive on the working time of mobile workers , the situation in the road transport sector was totally different from what it is today , as the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , said : at the time it was common practice to dodge the rules in force on driving time , meaning that professional drivers spent far too long at the wheel .
On the basis of the previous regulation on driving time , introduced in 1985 , it was nigh on impossible to control driving time effectively .
In that context , between 1988 and 2002 legislators discussed a Commission proposal aimed at regulating the working time not only of employee drivers , but also of the self-employed .
As a result of that discussion , the sectoral directive on the working time of mobile workers was adopted .
The hope was to reduce the negative consequences for road safety arising from inadequate driving time rules by extending the scope of the laws on working time to include self-employed drivers .
The problem was not resolved , however , and following a conciliation procedure between Parliament and the Council , the Commission was invited to weigh up the pros and cons of extending working time rules to self-employed workers and thus present a proposal in 2008 .
The Commission met this request , publishing a detailed study in 2007 that came to the following conclusions .
Firstly , that working time must not be confused with driving time .
As far as the latter is concerned , the situation has changed radically .
As you know , this House , together with the Council , has adopted new rules on driving time .
Among other things , these rules provide for the use of the digital tachograph , an extremely reliable monitoring device , and a specific implementing directive .
The new rules , which have been in force since 2007 , apply to all lorry drivers , thus including self-employed drivers .
With the new digital tachograph , which records a lorry 's every move , minute by minute , a driver cannot drive for more than nine hours a day and an average of 45 hours a week .
In essence , it is now possible to monitor the application of these rules much more rigorously than it was in 1985 .
Secondly , there are no precedents in Community social legislation governing the work of the self-employed .
A self-employed worker cannot in fact be forced to do extra hours insofar as he is , by definition , free to organise his own work as he wishes .
What is more , it is virtually impossible in practice to control the working time of this group of people .
Thirdly , the overall balance between the advantages and disadvantages of extending the rules on working time to the self-employed is very uncertain , and it is not possible to demonstrate that applying the directive in question to self-employed drivers will bring clear advantages .
Lastly , it is very important to point out that the application of working time rules to self-employed drivers is ineffectual and very difficult to achieve , since these drivers do not have to record their working time for salary purposes , not to mention the fact that the administrative costs of applying such rules would be very high .
Fourthly , one aspect where intervention is needed , however , is that of ' false self-employed drivers ' , that is to say drivers who are formally self-employed , but in reality are not free to organise their own working activity , because they are entirely dependent on a single company that provides their income and their orders .
In social terms , they are vulnerable .
Now , in theory , they are covered by the directive , but the failure to apply it means that this does not happen in practice .
The Commission 's proposal is therefore to step up the implementation of the directive and provide ' false ' self-employed drivers with the social protection they need .
At a time of economic crisis , to impose an additional administrative and financial burden on small and fragile businesses , which must face the consequences of the recession , would not send a good message .
For this reason , in conclusion , the Commission welcomes the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Independence and Democracy Group , which are in line with the Council 's common position adopted during the last Transport Council , and , through these amendments , is sending a clear message to the industry : the phenomenon of ' false ' self-employed drivers will not be tolerated , and legislators will ensure that the rules are applied throughout Europe .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( NL ) Madam President , the moment of truth is fast approaching .
Tomorrow afternoon , we shall be voting on the report by Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou .
The rapporteur and I , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , share the same perspective on free enterprise , and so together we have signed 10 or so amendments that the Council , too , can accept .
I am grateful that Commissioner Tajani can support them .
Tomorrow , we shall first have to deal with the amendment tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that seeks to reject the proposal .
I am still highly indignant about this amendment .
Last week , however , this indignation turned to horror when I saw the position paper of the European trade unions .
For fear of a stray Romanian or Bulgarian self-employed driver , it dusts off untruth upon untruth to persuade MEPs to vote against the Commission proposal .
The paper intimates that self-employed drivers work 86-hour weeks .
Drivers , both employed and self-employed , are permitted to drive for an average of 45 hours per week in a two-week period , as Commissioner Tajani has also pointed out .
Are we to understand , then , that they are spending 41 hours per week working on their businesses ?
Nor does the paper 's argument about road safety hold water .
There is no evidence of a correlation between road safety and exempting self-employed drivers from the rules on working time ; in fact , the reverse is true .
Incidentally , it is clear from the position paper that the trade unions know full well that their position is extremely tenuous .
The environment and the internal market are dragged in kicking and screaming to supposedly demonstrate that we should vote in favour of the rejection proposal , when the Commission 's very extensive impact assessment shows that the proposal will actually be beneficial to the functioning of the internal market , the transport sector and the environment .
That is why , tomorrow , we must vote against the amendment tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that seeks to reject the proposal , and in favour of the rapporteur 's amendments .
I trust that common sense will prevail during the vote .
Finally , I wish to add that I thought the email Mr Hughes sent last Saturday completely inappropriate .
Making politics out of the fatalities of ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , working time restrictions should not extend to self-employed entrepreneurs and drivers , and , fortunately , both the Commission and the Council have reached this conclusion .
In my country , Finland , a restriction on working time would have a very adverse effect on self-employed drivers .
Drivers in Finland tend to be small-scale entrepreneurs .
Over half own the vehicle they drive .
They therefore do everything themselves : they maintain their vehicles and do their own accounts .
Self-employed drivers are already bound by the same limits on driving time and compulsory rest periods as drivers who are employed by someone else .
This is important for the future .
Driving times themselves should not be extended , but if this amendment by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament were to enter into force , drivers would not be able to maintain their vehicles or do their accounts during their time off , for example .
In any case , how would compliance with such a regulation be monitored ?
It is vitally important to aid employment and entrepreneurship during an economic crisis .
I hope that everyone will agree with the Commission and the Council of Transport Ministers to keep self-employed drivers outside the scope of regulated working time under this Directive .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament considers the proposal for the revision of the rules on working time in road transport insufficiently well thought out and inconsistent .
Poor transposition of and compliance with the legislation cannot be a reason to relax the rules .
As the Commission says , legislation can be efficient and effective only if it covers all parties concerned .
In questions to the Commission , I have endeavoured to obtain clarity as to what action the Commission plans to take against the use of ' false ' self-employed workers .
In this context , the intention that has now been voiced in the Council not only to exclude self-employed drivers from the scope but also to omit to take satisfactory action against ' false ' self-employed workers finds no favour with the PSE Group .
The activities of both employed and self-employed drivers are equally relevant to their own and to other people 's safety .
Making a distinction is out of the question in the eyes of our group .
I must support the Commissioner : it is not the first time that self-employed workers , too , have been included in the coordination of safety on construction sites in order to guarantee their own safety and the safety of others .
During its last session of this parliamentary term , Parliament must adopt the directive on the working time of mobile workers .
As rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I think that it is irresponsible of us to support the rejection of the Commission 's text in its entirety , as was suggested .
We Liberals support and firmly stand behind the need for the tens of thousands of self-employed mobile workers to retain their competitive advantage and the purpose of being self-employed .
The current situation is alarming .
The current directive removes a fundamental principle of the free market , namely , entrepreneurship and support for it .
It is unacceptable for us to treat those working according to a labour agreement on an equal footing with those who are self-employed .
Unlike salaried workers , the self-employed work on the basis not of a specified number of hours , but of the goods which they handle as well as the number and type of shipments .
Including them in the new directive will actually destroy their entrepreneurial drive .
Legislation stipulating the working time for the self-employed would mark a dangerous , unjustified precedent .
There is no similar kind of regulation in any other sector .
Adopting such a decision would have an adverse impact on the European economy .
The definition of night work is also of great practical significance .
At the moment , Member States can define night time themselves .
This enables them to maximise the number of working hours for transporting passengers and goods according to the varying daylight .
As you know , night time in Finland is different to night time in Italy .
Flexibility helps reduce congestion during peak hours , while also reducing the majority of harmful emissions from traffic .
I would finally like to add that the Liberals , supported by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and many other fellow Members , would like to continue the debate on the basic elements of the directive .
In other words , we support the flexible , pragmatic position which was approved in the Council and proposed by the European Commission on excluding the self-employed from the directive .
I strongly urge you to vote in favour of this .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the concern throughout the world and all the measures currently being taken to combat swine flu , like those taken a few years ago against bird flu and BSE , are completely out of proportion to the lack of consideration given to the much higher number of deaths on the roads .
Forty thousand people die every year on the roads of the European Union .
Large numbers of people are injured or permanently disabled .
All of this is simply accepted , as if it were an act of God .
Everyone knows that a disproportionate number of lorries is involved in serious road accidents .
The main causes are speed , overtiredness and alcohol .
This directive is a move towards ensuring that drivers do not become overtired .
Not only driving times , which are monitored using the tachograph , but also loading and unloading times should now be considered as working time for everyone .
This is the right solution .
If a driver has been working for several hours before he climbs behind the steering wheel of a 40-tonne truck , he is already tired and will find it difficult to concentrate .
For me it is completely incomprehensible that this regulation should only apply to drivers who are employed by others and are not self-employed .
The only excuse is that it is more difficult to monitor the working time of self-employed people .
This may be true , but does a self-employed driver present a smaller risk behind the steering wheel when he is overtired ?
Madam President , we need to reject this proposal from the Commission for three clear reasons .
Firstly , they argue that Regulation ( EC ) No 561 / 2006 , on driving and rest time , covers everyone and therefore there is no problem excluding the self-employed .
This is wrong .
Driving time represents only half - on average - of the working time of a driver .
Those not covered could indeed end up working 86 hours per week , every week of the year .
Secondly , the hundreds of thousands of drivers driving vehicles of less than 3.5 tonnes are not covered by the Regulation .
Worse still , if they are excluded from this directive there will be no limits at all on their working time .
Thirdly , the Commission makes a distinction between self-employed and ' false ' self-employed , and says it does this because you cannot inspect or control the working time of the self-employed .
If that is so , how will they control the working time of the ' false ' self-employed ?
This is an abdication of responsibility and an open invitation to unscrupulous employers to constantly search for new forms of ' false ' self-employment to avoid the law .
We need to reject this proposal from the Commission .
( FI ) Madam President , firstly I wish to thank Commissioner Tajani for having done a really excellent job and who , in his speech just now , very commendably pointed out that this is not about safety and the number of hours spent driving so much as the number of hours spent working .
We have to respect the fact that in Europe there are small and medium-sized enterprises that do their work and create jobs , and this would be a slap in the face for small-scale entrepreneurs , especially in the current economic situation .
Two weeks or so ago we had a fierce debate here on how small and medium-sized enterprises keep the entire European economy going .
Now we face the practical issue of whether we should support them or not .
What Commissioner Tajani stated here is what we should be monitoring and what we need to do to ensure that these self-employed drivers can continue working after the hours they have spent driving .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to reassure those Members who have expressed concerns regarding the text we are debating .
Road safety is definitely not at stake , I repeat , it is one of my priorities to fight to reduce the number of road accidents .
I think we should not confuse working time with driving time .
I can well appreciate what you have said : a self-employed worker can work first and then be tired when he gets behind the wheel , but I do not think that a self-employed worker can be controlled in any job .
Obviously , the self-employed worker is also aware of what he is doing , he can even load a lorry and wait and rest for two , three , or four hours , and then get back behind the wheel in an excellent condition as regards safety .
It is in fact very difficult to control any kind of self-employed worker , artisan or small entrepreneur .
What is more , these are the men and women who represent the backbone of the EU economy .
Having said this , we are concerned with guaranteeing the health and safety of employees and of those workers who appear to be self-employed , but for all intents and purposes are employees .
That is why the Commission - and I think the rapporteur shares our position on this - wants to bring the activities of ' false ' self-employed workers under legislative control too .
So this is , I believe , an important signal , this legislation meets real requirements , and I think it right to emphasise again how important it is to make further progress in this area .
That is why I would ask the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to reflect on the comments that have been made and to understand that , as far as the Commission is concerned , road safety is and will remain a priority , but that this legislation does not cover that sector , rather it is aimed at better regulating the working time above all of road transport workers , and to assimilate the ' false self-employed ' to ' employees ' because in reality they are not self-employed workers , but de facto employees .
So then , may I reassure again all those who have expressed concerns , because I believe that the text that may be adopted is a good text , heading in the general direction of the interests of European citizens .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for his clear speech and his ex-post clarifications , by which I mean his assurance to the Members that his main objective is road safety and , at the same time , to safeguard the competitiveness of the European economy and support small and medium-sized enterprises .
I thank all my fellow Members for their views and I would point out that this is precisely the dialogue that we want to leave open by voting against Amendment 54 rejecting the Commission 's proposal .
I therefore call on all my fellow Members to reject Amendment 54 , so that the dialogue remains open and we can help workers who are being exploited and who claim to be ' false ' self-employed persons .
We want to help improve employment in road transport with full safeguarding of road safety under the regulation that covers everyone and of working times under the directive before us .
I should like to remind the Members that I have sent them an article from a German newspaper which makes clear from the examples given that the risk during driving is not from excessive work , but from poor use of the time which each person has at his disposal , regardless of whether he is employed or self-employed , which is , in fact , irrelevant .
What is important is how each person takes responsibility for his actions and drives in such a way as to behave as a mature person who is conscious of his obligations within society as a whole .
We shall not achieve this by raising obstacles to work .
In referring to the building industry , Mr Cremers revealed the intention of all those who are supporting these views in the run-up to the elections .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 5 May 2009 .
Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2010 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Maňka , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2010 .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) In my meetings with European Parliament secretary-general Klaus Welle I noted from the outset the efforts he made to resolve problems .
I applaud his attempt to optimise the work of the European Parliament 's administration , which is an institution employing 6 000 people .
I noted a similar commitment and positive approach in negotiations with representatives of the European Parliament 's various directorates-general .
In some areas savings have already been identified and improvements proposed .
One example of this would be the action plan of the Directorate-General for the Presidency relating to security services , which can bring savings in Brussels , Strasbourg and Luxembourg amounting to EUR 2.6 million a year with no negative impact on security and protection .
Most expenditure items and main projects in the European Parliament budget are of a multiannual nature .
I firmly believe that if we improve medium-term budget planning and increase its transparency we will achieve efficiencies .
Ladies and gentlemen , the report I am presenting today , which has been approved by the Committee on Budgets , clearly shows that we would like to leave more room for manoeuvre for the new Parliament .
If the Committee on Budgets identified savings or reduced certain items we did not begin working on them at this stage just in order to appear tough or to launch a round of in-fighting with the administration and the Presidency on one side and the Committee on Budgets on the other .
Our common aim is to obtain a professional and comprehensive summary of the issue and based on this to take the right decision .
In the area of workforce planning the Committee on Budgets is bearing in mind proposals and changes to the structure of services and the workforce plan submitted by the Presidency .
When we have a summary of all the requirements arising from the studies , the Committee will be ready to consider the whole package of requirements carefully .
Last week I met Swedish Finance Ministry secretary of state Hans Lindblad , who will represent the Swedish Presidency of the EU in the area of finance , together with other officials from the Swedish permanent representation in Brussels and the Swedish Finance Ministry .
I was promised close cooperation on rationalising European institution budgets .
The Swedish Presidency representatives placed special emphasis on building policy , which is also one of our priorities .
Expenditure on purchasing and renting buildings is one of the main administrative cost items of EU institutions .
Just over three years ago the institutions were using total space in excess of 2 million square metres .
We therefore decided that we needed a joint policy in the area of buildings , better inter-institutional cooperation , better coordination of planning , a review into consolidating office space in certain areas and better use of public tenders .
I would therefore like to applaud the secretary-general 's promise that in the new election period he will submit a medium-term building strategy plan proposal very quickly , so that it will be available to MEPs ahead of the first reading in the autumn in order for them to approve budget decisions .
We can achieve annual savings of millions of euros by improving cooperation between European institutions .
I believe that cooperation with the Inter-Institutional Working Group on multilingualism will enable us to make better use of free capacity in this area .
Next year we should have available the study into the Euramis translation tool , the full and automatic use of which will probably bring about a revolution in the area of translations and in cooperation in the area of translations .
I firmly believe that this tool will bring greater efficiency and financial savings in this area in the next two years , reducing dependency on external services .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , today we are deciding Parliament 's budget for 2010 at a particularly crucial period in time which is defined , firstly , by what we all hope will be the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon ; secondly , by the major economic crisis which has hit the European economy and , thirdly , by the new regulations for parliamentarians and parliamentary assistants .
All these elements are integral elements of the European Parliament budget for 2010 and I believe that , as parliamentarians , we must position accurately within these parameters , not with experimentation , eccentricities and superfluous expenditure , but reasonably and in keeping with the criteria which society itself expects of us .
I therefore believe that we are making a new start because , in the midst of the crisis , the European Parliament is setting a good example by keeping its expenditure for 2010 at very realistic , I would even say low levels .
We are keeping our budget below the 20 % limit on appropriations for administrative costs .
We have reduced our budget for 2010 by EUR 6.5 million compared with the Bureau 's initial estimates and , if we look at the overall figures compared with last year 's budget , we can see that , despite all the new demands implied by the new rules for parliamentarians and parliamentary assistants , we have what I consider to be an exceptionally reasonable increase of well below 4 % .
The parliamentary Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , for which I have the honour of acting as rapporteur on this issue , set a major objective for the 2010 budget at the start of the procedure .
We want to concentrate Parliament 's resources on the sectors for which it really does have competence and power , which are the sectors connected to legislation .
We want to stop there being armies of people concerning themselves with things for which Parliament has no voice and to stop having few people and resources where Parliament really can make a difference through legislation .
We therefore believe , and we shall debate this again at first reading , that the initial expenditure reflects this priority of ours and we agree with the rapporteur 's emphasis on the question of multilingualism and buildings , issues to which we have always given serious priority , but in terms of the emphasis on legislation .
I would like to finish as I began , by saying that this is not the time for eccentricities and needless spending .
It is the time for tightening belts , for seriousness and for concentrating on necessities .
As regards the three major multiannual programmes of Web TV , the Museum of European History and the Visitors ' Centre in particular , we want express guarantees for their progress , so that the budget for 2010 can continue to support them , but always on the basis of a philosophy of proper , serious and assiduous control .
Madam President , speaking in the debate on Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2010 on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group I should like to draw attention to three matters .
Firstly , we should support the proposal of the rapporteur to adopt for the present the draft of Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2010 in the form adopted by the Bureau of the European Parliament in April this year .
The final budget decisions should be left to the next Parliament by committing it to analyse particular budget items again in September 2009 .
Secondly , we should also evaluate positively the fact that the currently adopted estimates anticipate a growth in expenditure of only 2.72 % , which means that at this stage the 4 % rise in expenditure which was proposed earlier will not be needed , and also that the new Parliament will have a lot of room for manoeuvre in this area in the autumn this year .
Thirdly and finally , I would also like to give strong support to the rapporteur 's proposal in the area of multilingualism , and in particular to ensure that all MEPs have equal access to translation and interpretation services .
Also worthy of support are the items concerning information and communication technology for Parliament , and in particular the plans to enable the best use of these resources .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) I would like to conclude today 's debate by thanking both of my colleagues for their opinions .
I would also like to thank the representatives of all the institutions , including the European Parliament , with whom we have had dozens of discussions over the past three months concerning the preparation of their budgets .
I would like to thank the Committee on Budgets Chairman Mr Böge , the shadow rapporteurs and coordinators of the political groups , my colleagues and the advisors and employees of the Budget Committee who took part in most of the discussions .
It is thanks to all of you that we managed to find a joint approach and a joint solution in most cases .
On account of the European Parliament elections at the beginning of June we had very little time available for preparing and discussing budget proposals , and even less time to look for compromises .
Despite this we managed to find them and I can now state that the results of our cooperation will have a positive effect on the work of the European Parliament .
Meanwhile in the preparations for the 2010 budget we are seeing the greatest changes to European Parliament structures in the last 10 to 12 years .
It is a great challenge for the European Parliament management and for all of us .
I believe that at the end of the year we will be able to say that together we have paved the way to greater efficiency in the work of the European Parliament as well as in other European institutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 5 May 2009 .
Trade in seal products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning trade in seal products - C6-0295 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , we have a compromise ; we possibly have before us tomorrow a first-reading agreement .
For my part , as rapporteur in this Parliament , I would say that this has been a very difficult file , a very difficult journey .
However , we have arrived at a position where , I hope , we will respect the wishes of those Members of Parliament who signed the written declaration on this subject and we will have respected the wishes of many citizens in many of our countries across the EU who tell us that they do not like what they see of the commercial seal hunt and that they wish to have no association with the trade that results from that hunt .
We have respected that wish ; we have dealt solely with what we can deal with within the confines of Europe 's internal market : the circulation of goods in the market that arise from the commercial hunt .
Following this piece of legislation - if it goes through tomorrow - our consumers should be assured that nothing from the commercial hunt will be sold on Europe 's market .
But , of course , there are exceptions .
Seals are very beautiful marine animals - in fact , I have realised during this process that they have great PR - but to some they are the rats of the sea .
That is how they are perceived by many fishermen : an adult seal gets through an enormous amount of fish on a daily basis .
Therefore , there will remain the need for seals to be hunted to ensure the sustainability of fisheries in some area .
But what we have not done here is to regulate hunting .
If people in any of our Member States wish to hunt , they can still continue to hunt .
What they cannot do is take commercial gain from the results of that hunt .
But it should be the case that the results of the hunt can be used , and I hope particularly that those parts of seals that can be used by the medical community will be able to be used .
The most difficult aspect of all of this has been the place in it of the Arctic traditional communities - the indigenous people of the Arctic .
We say we have an exception for them , but how will being associated with a banned product actually affect their lifestyle and their economy ?
The Arctic is not some sort of theme park or museum : it is a living , breathing community with its own modern economy and at the heart of that is what is taken from the seas .
I hope that those communities will be able to continue to exist in the way that they always have .
But I have my doubts , and I know that those doubts were behind the decision of the Arctic Council last week to refuse to give the EU permanent observer status .
This file has been , for me , a conundrum .
I have wrestled with the clash of liberties , I have respected the vote in committee and I have tried to respect the views of those I represent at home .
But I share only this with you today : I had a delegation from the Nunavut community come to see me .
After our exchange of views , we were all in tears .
I hope the derogation works .
I will support this package tomorrow but I hope it will turn out to have been the right thing to do .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , first I all , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Wallis , and the draftsmen of the opinions , Mr Martin , Mr Brepoels and Mrs Mathieu , for their exceptional work .

In particular , I should like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Mrs McCarthy , for her positive contribution as regards this specific proposal .
The fact that agreement was reached at first reading demonstrates the political will of the Community institutions to deal promptly with the two main problems relating to the trade in seal products , namely the fragmentation of the internal market and the need to safeguard animal welfare .
This particular agreement contains three decisive elements : the first relates to the harmonisation of the internal market and is a ban on the trade in seal products on the European Union market .
It will apply both to products produced here and to imported products .
As you no doubt know , seals are hunted both inside and outside the Community .
They are used to produce products such as meat , oil , blubber and products from their organs , fur and skin .
These products are traded on various markets , including the Community market .
For some of these products , such as Omega 3 capsules or tanned skins or seal furs , it is difficult , if not impossible for consumers to distinguish them from similar products which do not come from seals .
Seal hunting and the way it is carried out has resulted in the expression of serious reaction and concern by the public and by numerous governments which are particularly enlightened about animal welfare .
These concerns are caused by the way in which seals are hunted , the methods used to kill them and the pain which they cause .
The public 's indignation is clear from its massive participation in the relevant public dialogue , but it is also eloquently expressed in the very large number of letters and petitions which I have received over the past two years .
The citizens can now be sure that seal products will no longer be available on the market .
A second important element in the proposal is the logical exemption of Inuit and other indigenous communities .
The aim is not to touch the basic economic and social acquis of these communities , which have traditionally depended on seal hunting .
It should be noted that this sort of hunting is an historical element of their culture and cultural identity and is a source of income which contributes to their survival .
The third element is the exemption for small-scale hunting .
Thus fishermen engaged in incidental seal hunting will be allowed , but only for the purpose of sustainable management of marine resources , to place seal products on the market on a not-for-profit basis , in order to cover their related expenses .
In accordance with the fundamental principle of this regulation , there must be no commercial aspect to this specific activity .
The Commission will approve detailed application measures clarifying how the above two exemptions are to be applied under the comitology procedure and following scrutiny by Parliament .
I hope that Parliament , like the Council and the Commission , will support this specific compromise package overall .
The text in question makes provision for the harmonisation of the internal market and , at the same time , addresses the concerns of European citizens about animal welfare in connection with seal hunting .
The European Commission is in a position to accept in full the compromise package , in order to reach agreement on the regulation in question at first reading .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you will appreciate that I am extremely pleased that we are able to vote on this dossier at the last minute , as many citizens , as well as Parliament , have been calling for measures to combat the cruel practice of commercial seal hunting for many years .
It was not easy to find the right approach , as Europe itself does not have the competence to ban this hunting .
Therefore , I am obliged to the Commission for presenting a proposal to Parliament , although Parliament did think that the proposal needed tightening up .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I am much obliged to my colleagues from the various political groups , therefore , for immediately supporting my proposal to opt for a total trade ban on seal products with only one exception : the hunts traditionally conducted by Inuit communities .
In doing so , the committee decided against the Commission 's original proposal , which made several exceptions , and also against a labelling scheme , which we believe would prove impossible to monitor .
I should also like to thank the Czech Presidency for continuing to work towards an agreement .
I can imagine that the relevant negotiations with the Member States were not always plain sailing .
As well as my fellow MEPs , I should like to thank the various non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) that played a constructive role as pressure groups right through the process and that now also expressly support the compromise .
Compromises are always a matter of give and take , of course , yet I believe that this text meets the requirements of all the parties concerned .
Finally , I should like to emphasise , for the sake of our citizens , that the compromise will indeed have an impact on commercial hunting in countries such as Canada .
In anticipation of a possible trade ban , the demand for seal fur skins has already fallen this year and the price has halved compared to last year .
As soon as the ban is introduced , therefore , it will undoubtedly deal a severe blow to this hunting and to the international trade in seal products .
Therefore , I am delighted with the result , and hope for strong support from my fellow Members in tomorrow 's vote .

Madam President , I am not of the same opinion as my fellow Members , nor as Mr Dǐmas , because I can remember the opinion of the legal adviser to the Council .
I can also remember the opinion of the legal adviser to Parliament .
Both these advisers informed us that the legal basis used was wrong .
That is what I remember .
Do not forget , Mr Dǐmas , that you are banning the products of seal hunting , without replacing them with anything , which is not legal .
You should realise that the Canadians are well aware of this and intend to exercise their right of appeal to the World Trade Organization .
They are not going to be deprived of these products , and you cannot stop them .
Personally , I think they are absolutely right in this respect .
The poor compromise - in my opinion this compromise is very poor - that some of my fellow Members will vote for tomorrow - without me , because I will vote against - is being put to the vote on the eve of the EU-Canada Summit .
The European Union is virtually declaring war on our Canadian friends .
I hope that my fellow Members realise exactly what they are doing .
I must also say to my fellow Members , and to Mr Dǐmas , that they are going to have a great electoral campaign on the back of the seals and on the back of the Canadians , because we are solving nothing at all in terms of seal hunting .
We are simply relocating the problem .
You said yourself , Mr Dǐmas , that you are not banning seal hunting .
You are potentially relocating the problem to China or to other countries , which will be able to accept these products .
You have solved nothing .
I therefore feel that this compromise is poor .
I feel that the problem has been swept under the carpet , that nothing has been solved and that there is really nothing of which to be proud .
There is also nothing to be proud of when you look at the fur price among the Inuits , which is falling .
The text has not yet been voted on , the compromise has not been adopted , and yet these people are suffering great economic misery , because of us .
I can see no self-satisfaction in that .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , as the coordinator for my group on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I signed the compromise text and believe I was right to do so but , as Diana Wallis has said , this has been a very difficult dossier because of the difficulties of balancing different views .
You have already heard from two members of my group who have differing views on this and I think you will see tomorrow that the position of our group will be against this - unless some of the amendments that my colleagues have proposed are voted through .
There will , however , be many - including myself - who will vote in favour because , having taken that position , I feel morally obliged to do so .
I just want to pick up on some of the crucial issues .
First of all , this is a call for action .
What people have indicated so far is that this is the beginning of a process and not an end .
The issue is the inhumane way in which seals are being killed and the inability of professional hunters to deal with that .
The Canadian Government has to reflect on that as well .
There are plenty of review clauses built in here to ensure this works , but I very much echo what Diana Wallis says that the exemptions were crucial for the compromise .
The exemptions are well balanced because they reflect , first of all , the importance of supporting traditional hunting in communities .
Diana Wallis is right in saying that has to work , and that means that products from those communities need to be on sale and need to be presented in an appropriate way .
Secondly , because of the importance of sustainable marine resources and how that issue is going to be dealt with .
We have a compromise on the table .
I think European citizens want us to endorse it , but this Parliament is also going to have to keep this deeply under review from now on .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I think we are forgetting that it was this Parliament which first took up the campaign for an EU-wide ban on the cruel trade in seal products .
In 2006 a written declaration calling for this ban was overwhelmingly backed by Members - receiving 425 signatures - with studies by veterinary experts clearly showing that seals are killed with terrible suffering , often skinned whilst still conscious .
The public no longer tolerate the trade and we as their representatives have the power to end it .
Moreover , our vote tomorrow will be a decisive step forward in the global campaign to ban the trade .
The USA has had a ban for many years . Mexico has banned the trade .
In Europe we already have national bans in Belgium , the Netherlands , Luxembourg and Italy ; Germany and the UK are considering ways to ban the trade .
Bans are now in place in Russia .
Hong Kong is planning a ban .
This is a political issue that now has its time .
After a 40-year campaign against the trade , Europe has the chance to introduce a ban in all 27 states .
For the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection it is not the first time we have taken up citizens ' concern to end the cruel trade .
Parliament has the power to deliver for citizens and the Internal Market Committee was determined to go for a strong ban whilst securing exemption for traditional Inuit hunting .
The committee rejected the Commission 's mixed proposal for a partial ban and labelling ; the committee rejected Mrs Wallis 's proposal for a labelling option only .
Why ?
Because citizens would have condemned this half-hearted gesture which would have allowed the cruel slaughter to continue .
The public have demonstrated in numerous polls across European countries that they want an end to the trade : 75 % of people polled in the UK want an end ; 80 % in Austria , over 90 % in France and the Netherlands .
Even in those countries in the EU where a small amount of traditional seal hunting takes place , the trade is not supported by the public , with 70 % against in Sweden .
A clear majority of Canadians do not support their country 's hunt .
Furthermore 86 % of Canadian people polled believed the EU should be free to choose to ban these products .
I have here a letter from a Canadian senator written to President Pöttering saying : ' Your vote to ban the trade in seal products will help the vast majority of Canadians who watched in admiration as the Russian Federation ended its bloody seal slaughter last month to force their politicians to look beyond political expediency to what is right and to end this inhumane hunt once and for all .
On behalf of the majority of Canadians who are opposed to the hunt , thank you for the leadership you are taking on this issue .
It is much appreciated . '
This year 50 000 seals have been slaughtered in the Canadian hunt compared to 220 000 last year .
That means that we as citizens now have the opportunity to ban this cruel trade .
I know that this will be applauded by the citizens of Europe .
I hope that Parliament will tomorrow vote to back the Internal Market Committee 's proposal for a ban in seal trade products .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I have signed the compromise as coordinator for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
There are differences of opinion in our group , too , as Mr Harbour said about his , but this just goes to show the sensitivity of this issue .
In a democracy , elected representatives must listen to the public , and the days have gone when animals need be cruelly slaughtered to obtain commercial products .
It is absolutely not our intention to stipulate how hunting is to be carried out ; we do not intend to intervene in game management .
What we do want is to end the trade in animals that have been slaughtered inhumanely .
Indeed , I think this is the message sent out by this compromise .
I think it is good that traditional communities have been taken into consideration by means of an exemption , and also that consumers or tourists importing products they have bought as souvenirs are to be spared a witch hunt .
This would not be a good course of action , nor would it befit today 's European Union of freedom .
Since we want information displayed on all products , it might be a good thing to simply label the products as containing seal parts so that consumers are able to choose , as they are often unaware of this as things stand .
Better information is required , as consumers should be able to make a more informed choice .
It might be a good idea to support the indigenous traditional communities by taking measures enabling them to develop alternative economies .
I thank you , Madam President , and I hope that we adopt this compromise tomorrow by a substantial majority .
Madam President , cases of the cruel slaughter of seals are part of the phenomenon of poaching , which , unfortunately , we encounter fairly often .
Poachers kill marine and forest animals and many species of fish , and do not observe any principles , destroying populations and causing them suffering .
In the countries of the European Union and in Canada appropriate legislation exists , and there are also appropriate services whose role is to ensure that this legislation is observed .
One way to give very helpful support to these services would be for ordinary people to help in exposing and detecting poachers .
The role of the state should be to ensure that animals can live in good physical and emotional condition and in harmony with the environment , and also to ensure that illegally obtained skins and meat from wild animals , including seals , do not reach the market , and that such trade is severely punished .
The draft regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council is a document which reconciles the interests of all parties in the area of trade in seal skins .
Madam President , I also welcome the agreement on behalf of our group and we will vote in favour of it tomorrow .
We are meeting the wishes of the many citizens who have asked us in countless letters and e-mails to take action in this area .
We are , of course , also following Parliament 's written statement which clearly demanded the ban .
I am rather surprised by the previous speaker from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I would be interested to know whether she really was speaking on behalf of the committee or only on her own behalf .
In any case , I would like to state quite clearly that there definitely is a legal basis for this .
For example , there is a ban on the trade in dog and cat skins , which came into force at the beginning of this year .
This makes it very clear that there is a legal foundation for what we are doing .
In addition , we already have a distinct distortion of the internal market , because at least five Member States have already implemented a ban and others are planning to do so .
This is why the European Union must act in order to follow up on this distortion of the internal market .
There are foundations for our actions .
There are legal foundations for our actions and internal market foundations for our actions .
Once again I would like to emphasise this very clearly .
As far as the exceptions are concerned , I would also like to say clearly that the markets for the Inuits collapsed some years ago .
The Inuits explained this during the consultation .
We invited them to speak before the committee and they explicitly said that the markets had already collapsed before we took action .
If the Inuits want to continue selling these products , then they can only do this if it is quite clear that the products have nothing to do with the usual method of hunting seals .
Only if a clear distinction is made will the Inuits have the opportunity to sell anything .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I advocate a total ban on the import of seal fur skins .
Each year , a magnificent spectacle of nature becomes the setting for a bloody , gruesome display of pain and suffering , with baby seals as young as 12 days ' old clubbed to death or shot down .
This slaughter is carried out for the benefit of the market and of big business , without any store being set by animal welfare , and this really fills me with horror .
We cannot want to import this abomination into the EU .
Indeed , many EU citizens do not , and they support a total ban on the import of seal fur skins .
In the Netherlands , we have fought hard for such a ban , and have succeeded .
Adopting the Commission proposal in its original form would undermine the result achieved in the Netherlands .
However , Parliament 's report leads me to conclude that this House has reached the point of accepting a total ban on seal fur skins .
I support such a ban , and I call on all the Members of this House , and also the Commission , to follow suit .
Madam President , despite the fact that the proposed legislation that we are discussing is about the trade in seal products , the discussions have tended instead to revolve around seal hunting and then primarily outside the EU .
The slaughter of seals in the way that we have seen pictures of from countries outside the EU is terrible and should not be allowed to occur .
However , we should make a distinction between hunting and slaughter .
Seal hunting occurs in Sweden , but it is controlled protective hunting .
No clubs or cudgels are used ; guns are used instead .
The whole process is surrounded by strict rules and it would be a very poor way of managing natural resources if the animal were not permitted to be used once it had been shot .
The compromise that has now been proposed is better than the original motion .
However , I have some concerns regarding how some parts of the legislation may be interpreted and that it would have negative consequences for Sweden and our Nordic neighbours .
Let us hope that I am wrong .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur for her hard work on this dossier .
Following this House 's call for an EU-wide ban on seal products back in 2006 , which Mrs McCarthy mentioned , I am delighted that a compromise has now been struck with the Council that does justice to the wishes of this House .
Approximately 900 000 seals meet a gruesome death every year in the name of commercial seal hunting .
This is not only gruesome but also totally senseless .
As far as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament was concerned , it was clear from the outset that the Commission proposal did not go far enough .
The generous derogations in the proposal would have been impossible to monitor given the widespread nature of the hunting over a period of 10 days each year .
Monitoring capacities are insufficient , and often the governments concerned are unwilling .
Our group saw it as crucial to substantially curtail the scope for exceptions in the negotiations , and I am delighted with the present result - a trade ban in which this objective has largely been realised .
The PSE Group also considers it important to intervene as little as possible in the traditional livelihoods of indigenous peoples .
The derogation for the Inuit and other indigenous peoples that forms part of the compromise is in line with the wishes of our group .
Although we cannot oblige non-EU countries to stop this seal hunting , we hope that the trade in seal products will become much less lucrative and the hunting itself will be reduced - and hopefully , in due course , completely stopped .
I am delighted with the result achieved , therefore .
Madam President , this final proposal on seal hunting is wholly unacceptable as it grossly interferes with other countries ' affairs .
Yet these countries play by the rules and all they are trying to achieve is to manage natural resources and provide employment for their people .
This proposal destroys people 's lives and their communities in remote regions .
It destroys business opportunities on both sides of the Atlantic and seriously harms good relations with important trade and strategic global partners .
Furthermore this proposal violates WTO rules .
As Members of Parliament we have a duty to protect people and create an environment for employment opportunities .
With this ban we are failing in both areas .
Slapping a ban on overpopulated seals is madness and a complete failure of our values .
I say to all MEPs : please stop this disaster and vote against this proposal .
( SV ) Madam President , I am very pleased indeed that we have finally reached this point .
To start with many people said it was impossible , that it could not be done .
It could be done .
We are now supporting the citizens of Canada who want to stop being ashamed of their country 's behaviour on the ice floes .
For thirty years we have attempted to control and to regulate this hunting .
This has not been achieved in either Norway or Canada .
The rules are not complied with out on the ice .
It is time to give up on the idea that it is possible to make this industrial scale commercial slaughter in any way humane .
We have the work of non-governmental organisations to thank for today 's decision , and the majority of Europe 's citizens who want this ban in place .
It is a victory for common sense , it is a victory for humanitarianism , it is a victory for democracy and not least it is a victory for all the seals that will be allowed to grow up without being clubbed and slaughtered simply for the sake of human vanity .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members who have made this possible .
( DA ) Madam President , I want to say that I find this matter unreasonable , and when I speak now it is solely on behalf of Greenland , which is part of the Kingdom of Denmark .
There are a few tiny , remote settlements in the far north with a population of just 10-20 people who live from hunting seals .
If we take away their livelihood , they will have no chance of economic survival .
Neither can we find them alternative employment .
It is hundreds of kilometres to the next settlement , and we should be grateful that they are there , because it enables us to maintain Greenland as part of the Kingdom of Denmark .
The Greenlanders shoot the seals .
Who has anything against that ?
No one !
If they are unable to shoot enough seals , then there will be no fish for them to catch .
Consequently , what is being done here is a disaster for Greenland .
This matter has not been discussed thoroughly enough and no account has been taken of the poor people whose livelihood this will take away without offering them anything else in its place .
Treating poor people like this is beneath us .
Madam President , as one of the other co-sponsors of the original written declaration nearly three years ago , which called for this ban , I should like to congratulate everyone who has worked to bring this draft proposal forward .
Four hundred and twenty-five Members of this House signed that declaration , reflecting the strength of feeling about the issue , not only among MEPs but also among our constituents .
Today , nearly one million seals are slaughtered annually in commercial seal kills around the world , and when we vote on this package tomorrow we will be helping to end one of the most vile examples of animal cruelty .
I am very glad that compromises , like the proposed labelling system , have been strongly rejected , so that we can fully meet the demands of millions of European citizens .
A positive vote will be a vote for ending cruelty .
It will also be a vote and a victory for all of us who have refused to take ' no ' for an answer .
I well remember many meetings with Commission officials when we were told that a ban would be simply impossible .
Well , this just shows that when we can galvanise sufficient political will - and I pay tribute to the NGOs which have helped us to do so - then impossible things become possible , and I am delighted that they do .
Madam President , this has been a difficult debate , often emotional , with the heart ruling the head on many occasions .
I have great sympathy with what my colleague Christian Rovsing has just said in terms of the communities he spoke for , but I will be supporting the compromise tomorrow .
However , I need an assurance from the Commissioner .
Perhaps I could ask a direct question through the chair to the Commissioner .
Commissioner , if the compromise goes through tomorrow , could you assure me that it will still be possible to use seal tissue for medical research and for bioprosthetic purposes , as is currently the practice in parts of the world ?
For example , great progress has been made in the survival and quality of life of cardiac patients by using the aortic , pulmonary and pericardial tissue of harp seals , the assumption being that they are sustainably hunted or killed and not in a cruel way .
I would like assurances on ongoing medical research and bioprosthetic use of products from seals in the context of the compromise .

Madam President , I will also support the compromise but I am not at all sure that we are doing the right thing because the issue at hand is not whether we kill seals or whether the seals are in danger of not surviving : these issues have been cleared up .
The issue is whether they are killed humanely or not .
And of course in our daily existence we know there are hundreds of thousands of animals that we are happy to have killed , either to eat them or to use their products in other ways .
We are happy to have fish dying after hours of suffering on hooks and in nets and we do not complain about that .
So why are we complaining about the seals ?
Well , because they are beautiful animals and because watching their blood being spilt on white ice is not very nice .
So are we voting and are we deciding with our hearts rather than with our brains and our heads on this ?
I just wonder .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the speakers in tonight 's discussion for their contributions .
I am very pleased that it is possible tonight to reach a first-reading agreement on this highly sensitive file .
Since the European Parliament raised this issue about two years ago , the Commission has conducted extensive preparatory work in order to get a full picture of the situation and share it with the general public .
Our obligation to take full account of the concerns expressed by European Union citizens , as well as the need to harmonise the internal market , were key issues which needed to be addressed by this legislation .
When the regulation enters into force , citizens can be reassured that seal products derived from commercial hunting activities will no longer be found on the European Union market .
The Inuit exemption will ensure that the interests of Inuit and other indigenous communities traditionally engaged in the hunting of seals will not be adversely affected .
Regarding the issue that Mrs Doyle referred to , this will be dealt with in the implementing measures .
In conclusion , I believe that , by adopting this regulation , we will contribute to raising awareness and to upholding high standards of animal welfare in the European Union .
I would , therefore , like to stress again the importance of reaching first-reading agreement on an issue which is so important to European Union citizens .
I therefore urge you to support the compromise package in full , without amendments , to ensure a first-reading agreement .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Wallis , and Ms Brepoels and all those who worked towards reaching the compromise agreement .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I think the debate tonight well illustrates the difficulty of this issue , and it also illustrates , therefore , how wonderful it is that we have been able to reach some form of compromise .
As with all compromises , somebody or everybody will perhaps be a little disappointed by something or other .
I guess what I wanted to emphasise is what we have tried to say throughout our negotiations : that what we have dealt with is what the internal market can deal with , and that is the trade .
We cannot deal with the hunting from here , not the hunting that occurs in third countries .
It has been difficult ; many of us still have questions about how things will be implemented and , Commissioner , I am grateful for the reassurance you have given with regard to how the indigenous communities will be dealt with : that will be something which will be important to many and something that we will have to watch very carefully .
I think many of us still have concerns about the legality - and there has been much spoken about this either at WTO level or within our own internal market rules .
Suffice it to say at this moment that I would just wish to say thank you to the lawyers of all three institutions who have worked to get us where we are today .
I suspect they will have more work to do in the future but that , as I have said , is for another day .
So there we are : we will see what the vote brings tomorrow .
I believe that it is a compromise that is worthy of our support , a compromise that honours the original written declaration and honours the views of European citizens .
I hope that they will not be disappointed if they see that this does , in any way , infringe the rights of others elsewhere .
It is that that has bothered me throughout the most , and I hope that you will do your best , Commissioner , to make sure that those small and fragile communities are protected .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 5 May 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Ladies and gentlemen , I endorse the Wallis report .
I endorse the draft regulation which has been agreed with the Member States , on the grounds of which a ban on the trade in seal products will be introduced .
I think that exceptions should be possible only after conditions have been met on the methods used to kill the seals .
We should not ban the hunts traditionally conducted by Inuit communities .
Thanks to the regulation , trade in seal products will be conducted under uniform conditions across the EU .
The regulation has been supported by many EU citizens , who are sensitive to the issue of animal welfare .
We all know that seals are often killed under conditions in which the animals , which are mammals and capable of sensation , experience terrible pain and suffering .
Now we have the opportunity to end that suffering .
Let us do this .
The ban will mean that goods made from the meat , fat and skins of seals , such as bags , shoes , hats and gloves , will disappear from the common market .
Marketing of some pharmaceutical products made from seals , such as dietary supplements , will not be allowed . Thank you very much .
in writing . - ( FI ) It is understandable that the EU should try to make goodwill gestures towards its citizens prior to the elections , but this time the Commission is treading on thin ice .
If Europe attempts to ban or restrict the traditions of other democratic countries , goodwill might just come back later and slap it in the face .
I await the day when the United States of America or Australia wake up to the fact that there is bullfighting in Spain and elk hunting in Finland .
Each year in my country , Finland , fishermen catch a few hundred seals , because the seal population has soared and will soon threaten fish stocks in the Baltic Sea .
The compromise reached with the Council means that fishermen can carry on as before as long as they do not make a profit .
It is a principle of mine not to support laws compliance with which cannot be monitored , but the compromise is definitely an improvement on the result of the Committee 's vote .
Protection of animals used for scientific purposes ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Parish , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes - C6-0391 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , firstly I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs who have been very willing to work with me on what is an incredibly technical and difficult dossier .
By working together we have been able to come up with what I believe is a good compromise .
I would also like to thank the Commission for their cooperation , and we look forward to working with them on this dossier in the future .
I would also like to thank Patrick Baragiola from the AGRI secretariat and my adviser Dan Dalton .
Animal testing is a highly controversial area and involves a moral dilemma .
Is it ever right to test on animals in order to potentially save the lives of humans ?
I believe that , as long as tests are properly justified from both the scientific and ethical perspective , then it is .
However , we must do everything we can to minimise both the number of tests and the amount of suffering imposed upon animals .
The Commission report was a good start .
It showed that the Commission is keen on moving towards an end to animal experimentation whenever possible .
However , in many areas the Commission proposal was ambiguous and may have the opposite effect to that which the Commission is seeking .
The omission of definitions of a severity classification was a glaring hole in the whole proposal .
The Commission was in effect asking Parliament to make a judgement on the rules surrounding the classifications without knowing what they actually were .
In addition , some provisions , particularly the recommendations on the reuse of animals and on the proposed use of only F2 primates ( second-generation primates ) are likely to mean that many more animals will have to be used .
In the case of F2 primates , no feasibility study has been done to see whether it is possible to do what the Commission is proposing .
Their impact assessment only looks at numbers ; it does not look into the welfare implications .
For this reason , Parliament urgently needed to amend the proposal : not to weaken it but to make it clear exactly when testing on animals should be allowed and under what circumstances .
I believe that the AGRI Committee report strikes a compromise between ensuring that research can continue in the EU and improving animal welfare .
From an animal welfare perspective it is a step forward .
It is all about promoting alternatives to animal experimentation through a financial commitment , more emphasis on the three ' R 's and the strengthening of the role of ECVAM .
In addition I have also proposed regular thematic reviews of primate experiments to identify and phase out those experiments which are not necessary .
It is also a step forward for medical research .
It will update the current outdated legislation and will allow medical research to continue as and when that research is scientifically and ethically justified .
I believe that this is fundamentally important .
We also want to see animal tests reduced .
However , European citizens quite rightly demand that the best and more effective medicines are available .
Reliable European research and development is essential .
Vaccines for polio , German measles , hepatitis B , diphtheria , measles , mumps , rubella and meningitis , along with combined therapy drugs for HIV , medicines to control asthma , life support systems for premature babies and deep brain stimulation for Parkinson 's disease , have all been developed through experimentation on animals , and specifically primates .
Many millions of lives have been saved or improved as a result .
Until we have alternatives in place , I believe that it would be unwise to outlaw these types of experiments , either directly or indirectly through poorly worded legislation .
This directive will set out the framework to ensure that we can phase out animal testing as soon as alternative methods are available .
It significantly improves the search for alternatives and puts us firmly on the path to one day phasing out animal testing altogether .
We have a good compromise in the AGRI Committee .
However , the Liberal group appears to be trying to drive a coach and horses through this agreement .
I would urge them not to vote against this report , because it will set back animal welfare by several years and it would be completely wrong for them to take this action .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , I welcome the opportunity that we have this evening of debating the proposal to revise the directive on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Parish , and the three parliamentary committees that examined the report for their efforts and their comments .
I am certain that the dialogue which ensues will be constructive .
Numerous Member States have long since adopted their own national legislation on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes .
As a result , there are different levels of protection in Europe .
The review will achieve a harmonised level of protection within the Community and will safeguard the smooth operation of the internal market .
The Commission 's aim is to improve the legislation of the European Union governing animal experiments .
On the one hand , this will both limit the number of experimental animals and , on the other hand , it will provide suitable care and treatment of animals subjected to experiments , as required under the Protocol on protection and welfare of animals added to the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Our aim is for this review to considerably improve the welfare of experimental animals within the European Union .
The welfare requirements of animals are now officially included in the Treaty on European Union and must be taken into account when laying down policies in sectors such as the internal market .
Experts and specialists in the animal testing sector , the research community , the industry directly interested and citizens were involved in formulating the proposal with transparent procedures and without exclusions .
The proposal is also based on a carefully substantiated impact assessment .
Moreover , numerous scientific agencies made a significant contribution to this procedure .
A comparative analysis of the possible benefits and the costs of taking action against not taking action was carried out in order to draw up the proposal .
This proposal strikes the necessary balance ; on the one hand , it promotes competitiveness and research in Europe and , on the other hand , it takes full account of the welfare requirements of animals .
The Commission has carefully examined the concerns expressed by various sides that the proposal would expel European research from Europe , due to the supposed administrative burden or the cost involved in specific animal welfare requirements .
However , there is no evidence that there will be any such drain to non-EU countries .
Several of the welfare standards contained in our proposal and many of the stricter licensing procedures are already being applied by Member States who lead the way in research globally .
Furthermore , our proposal makes provision for measures to minimise the administrative burden .
There is , in fact , no contradiction between the adoption of strict animal welfare standards and the promotion of a high level of scientific research .
On the contrary , the two concepts are interconnected .
Under the Commission proposal , the licensing of research on animals who are still conscious will be accompanied by systematic independent ethical evaluation .
This will put the principles of restoring , restricting and improving the use of animals into practice .
These provisions are the fundamental objectives of the review .
We shall be unable to achieve our objectives if we replace licensing by tacit agreement to every type of research or if we allow the ethical evaluation to be carried out by those with a direct interest in the research project .
Finally , the Commission wishes to avoid any possible interruption to scientific projects under way and to minimise the administrative burden .
That is why it allows for flexible application and encourages the use of existing infrastructures in the Member States wherever possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , the recast proposal will restore the smooth operation of the internal market , improve animal welfare standards and promote research .
The current legislation urgently needs to be strengthened and improved in a properly balanced manner and that is precisely what the Commission proposal achieves .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - Madam President , it is a necessary evil of our times that , unfortunately , human and animal health research requires , as a must , animal experimentation .
It is my firm belief that no true scientist enjoys experimenting on animals or does so when alternative means of research are available .
Such research must of course at all times be as humane as possible to the animals involved .
To this end the directive under debate seeks - correctly , in my view - to improve matters significantly and decidedly .
Important areas of note are the safeguarding of the principles of ethical review and authorisation as well as the concepts of enhanced national inspections and increased transparency throughout .
It must be emphasised that the aim of the scientific and political world should always be to phase out the use of animals in research if and when alternative and effective methods not using animals are made available .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is a compromise that takes account of the views of the parties in a balanced way .
The Commission proposal has been amended in a way that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is also proposing .
As there are no alternative procedures for developing all drugs and vaccines , animal experiments have to be conducted .
We are responsible to the citizens of the EU for ensuring that our fellow citizens , when ill , are comforted by the hope that the drugs needed to cure them are also developed in Europe .
At the same time , those who conduct animal tests are under an obligation to treat experimental animals well and cause them as little pain as possible .
The directive is a clear improvement for animal welfare , and many of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture are the same or similar to what we , the Committee on Industry , proposed .
Accordingly , the Committee on Agriculture 's report should be adopted with as few changes as possible .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Animal Testing Directive is based on the 3Rs principle .
Our objective is the replacement , reduction and refinement of animal testing .
In order to achieve this , we need to develop and promote alternative methods .
Thirdly , we must find a compromise between animal welfare and research , while placing the emphasis on human health .
Commissioner , you have also emphasised that we need to have the same standards in all Member States .
The current legislative proposal is based on the Community Action Plan on the Protection and Welfare of Animals and on the animal health strategy .
We want to ensure a high level of protection and high standards in the European Union and throughout the world .
However , the complete abolition of animal testing without other methods being available as an adequate replacement would make the majority of the research based on animal experimentation in the European Union almost impossible .
Research projects would move abroad , we would lose the huge amount of knowledge that we currently have and we would make ourselves completely dependent on other countries .
Therefore , it is important to find a compromise and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has presented a good compromise .
Admittedly it is not an easy balancing act , but for people who are ill it may be a matter of survival .
The result of the vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 31 March meets these requirements .
We must support this compromise which was accepted by 72 % of the committee .
Therefore , I call on all Members of this House to reject all the more far-reaching amendments that have been submitted and to vote in favour of the amendments from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
My warm thanks go not only to the rapporteur , but also to many of my fellow Members throughout Parliament .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must firstly congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Parish , on the quality of his work and the importance that he placed on cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs .
Before we vote tomorrow at first reading , I want to go over the main lines of this report .
Nowadays , the negative image that animal experimentation can have among the general public confirms the indisputable importance of this issue .
Like me , you will have also received , over the last few weeks , a large number of letters from worried citizens .
However , while we have a duty to propose a text that takes account of the public 's fears , we must not , for all that , neglect the demands of researchers .
I must underline the fact that we cannot forget that researchers are not only legitimate representatives of this public opinion , but primarily people whose role is absolutely fundamental within our society .
You must be aware that , in the last 20 years , the number of animals used for scientific purposes has not increased , despite the fact that the number of scientific publications in the area of biomedical research has doubled every two years .
In order to understand the challenges involved in revising this directive , I myself have met with many stakeholders representing the various opinions on this issue .
To my mind , the initial text proposed by the European Commission was really moving away from the fundamental aim in using animals , namely to make advances in research .
It was therefore essential to put the issue of human health back at the heart of the discussions .
Clearly , the provisions on animal experimentation must be amended , but European research must not , however , suffer negative consequences from this new legislation .
The strategy that I adopted , and which has been taken up by the rapporteur , therefore involved rebalancing this proposal to ensure that researchers are not harmed .
Based on the report adopted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I believe that we can arrive at a coherent and reasonable text , which I hope will be broadly supported by Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mahatma Gandhi said ' The greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the way it treats its animals . '
The welfare of laboratory animals is an important and delicate subject that many people would like to ignore .
However , it is a very sensitive issue , in particular when it comes to research using monkeys and especially great apes .
We know that this is the case from the public reaction .
The Commission was subjected to great pressure .
I would like specifically to thank Commissioner Dimas . You have done some very good preparatory work and you have introduced important improvements in the welfare of laboratory animals , such as prior authorisation and follow-up checks for all tests .
You have extended the directive to cover all animal species , not just mammals .
The Commission has also effectively resolved the highly controversial issue of tests on non-human primates .
These tests have been restricted to life-threatening illnesses and brain diseases .
Unfortunately , many details of the Commission proposal have been amended by the votes in the committees .
For instance , the standards that I have just referred to have been turned on their heads by the vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
To give just one example , following the vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , tests will be automatically authorised if they have not received official authorisation after 60 days .
This is an indefensible situation for us in Europe .
This is why I am calling on my fellow Members to read through what you are voting on tomorrow and not just to follow your voting guidelines .
I am grateful to the rapporteur for being prepared to make some compromises at the last minute .
I am pleased that Mr Parish plans to introduce an oral amendment tomorrow to ensure that the rules on the authorisation period for projects are made clearer .
However , it is a pity that Article 15 has not got through .
Article 15 gives some Member States the option of retaining stricter standards , as is the case , for example , in the Netherlands .
Why do we want to lower the standards which are currently very high in the Netherlands ?
Our joint aim must be to find a balance between high levels of animal welfare and intensive research .
I have had enough of the knock-out argument , which is always trotted out , that research will move abroad .
This is not necessarily always true .
Schopenhauer said ' Any stupid boy can crush a beetle , but all the professors in the world cannot create a new beetle . '
We must provide a set of values , because that is our job .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) I am pleased that the Commission has taken the initiative to revise the Directive on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes .
Both the use and the suffering of laboratory animals must be substantially reduced , and this can be done by encouraging the development of scientific methods that are equivalent or more efficient , but without unduly hindering the development of medicinal products .
Something I have difficulty with , however , is the fact that several amendments have been tabled that could considerably weaken the proposal .
We must not lose sight of the objective of the proposal .
This is about protecting laboratory animals and not about business profits .
The most important thing is to ban procedures categorised as ' severe ' in which laboratory animals may suffer prolonged pain .
These procedures are unethical and barbaric .
Finally , the use of non-human primates in experiments must be phased out completely - and rapidly .
Parliament adopted a written declaration on this back in 2007 , and I think that it is now time to match words with deeds .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , high animal welfare standards are an expression of civilisation and of respect for one 's fellow creatures .
Where good alternatives to animal testing are available , these must be used , as we want less animal testing .
This also goes for good procedures that reduce animal suffering or require fewer laboratory animals , as we want less animal suffering .
I think that the proposed compulsory ethical review is progress .
Naturally , the objective of this directive cannot be to compel Member States to accept testing on human embryos as an alternative .
Member States must take their own ethical decision on this .
The Commission 's ultimate aim is to abolish animal testing completely .
Although we share this aim , it is an unfortunate fact that we cannot yet do without animal testing , nor are we yet in a position to say definitively when this will be the case .
Already giving a final deadline for banning animal testing would be ill-advised and perhaps even hazardous to human health ; I agree with the rapporteur on this .
( FR ) Mr President , our fellow citizens are calling for more research , particularly in the biomedical area , in order to find new treatments for diseases for which we do not yet have a cure .
This is the case , among others , with all the neurodegenerative diseases , such as Parkinson 's and Alzheimer 's .
We also know that we need animal experimentation and that this animal experimentation has fortunately reduced in recent years because we have set ourselves the goal of finding alternative solutions .
However , unfortunately , we know that , in some cases , these solutions do not exist and we still need to use animal experimentation , particularly on non-human primates .
In this case , we must do absolutely everything we can to ensure that European research remains in the territory of Europe so that we can offer maximum protection .
Taking into account an animal 's pain during an experiment offers every guarantee that this experimentation will produce good results .
Therefore , let us keep our research and , in particular , let us also keep animal experimentation .
Let us particularly make sure that this research is not relocated outside Europe .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , using animals for scientific purposes is a very sensitive matter that gives rise to controversial and irreconcilable emotions , if viewed from one side only .
It is impossible to discuss this issue solely from the perspective of protecting the interests and rights of animals .
It is also impossible to discuss this issue looking solely at the interests of science or using a logic of obtaining results at the lowest possible cost .
No one can be indifferent to the suffering of other living beings , even less so in the case of animals as close to us as primates .
However , our sensitivity is even further heightened when we are faced with the suffering of human beings caused by accidents , war or disease .
In order to combat pain , we cannot refuse science the instruments that it needs , including the use of guinea pigs .
This report sets out a possible balance between the contradiction of values and emotions with which we are faced , and it reveals an effort to compromise which can only ennoble this Parliament and its most committed Members .
I therefore congratulate those with whom I dealt most in this discussion - the rapporteur , Neil Parish , and the shadow rapporteur of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Roselyne Lefrançois - on their excellent work and the consensus that they managed to achieve on such a difficult and controversial issue .
My political group , the PSE Group , will therefore vote for this report and the amendments with which we tried to further improve it , in the belief that we will therefore help to reduce the suffering of animals , without compromising scientific progress for the benefit of human health and the viability of European research .
- ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am concerned about the suffering of laboratory animals as well , but at the same time I know , as a physician , that we must do everything we can to make vaccines and medicines available to our patients as soon as possible , for the treatment of new and old diseases .
I would like to thank our fellow Members , who have succeeded in finding a truly balanced compromise which respects and honours ethical principles applying to the treatment of animals while at the same time making it possible to carry on with research projects .
First and foremost this directive sends a clear political signal that we want our scientists to look for alternative methods of verifying research into new medicines , in order to minimise the number of animals and the number of tests , while naturally complying with all of the possible ethical principles so as to avoid the suffering of animals .
I would like to thank you all for this outcome .
Mr President , I cannot hide the fact that this report has been a serious disappointment to those of us who thought that a rapporteur who was also the president of the animal welfare intergroup might have reflected that concern for animals rather more diligently in his report .
It is therefore essential that some crucial amendments are adopted when we vote on this .
In particular , the scope of authorisation must apply to all projects , not just to severe and moderate ones .
If we fail to ensure that , it will mean that many procedures causing pain , distress or suffering would no longer be subject to a centrally monitored ethical review and that in turn would effectively undermine the enforcement of many of the measures set out in the proposal as a whole .
But , if our amendments are passed , it will mean that there will be renewed effort going into research and the alternatives to animal testing , which is particularly critical in basic and medical research .
Current efforts are concentrated on regulatory testing , which accounts for only 10 % of animal use .
For the sake of both the animals and human health , it is essential that more modern , effective non-animal tests come into use as soon as possible .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank all the speakers for their very constructive contributions to this evening 's debate .
Allow me to formulate some brief comments on certain amendments .
The Commission can accept numerous amendments in full , in part or in principle .
These amendments include proposals to improve the confidentiality of data relating to installations and staff working with animals .
They also include proposals for regular review of the use of non-human primates at European Union level .
Concern was also expressed about the criteria for severity bands .
I am in a position to announce to you that , before the summer recess , the Commission will convene a working party of experts to examine the definition of appropriate criteria for use in the European Union .
Without doubt , we will need to maintain the balance struck , as a result of detailed consultation with those directly involved , between the needs of industry and the promotion of research , on the one hand , and animal welfare , on the other .
Consequently , the restrictions on the use of non-human primates must be retained , as must the principle of licensing and independent ethical evaluation of all forms of research , which are basic elements in this proposal .
To recapitulate , the Commission is able to accept 83 of the 202 proposed amendments in full , in part or in principle .
I shall send Parliament 's secretariat a list with the Commission 's detailed positions on the amendments .
Finally , I should like to say that , over and above this proposal , which is very important and for which we must maintain the balance between the needs of scientific research and improving human health , while at the same time using methods which are not hard on animals , I must say that the Commission , all the while I have been Commissioner , has taken numerous measures to protect animals .
I would remind you of our previous debate on seals , of the very drastic measures and reaction in connection with whale hunting , of the issues relating to unsustainable hunting , especially in spring , and of the measures which we took for the first time as the Commission , with safety measures to prevent precisely such cases .
I truly cannot understand how practices such as fox-hunting or bullfights or cockfighting can be compatible with today 's culture .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank Members very much for their views and the Commissioner for his views .
We are right to have this review of this legislation .
It is right to refine , reduce and replace animal testing wherever possible .
We are right to keep the momentum going .
Both industry and animal welfare organisations believe this is necessary .
This is an issue which I believe goes well beyond politics and is very much a moral issue that we must get right .
I for one am very disappointed - if he were here I would say it to him clearly - that Graham Watson has made a personal attack on me in my own region , making this a highly political issue .
This is regrettable because we need to come forward with a sensible proposal in the end .
A lot of technical expertise and work has been put into this report .
We do not deliver this report lightly .
We have put serious work into it and we have good compromises .
I have sought to bring all sides together to deliver a report which is right for Parliament , right for research and industry , and right for animal welfare .
I would urge all to support it because , if we do not get it through , we face delaying the report for a couple of years , and this would be detrimental to the industry and to animal welfare .
So I would urge all Members to support it .
If there are groups here that decide to vote against it , I think in the long run all it will do is delay what is a good proposal , one which will help to make sure there is research available in the European Union to help with disease control and new medicine while at the same time reducing the number of animals we need to use and actually strengthening ECVAM in looking for alternatives .
So I would urge all Members to vote for it because we want a really resounding result in the morning .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 5 May 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( LT ) The draft Commission report strongly supports the development of a more animal welfare friendly approach to the issue of the use of animals in scientific experimentation .
This demonstrates the Commission 's commitment towards the end goal of the abolition of animal experimentation .
The European Union should be working towards this goal .
The European Parliament has made its belief clear that more should be done towards the final objective of removing animals from scientific experiments altogether .
However , whilst this remains the end goal , we are not yet in a position to end animal experimentation altogether .
There remains a huge gap in the development of alternative , non-animal testing methods .
Whilst this remains the case , it would be unwise and potentially disastrous for human health to mandate a date beyond which animal testing or testing on certain categories of animals , such as non-human primates , can no longer be carried out .
Public opinion polls tend to support this approach and they cannot be ignored .
I would first of all like to congratulate the European Commission for its proposal to revise Directive 86 / 609 / EEC , but I am sorry that the rapporteur did not put forward more ambitious objectives .
I think that we must invest more in carrying out research into finding alternatives to using animals for scientific purposes .
We must oblige laboratories to resort to the use of animals for scientific experiments as little as possible , especially those taken from the wild .
I strongly oppose the use of non-human primates for biomedical research , except only where there is a need to use them exclusively in experiments involving life-threatening or debilitating conditions .
From an ethical standpoint , there must be an upper limit of pain , suffering and distress above which animals must never be subjected in scientific procedures .
With this in mind , carrying out experiments which result in severe pain , suffering or stress , and which are likely to be prolonged , must be banned .
I am aware that public health is of paramount importance , but we must not allow animals to be subjected to extreme suffering in order to test treatments .
I also support the amendment stipulating that the directive must not restrict Member States from applying or adopting more stringent national measures , aimed at improving the welfare and protection of animals used for scientific purposes .
Ship-source pollution and penalties for infringements ( debate )
The next item is the report by Luis de Grandes Pascual , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2005 / 35 / EC on ship-source pollution and on the introduction of penalties for infringements - C6-0142 / 2008 - .

rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , Commissioner for Transport , Mr Tajani , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , personally , I cannot imagine a greater finishing touch to the end of this parliamentary term than the adoption of this proposal for a directive on ship-source pollution and the introduction of penalties , including criminal penalties for pollution offences , which I hope will receive everyone 's support .
The consensus we have reached suggests that we have widespread support for the proposal and that it will be adopted tomorrow at first reading .
Apart from the tremendous effort made by the three institutions during the negotiations phase , this is mostly due to the fact that we agree that the Community needs to take action in order to combat serious offences against the environment .
It is certainly true that Member States were initially suspicious , given that the measure intended for adoption - the Community 's acquisition of powers in the area of criminal law - will not be the fruit of a reform of the Treaties but , instead , will be achieved through legislation which , in addition , is unquestionable and of immense significance .
All this is derived from the need to address widespread problems in maritime transport , such as the worrying escalation of illicit operational discharges of ship-source polluting substances .
Although we already have current international regulations to minimise this situation - the Marpol 73 / 78 convention - we are increasingly seeing glaring shortcomings as regards application and compliance ; it has also been observed that the civil liability systems governing ship-source pollution in force at present are not sufficiently dissuasive .
Malpractice in certain areas of European coastlines is so recurrent that some of those responsible for maritime transport prefer to carry out the illicit practice of polluting , because it costs them less to pay the administrative penalty than to comply with the relevant legislation .
Such behaviour has transformed the former principle of ' the polluter pays ' into ' pay to pollute ' .
Indeed , by introducing criminal penalties on account of the severity and social stigma they carry in comparison with administrative penalties , the European Union is trying to deter potential polluters from any kind of contravention .
The reform is the fruit of negotiations with the Council , represented by the Czech presidency which , by the way , deserves my full praise , since it has had no shortage of political difficulties to face throughout its term of office ; it is a combination of a structural reform of the directive , which does not affect the foundations of Parliament 's mandate and which fully respects the principle of subsidiarity , since the directive establishes the principle of sanctioning actions in the terms defined by the Court of Justice ruling , while leaving Member States to define the types of penalties .
Furthermore , it consolidates the difference between minor discharges and major infringements and the corresponding penalties these deserve .
Thus far , we had succeeded .
We simply had to reiterate the agreements reached in the debate and the adoption of Directive 2005 / 35 / EC and of Council Framework Decision 2005 / 667 / JHA , but according to the new legal basis , since the aforementioned rulings bring about the possibility that the Community legislator may adopt measures relating to the criminal law of Member States .
The main innovation we have added to this amending proposal , which will enable us to go a step further in our fight against environmental infringements in the maritime transport sector , is that it claims - as was defended by this rapporteur from the very first day - that repetition of minor discharges involving water pollution can also constitute a criminal infringement .
I am pleased to see I have not fought this battle alone , for Parliament lent me its support through members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism ; the Commission and the Council , in the end , understood the significance and scale of my proposal .
May I express my sincere thanks to the shadow rapporteurs who have helped me in my endeavours and who have provided support in the tough negotiations with the Council and the Commission ; I wish to acknowledge the draftsmen of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their contributions .
We finally reached a compromise solution with regard to the date on which the directive shall come into force , which will be in the next 12 months .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that today we all have reason to be satisfied , for , with the adoption of this legislation and the approval of the third maritime package at the beginning of March , the European Union has strengthened its position as a leader in maritime safety .
I am certain , ladies and gentlemen , that we will be an example to others .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission cannot help but be delighted at the outcome we are seeing , which will lead to the adoption of a new directive amending the previous one .
This will fill the legal vacuum created following the ruling by the Court of Justice annulling Framework Decision No 2005 / 667 , which established the nature , type and level of criminal penalties for the illegal discharge of polluting substances at sea .
Once adopted , the directive will make it possible to fight more effectively against those responsible for polluting the seas .
The text that Parliament is about to adopt is , therefore , an important addition to the third maritime safety package signed by the presidents of both Parliament and the Council at the end of your last plenary session .
The compromise text currently being discussed is slightly different from the Commission 's original proposal , although I have to say that the essential points have remained unchanged : firstly , the criminal nature of the penalties to be imposed for illegal discharges , and secondly , the possibility of prosecuting all those responsible for such discharges , including legal persons .
For this reason , the Commission supports the text , even if it does introduce separate treatment for minor infringements and repeated minor infringements .
On the other hand , I can appreciate that the Council and Parliament have thought it desirable for discharges that do not lead to a deterioration in water quality to not necessarily be subject to criminal proceedings .
Even more so than Parliament , I am keen to see small discharges criminally punished ; although they may not be very serious , they can lead , precisely because they are repeated , to real pollution of the marine environment .
The compromise reached concerning the question of repeated minor infringements gives a more specific definition of ' repetition ' and can therefore be accepted by the Commission , which , I repeat , is pleased with the outcome reached thanks to the work of the Commission staff and Members of this House .
I thus believe we can say today we are happy to be sending out a message on reducing the pollution of our seas .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - Mr President , the legal vacuum created by the relevant ruling of the European Court of Justice necessitated the amendment of the directive under debate .
It is incredible that a legal-basis error has caused a delay in the implementation of such an important directive , and has without doubt been detrimental to our marine environment .
Lessons can and must be learned by all concerned in order to avoid such occurrences in the future .
The main issue at this point in time is to speedily amend the proposed directive and get it on the road to implementation as soon as possible .
Only then can we envisage the widespread problem of the increase in the incidence and scale of illegal operational discharges of ship-source polluting substances being brought under control , and only then will our task of fighting to keep our seas clean have real hope of success .
In conclusion , I wish to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work he has done on this report .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , marine pollution is only the focus of interest when there has been a dramatic accident .
Then there are serious debates about the threats to our oceans from this ongoing pollution .
Unfortunately , the subject is always largely ignored in the interim .
We must take seriously the constant and repeated violations of the law which make just as significant and just as dramatic a contribution to the threat not only to our oceans but also to our coastlines .
I would like to thank my fellow Members with whom we were able to discuss the issue for taking a consistent approach to the protection of our oceans .
I come from a landlocked country , but nevertheless , as a European , I feel responsible for protecting our oceans against ongoing pollution caused by cheap business interests and for integrating the principles of the third maritime package , which is urgently needed , as the Committee on Legal Affairs has proposed .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the version of the amending directive , negotiated by the rapporteur with the Council , which introduces sanctions against ship-source pollution .
We would like to congratulate him warmly on his work .
We would also like to congratulate the Vice-President , because without the help of the Commission it would not have been possible to come to an agreement with the Council at the first reading .
It is a big day for us , because we can complete this important dossier at the end of this period .
We must always remember that the new regulations became necessary because the Court of Justice of the European Communities in its judgments from 2005 and 2007 has finally made it completely clear that legislation , including criminal law , is permitted on the basis of the first pillar .
We need this legislation to protect the seas from ships and from the behaviour of captains , shipowners and others .
Until now the civil liability legislation has simply not been dissuasive enough .
It is much cheaper to discharge something illegally into the sea .
Surely that cannot be right .
Therefore , we need effective sanctions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for this three-way agreement , which has been reached between all three institutions .
It is clear that serious ship-source pollution must be classified and punished as a criminal offence and minor ship-source pollution can be regarded a regulatory offence , so that there is a distinction between the seriousness of the two types of activity .
However - and my third point is very important - repeated minor ship-source pollution should now be regarded as a criminal offence , because it contributes to the overall pollution of the oceans and that is not a trivial matter .
We must send out clear signals in this respect and we call on the Member States - and I hope that someone will pass this call on to the Council - to implement and to apply this directive immediately .
We can only protect our oceans by means of dissuasive criminal sanctions .
I too would like to congratulate Mr de Grandes Pascual .
I also want to mention that pollution of the sea is really a topic which we must discuss more often .
Unfortunately , I can cite the example of the Black Sea where , in just the last two years , the fact that it has become heavily polluted has led to a four-fold increase in the volume of algae , precisely due to a very high concentration of nitrates .
Obviously , maritime transport is unfortunately responsible for some of this pollution .
This directive is actually intended to deal with illegal discharges from ships made either through negligence , deliberate intent or carelessness .
In practical terms , the directive harmonises the definition of ship-sourced pollution caused by individuals or legal entities , the scope of the response to this and the punitive nature of the sanctions which can be applied in the event of any such violations committed by individuals .
I also want to mention that a set of coherent legislative measures have already been adopted at European level for reinforcing maritime safety and preventing ship-sourced pollution .
This legislation refers and applies to flag states , ship owners and classification companies , as well as port and coastal states .
However , it is important for us to tighten the current system of sanctions for illegal discharges from ships by supplementing the relevant legislation .
We must emphasise that this legislation was necessary precisely because the existing preventive regulations were not enforced adequately .
Unfortunately , the MARPOL 73 / 78 Convention was not enforced adequately either .
This is why I believe that it is important for us to have this legislative package .
I also believe the fact that opinions were given by both the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Petitions highlights the importance of this subject .
( BG ) It goes without saying that at a legislative and executive level , the European Commission and European Parliament are in the debt of the European citizens who are ultimately affected by the pollution which has occurred in our marine areas .
I am looking at this issue from the point of view of the previous regulation and its enforcement aimed at protecting the environment , the seas and associated coasts .
I would like to reiterate that the regulation and the amendment to the directives are necessary , but are still inadequate .
The most important thing of all is how effectively they are enforced .
It cannot be accepted as normal that you can dump your waste in the sea and pay a fine which costs less than complying with the directive 's requirements .
This is why , above all , attention must be focused on monitoring .
Nowadays , there is a sufficiently large number of technological options available to ensure that waters and coasts can enjoy the protection of a long-term policy governing the use and protection of the entire flora and fauna .
I support the proposal to amend the directive as I believe that it is particularly important to set up a specialist body for the European Maritime Safety Agency whose activities will be aimed at implementing this directive .
Mr President , honourable Members , at the end of this debate we must be grateful , I think , for the interinstitutional cooperation between Parliament , Council and Commission , which Mr Jarzembowski underlined in his speech .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
This time the institutions have shown , even at the end of this parliamentary term , that they are able to work in partnership and come to a solution at first reading , and I believe that this is a message we are sending to citizens , on the eve of the European elections .
A further message in the sensitive area of transport , and , since this will be one of the last debates to involve Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism , I take this opportunity to thank all the members of that committee for the work they have done in cooperation with the European Commission and myself , to come up with practical solutions to several important matters , some of which had been dragging on for months .
This was made possible thanks to the intelligence of Members of this House , and also to the work we have done to achieve efficient cooperation among our staff , showing that , when bureaucracy has clear-cut tasks , when there are goals to be reached , it is not a barrier for citizens but an effective instrument , alongside politics , with which to meet citizens ' needs .
I believe that today , and of course tomorrow with the vote , Parliament will give another demonstration of efficiency and a desire to always work for the people .
So , with this debate and with the vote , Commission , Parliament and Council are filling a legal vacuum and enabling Member States , from tomorrow , to better prosecute those who pollute our seas : another step taken by the European institutions to strengthen the rights and freedoms of the European people .


rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I shall speak very briefly , for which the honourable Members will be grateful at this time of night : Mr Tajani , many thanks once again because you have shown , as you did in the third maritime package , that your impetus and political skill have brought about an agreement with the Council and made it possible for Parliament , the Council and the Commission to come to an agreement on this occasion and in the final days of this parliamentary term .
I believe that we should congratulate ourselves .
I am , of course , grateful to the draftsmen of the opinions , both from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , for their close collaboration .

May I reiterate my thanks for the shadow rapporteurs ' hard work and collaboration ; I am certain that tomorrow 's adoption of an agreement at first reading on such an important regulation that is sure to complete the work of the third maritime package , is a success for this Parliament and for the three institutions of the European Union ; once again , it justifies the useful codecision procedure which enables us to hold a constructive dialogue to the benefit of all the citizens of the European Union .
Thank you , Commissioner , not only for your work as Commissioner but also as a Member of the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 5 May 2009 ) .
Consumer rights ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the proposal for a directive on consumer rights by Arlene McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - B6-0232 / 2009 ) .
author . - Mr President , I know Commissioner Kuneva is here , and I very much welcome the opportunity at this last session of Parliament 's mandate - even at this very late hour - to have an exchange of views on the Commission 's consumer rights proposal .
We have produced a working document and you will recall that the IMCO Committee working group , led by myself as chair and rapporteur , made a decision not to rush this proposal without taking full consideration of all its implications , in particular since it has been described as the most far-reaching change in approach to consumer law in Europe .
The committee , I believe , has very diligently carried out its work with a public hearing , several exchanges of views , a presentation suggested by Mr Harbour on the impact assessment , and an online consultation with has received around 100 responses from organisations across Europe in just three weeks .

We also held an exchange of views with representatives from the 27 national parliaments to which the Commissioner was also invited .
Commissioner , I know that you and your staff are fully aware that this is a controversial proposal that merits further examination in a number of areas .
We appreciate the drive to improve consumers ' rights in the internal market .
We also agree that there is a need to improve the functioning of the business-to-consumer internal market by removing barriers to cross-border trade , but there is also a need to reassure our consumers that they can continue to expect a high level of protection .
During our deliberations , debate and consultations with stakeholders , we received numerous representations concerned about the lack of clarity and certainty in this proposal .
We encouraged consumer organisations and business stakeholders to initiate their own dialogue on how we can make this proposal work , and I know that the Commissioner has received a jointly drafted letter from business and consumer organisations which has been copied to all MEPs .
I would like to quote from that .
They say , ' we attach great importance to the legal clarity and quality of the proposal , as well as to the need to know what consequences and changes it would bring about compared with the current situation .
We believe there is a high degree of uncertainty about the scope and the consequences of this proposal in particular in relation to its impact on national legal orders . '
Their concerns are clear .
We need to be clear in our final proposal .
Are we asking consumers to give up some of the rights they have under national law ?
If so , what does the consumer get in return ?
And if we are not asking them to surrender certain contract law rights , such as the right to reject in UK and Irish law , then is business still not faced with 27 different sets of consumer rules , the abolition of which was a key objective in the first place ?
My colleagues and I believe that our first priority is to evaluate what this proposal will do for consumers and business in real practical terms .
That is why tonight 's oral questions identify some key issues that we would like to work with you on , and that we need to make sure are addressed , in order to produce a workable set of rules that benefit all stakeholders .
Our questions therefore focus on the details of specific areas where we would like to see further work .
Some members of the working group were concerned at perceived flaws in the impact assessment and want to see more evidence of the costs of legal fragmentation if we do not act .
They also want more information on the economic impact of the proposal , not only on the impact of the information requirements .
In short , we would like the Commission to take some time in the intervening election period before Parliament is reconstituted in July to undertake the following work ( this is all contained in the Oral Question ) : an analysis of the practical and legal implications of the proposal on consumer rights in each Member State ; a clarification of the relationship between the fully harmonised provisions in the directive and the general remedies available in national contract law ; a clarification of the interplay of the draft proposal with existing Community legislation , in particular the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , E-Commerce Directive , Services Directive , the Rome I Regulation and , of course , the proposed CFR .
We want some further evidence in the impact assessment to help us analyse and demonstrate the benefits and costs of this proposal and any alternative approaches that could be put forward .
We want you to help us , and we will work with you , to ensure that we support a dialogue between stakeholders on what measures are necessary to bring mutual practical benefits for business and consumers alike .
Commissioner , I believe it is possible to produce a workable practical proposal that is supported by all stakeholders .
I pledge to you that the Members of this House wish to continue to work with you to ensure that we deliver that , and that we can at some point in time vote through this Parliament a new consumer rights directive .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank Arlene McCarthy very much for her words because a lot has really been done on this directive .
I would , however , like this directive - which we will continue to work on - not just to be adopted , but also to be embraced , by all the stakeholders .
We will not spare our efforts for this to happen .
As this is our last session here , may I use the opportunity to thank you all very sincerely , especially Arlene as the chair of our committee , as well as Mr Harbour and especially Mrs Cederschiöld .
I expect one way or another to keep in touch with you because it was a real pleasure to work with you and I hope this will continue in another way .
I would now like to concentrate on the next important steps for the directive because I do believe that this directive is very important for all of us .
We need this directive for the internal market of the 21st century .
Let me make it clear that , before tabling the proposal , the Commission carried out a comparative law analysis , the ' Compendium ' , covering the laws of the Member States transposing the consumer directives under revision .
The Commission is now going through the various provisions of the proposal in more detail with the Member States in order to improve its understanding of the practical impact on national law .
My services are preparing a table , which aims to illustrate the impact of the proposal on the existing levels of consumer protection across the EU .
The table will cover those provisions ( for example the length of the withdrawal period and of the legal guarantee ) for which it is possible to assess whether the proposal will bring about an unquestionable increase or decrease in consumer protection in the various Member States .
The table will be available by the end of May at the latest .
Under the proposal , Member States will be able to retain general contract law remedies for faulty goods , provided that the legal requirements for the exercise of these remedies differ from the requirements which apply to the remedies regulated in the proposal .
I appreciate that this interaction between the proposal and national general contract law remedies could be made clearer in the text .
This means that remedies such as the right to reject in the UK or the garantie des vices cachés in France could be maintained .
However , I am also prepared to consider alternatives whereby elements of these national remedies could be incorporated into the proposal , if such a solution were to be preferred by the Council and the Parliament .
The proposal complements the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive ( UCP ) .
Whereas UCP protects consumers collectively against questionable business practices by rogue traders , the draft Consumer Rights Directive provides consumers who conclude a contract with a trader with individual contractual rights , which they can enforce before civil courts .
As regards the Services Directive and the E-Commerce Directive , the information requirement in these Directives will apply in addition to those of the proposal and will also prevail in case of conflict with the proposal .
Finally , as regards the Rome I Regulation , the preamble to the proposal makes it clear that the proposal is without prejudice to the Regulation .
As a consequence , the national law applicable to consumer contracts within the scope of the draft Directive will be determined exclusively by the Regulation .
The Commission , in preparing the proposal , was inspired by the findings of the contract framework of reference ( CFR ) , for example , on the black list of unfair contract terms , the passing-off and delivery rules , as well as the streamlining of the pre-contractual information requirements .
For the future , it will be important to ensure coherence between the CFR and the Consumer Rights Directive .
Given that the CFR will be a longer-term project , we will have to make sure that the final definitions and rules of the Consumer Rights Directive are incorporated in the section of the CFR dealing with consumer contracts .
The proposal for a Directive on Consumer Rights was preceded by a thorough impact assessment .
The impact assessment also monetised the administrative burden that would accrue as a result of the changes proposed , and compared it with the cost of compliance that traders wishing to sell to other Member States have to incur as a result of the fragmentation of consumer protection rules and Rome I. The assessment showed that full harmonisation of the essential consumer rights would have strong positive effects on internal market integration and consumer confidence .
During the initial stages of the legislative process , it appeared that further evidence and more insight might be useful on consumer behaviour and preferences regarding sales remedies .
I intend to launch a qualitative study in the near future on this matter , with a view to gathering evidence following in-depth interviews with consumers and traders .
The results of the study should be available in the third quarter of 2009 .
The Commission is committed to maintaining a constructive dialogue - and this is my political commitment to you - with the stakeholders mostly affected by the draft directive during the legislative process .
To that effect , I will gather consumer and business stakeholders together at a joint meeting in June 2009 to clarify elements of the proposal and to further discuss the most important aspects of the proposal .
Parliament will be kept duly informed .
I would like just to add that last week I met all the consumer organisations under the umbrella of BEUC and we discussed this matter again .
Two days later at least 10 representatives from the House of Lords came to discuss this directive in Brussels .
This is a very good sign that interest in consumer policy is increasing , as is right for the internal market .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would first of all like to warmly thank Ms Kuneva for all the work she has done on consumer issues , since this is the last time in this Parliament we shall have a chance to debate with her .
Commissioner , I from my side and , I think , the whole committee have really appreciated your intensive engagement .
I know it was perhaps somewhat disappointing for you that we felt we were not able to give this proposal a thorough review and get it to first reading before the end of this mandate .
But I think history will show that we have done the right thing because the work that has been led very well by Arlene McCarthy - looking at the impact assessment , questioning the issues - has raised awareness in the proposal and has also got many more people engaged , as you yourself indicated .
It seems to me - and here are the crucial points I want to make in the short time available this evening - that one important thing that is missing from this proposal is the overall strategic framework that the Commission wants to follow in the evolution of the consumer acquis .
This proposal addresses goods but , at the end of this year , before we have this proposal in place , we shall have the Services Directive in place and there are many issues for consumers around that .
We know that you are also looking at issues such as digital products , package , travel and so on .
I think we need to see what you intend to do with this goods package as part of a broader strategy for the direction of the consumer acquis .
That is very important .
It needs to be future-proofed ; it needs to be part of an overall process .
That is one of the things that I would be slightly critical of in the approach that has been taken so far .
I hope we will be able to move that forward .
I was delighted you mentioned the House of Lords because I was also going to reflect on that .
We have assured them that their report will be able to have a material contribution on the outcome , given the time we have available .
We look forward in the end to an extremely good result for Europe 's consumers and the internal market .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would refer to the working document of Mrs McCarthy and Mrs Wallis .
For the benefit of the next Parliament , it asks the questions raised by this proposal for maximum harmonisation and highlights the risk that some countries perceive of a weakening in the protection of their own consumers .
On the other hand , the Commission is right to want to expand cross-border trade , which is abnormally low for an internal market .
I will not therefore go over the background again - as Mrs McCarthy has already done so - but would give the Commission some advice , if you will permit me .

Firstly , I hope that Mrs Kuneva will continue her work , and I hope that she can get a draft horizontal directive adopted .
However , you will only achieve this if , firstly , you very precisely assess the impact on all national legislations , which has not been done ; secondly , if you position this proposal very precisely in relation to existing and proposed regulations , directives and agreements at Community level , which has not been done ; thirdly , if you very precisely stipulate that some rules of principle , such as on hidden defects , are safeguarded , which has not been done ; and , fourthly , if you indicate - and this is the most important point - what level of protection will result from implementing the directive , and not just what the provisions will be .
In this respect , the proposal is not what you would call a clear document .
Yet that is what we need : harmonisation which increases the level of protection .
In short , Commissioner , you have been rather hasty .
My advice would be to take some time - your time - and , with this time , to present all the arguments that will allow you to totally convince the governments and this European Parliament .
( SV ) There is currently room for improvement in consumer protection regulations .
The negotiations have not started , Parliament has not made a statement and the Member States are just starting their discussion .
We need full harmonisation in the area of consumer protection .
I have room for three points that I think it is appropriate to mention .
1 .
A clearer scope for the directive .
2 .
At present , goods with an original defect can be returned within two years ; this should be three years .
3 .
The withdrawal period should be set at one year , which will increase consumer protection in most Member States .
Clear , unambiguous rules and a high level of consumer protection benefit both consumers and businesses .
Unclear rules are detrimental to genuine businesses and to small and medium sized enterprises .
The Council and Parliament should now incorporate these three central points into a fully harmonised proposal .
Since this is my last debate with Meglena Kuneva , I would like to express my thanks for the fact that our cooperation has been so incredibly pleasant .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start by answering Mr Harbour .
I see clearly why we need to address the issue of services , and services are definitely a very important part of the consumer strategy for 2007-2013 .
I fully realise that the European economy is a service economy .
As to why we are not addressing , for example , digital content , and excluding it from the scope of the proposal , I can state that the issue of consumer protection in respect of digital content services was raised in the green paper consultation .
Several stakeholders , and in particular consumer organisations , consider this to be an important matter .
However , it raised serious concerns in business quarters , and respondents argued that because of the complexity of the issue further careful analysis was needed .
To this end , the Commission will carry out a study in order to determine the scope of the problem and the extent of the consumers suffering detriment as a result of digital content not being covered .
I would like to turn to digital issues next time , with rock solid arguments .
Without wishing to waste either the time of Parliament or of consumers and businesses , may I kindly inform you that tomorrow , together with Commissioner Reding , I will present the digital guide .
This is a very practical guide based on the existing legislation - about 20 directives - which forms a kind of compendium of what we can do right now to enforce our rights , because sometimes the most important point is how we enforce legislation .
On the remarks which Mr Toubon made , I should say that , under the proposal , Member States will be able to retain general contract law remedies for faulty goods , and this means that remedies such as the right to reject in the UK , or the garantie des vices cachés in France , may be maintained .
Sometimes we need to invest more time in explaining the content of a directive , and that is what my colleagues are doing in the Council .
At the least we need to make clear what we mean in one or other text , and this is the stage at which we can clearly settle questionable issues .
The Commission is now going through the various provisions of the proposal in more detail with the Member States , in order to improve understanding of the practical impact on national law , exactly as you , Mr Toubon , and Parliament asked .
We will spare no effort to make everything clear .
This is a legal text ; this is a civil text ; and how this legal text can even be translated is itself quite a challenge .
We will therefore keep explaining and maintaining the good level of collaboration with the Council , and with Parliament , on this aspect .
Thank you , once again , for the last comment , Mrs Cederschiöld .
I will keep your proposals in mind .
You are right to say that we are negotiating the directive .
I listened very carefully , but let me be very clear in saying that there is one point on which I will not compromise , and that is full harmonisation .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) Levels of consumer protection vary between the Member States .
During the IMCO committee hearings representatives of voluntary consumer protection groups from the old Member States did not report financial problems .
Consumers often pay for the services of these consumer groups before deciding on a purchase .
This helps these organisations to remain independent .
Consumer organisations in Slovakia receive EUR 152 000 to fund their activities .
I am concerned that such a pitiful sum will discourage these organisations from standing up for consumer rights .
Following the expansion of the EU it is all the more difficult and complex to be a consumer .
A whole series of issues directly concern consumers , from the defect-free condition of products purchased , to confidence in transactions to on-line shopping and advertising .
As many of these issues go beyond the boundaries of individual countries we need harmonised legislation and intensive efforts at prevention awareness , which will provide us with enough self-awareness to avoid becoming pawns in the hands of experienced companies .
For this reason consumers should know how to use the portals providing them with up-to-date information , for example RAPEX on hazardous products , SOLVIT on the internal market , DOLCETA on financial awareness and many others .
The European Consumer Centre and the Europa Diary can also help consumers considerably .
Commissioner Kuneva , on behalf of the Commission you must challenge the new Member States in particular not to undervalue consumer protection by failing to provide sufficient support for consumer organisations .
Recommendation to the European Commission in Complaint 185 / 2005 / ELB ( short presentation )
The next item is the short presentation of the report by Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the special report from the European Ombudsman following his draft recommendation to the European Commission in Complaint 185 / 2005 / ELB .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , in 2005 a freelance interpreter , discovering that he was no longer hired by the European Commission when he reached the age of 65 , lodged a complaint with the European Ombudsman for alleged age discrimination in violation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This was not a recent issue : years before , the Commission and Parliament had taken the decision not to hire freelance interpreters over the retirement age of their own staff .
The interpreters affected by this took the matter to the Court of Justice and won on first instance , but were ruled against at the appeal stage , although this was due to formal defects and not substance .
Taking into account previous cases and rulings , the Ombudsman made a thorough analysis of the complaint and concluded that , indeed , there had been evidence of discrimination and an infringement of the Charter of Fundamental Rights ; he therefore recommended that the Commission change the rule in line with the action already taken by Parliament following the ruling by the Court of First Instance .
The Commission ignored the Ombudsman 's recommendation , which compelled the Ombudsman to request support from Parliament , which passed the case on to the Committee on Petitions .
The Committee on Petitions had three reasons for supporting the Ombudsman with the resolution that was adopted unanimously by the Committee .
Firstly , to line up with the position of Parliament itself , which had been hiring freelance interpreters over the age of 65 when it was deemed convenient or necessary .
Secondly , because of its obligation to support the Ombudsman .
Parliament considers the Ombudsman to be a troublesome institution at times , but one that is always of great importance to our legal system .
Thirdly , we felt it was important to remind the European Commission that it is not above other Community institutions , especially those that are responsible for scrutinising and overseeing its work .
So here we are in plenary , presenting the resolution that was adopted unanimously by the Committee on Petitions , as I have said , and which calls on the Commission to implement the Ombudsman 's recommendation ; we are also reiterating that the Ombudsman , like Parliament itself , is above the Commission 's Legal Service , which is an important department , but an administrative one and nothing more .
Nothing less and nothing more than that .
I must confess , Mr President , Commissioner , to a certain uneasiness , because , throughout this process we have always sought to reach an understanding but , nevertheless , there has been a certain amount of pressure for the report not to reach plenary and even now some comments suggest that Parliament 's position will be disregarded as well .
This is most surprising and , in addition , does not stem from Commissioners themselves but , rather , from certain high-ranking officials - very few , but from some high-ranking officials - convinced that they are permanent members of staff in contrast to Members of Parliament and even Commissioners who are , by definition , interim staff here on a short-term basis .
Whilst reiterating , Mr President , Commissioner , fellow Members , our desire and will to cooperate and always be on good terms with the Commission , we have no choice but to reject the conduct to which I have referred .
Let us hope that tomorrow 's vote reflects what happened in the Committee on Petitions : a majority or unanimous vote in support of the Ombudsman , with Parliament making clear to the Commission that things are as they should be and that everyone knows their place .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to stress that the Commission has acted in good faith , strictly respecting all relevant legal rules in the process .
We have never been seeking a conflict with the Ombudsman , and even less so with the European Parliament .
Our opinion was that our position would be recognised by the Ombudsman .
Our starting point is that , over the years , the working conditions for agents interprètes de conference ( AICs ) have been increasingly aligned to the rules of the Staff Regulations .
Since 2000 , freelance interpreters have been linked to the Staff Regulations , after the decision of the Council of Ministers that they can pay Community tax instead of national taxes on their income from the European institutions .
And then , from 2004 on , they have been covered by Article 90 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants , which is why they are now called AICs .
The age limit of 65 years is a rule of the Staff Regulations that covers all categories of personnel working for the institutions , be they officials , temporary , contract or auxiliary staff , as well as parliamentary assistants , following the recent adoption of a new regulation in this respect .
This rule was applied to AICs by the Commission , as well as Parliament , between 2000 and 2004 .
Following a decision of the Court of First Instance in 2004 stating that not to recruit AICs over the age of 65 constitutes discrimination , the institutions suspended the application of the rule .
However , following an appeal against the decision , the Court declared it null and void .
Consequently the Commission returned to its previous practice .
As there is no longer a Court decision in the matter , our reading is that the previous line applies and that the Commission has to apply the rules deriving from the Council regulation of the year 2000 and stop recruiting at the age of 65 , exactly as for other staff .
The freedom of the interpretation services of the institutions to recruit AICs according to their needs is a cornerstone of efficient delivery of conference interpretation .
This makes it possible to have most regular and predictable demand covered by staff interpreters , whilst fluctuating demand and peak situations are catered for by recruiting AICs .
This tried and tested system has made it possible for the institutions to satisfy requests for interpretation according to demand , including making a success of the latest enlargements while keeping costs under strict control .
This approach also supports an active policy of training of young conference interpreters .
Finally , I would like to welcome the very positive contacts between Parliament and the Commission in this matter , and I would especially like to thank Vice-President Martínez Martínez for his valuable contacts with my colleague Commissioner Orban in a previous phase .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , as I missed one minute of time earlier , I would like to respond to Commissioner Kuneva , who is aware of the feeling of friendship and affection I have for her and , indeed , for Mr Orban .
But the Commissioner has failed to make a single mention of the Ombudsman 's recommendation .
In other words , the Ombudsman , who is aware of all the Commissioner 's arguments , has made a specific recommendation of which the Commission appears to be ignoring every aspect .
I am not even asking Mrs Kuneva to give me an answer personally because , obviously , she is not the one with the information , but all the information she has given me is in line with what we already knew and with what the Ombudsman knows and yet she still has not told us whether the Commission - regardless of all that and knowing that the Ombudsman , who is familiar with the case , is recommending that the rule be changed - is going to act on the Ombudsman 's request and Parliament 's related recommendation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the only thing that I can tell you at this stage is that I will report back to Commissioner Orban and make sure that you will have an adequate answer on this point .
Of course we will take your comments very seriously and the last clarification which you asked for .
Thank you , Commissioner , thank you , colleagues .
Thank you to all the staff and thank you to all the interpreters , whatever age they may be .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 5 May 2009 ) .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 23.45 . )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Electronic communications networks , personal data and the protection of privacy - Electronic communications networks and services - Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications ( BEREC ) and the Office - Frequency bands for mobile communications ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002 / 22 / EC on universal service and users ' rights relating to electronic communications networks , Directive 2002 / 58 / EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector and Regulation ( EC ) No 2006 / 2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer protection laws ( 16497 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0068 / 2009 - ( Rapporteur : Mr Harbour ) ,
the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 2002 / 21 / EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services , 2002 / 19 / EC on access to , and interconnection of , electronic communications networks and associated facilities , and 2002 / 20 / EC on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services ( 16496 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0066 / 2009 - ( Rapporteur : Mrs Trautmann ) ,
the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the Council common position for adopting a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Electronic Communications Market Authority ( 16498 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0067 / 2009 - ( Rapporteur : Mrs del Castillo Vera ) , and
the report by Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 87 / 372 / EEC on the frequency bands to be reserved for the coordinated introduction of public pan-European cellular digital land-based mobile communications in the Community - C6-0452 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , it is a privilege this morning to be opening this most important debate and inviting our colleagues to support the reform to the telecom package that we have on the table .
I emphasise that it is a reform .
As you heard , four rapporteurs have been working on elements of it .
On the key reform of the package , I want to pay tribute to my colleagues , Catherine Trautmann and Pilar del Castillo Vera , because we have worked very closely together to bring that package together .
It is an important reform because the existing package that I worked on with colleagues back in 2001 and 2002 has worked very well for the European economy .
We have a thriving and dynamic communications sector with active consumers in the marketplace .
But this reform brings that up to date and my colleagues will explain the areas that they want to work on .
The most important thing is that it makes the package robust for the next decade .
There are substantial improvements that Parliament has made in this second reading .
I would like to place on record , on behalf of the three of us , our thanks to the French Presidency for bringing us a common position in November which has enabled us to bring this improved package to you today in the last session of this mandate , because it is vital for European consumers and the European economy that we give this a ringing endorsement in our vote tomorrow .
As always with these complex issues , I have had tremendous cooperation from my own shadow team - Bernadette Vergnaud , Cristian Buşoi and Heide Rühle .
I also want to thank the team from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , led by Alexander Alvaro , because an important element of my reforms includes the E-Privacy Directive , which they have handled .
In my four minutes this morning , I do not have time to go through all the points and all the improvements that we have made in great detail .
There will be plenty of briefing about that afterwards .
I just want to give you a sense of what we have achieved and what we are looking for .
In this directive we have significantly improved the rights of consumers and users in the electronic space .
Consumers need to be empowered to make choices between the communication services on offer and , to do that , they are entitled to information .
They are entitled to fair contract terms and conditions that do not tie them for long periods to particular providers .
They are entitled to a high-quality emergency service , to access to social information services over the Internet and voice telephonic communication .
Above all , they are entitled to have their data in the electronic communications space protected .
We will hear more about that later .
We also need to empower regulators to ensure that those entitlements are properly delivered .
All of those are included in this proposal .
I think it is very important to emphasise that this is an enabling and empowering proposal .
It is not a proposal that is any way restrictive of people 's rights on the Internet or restrictive of services at all .
We want to give consumers that power to make choices and that is what will open services .
I just want to conclude my first speech by saying this : there have been a huge number of people working on this proposal and we have had tremendous resources behind us .
I want to particularly mention Peter Traung from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Luca Vusaggio , our legal adviser , and Lindsay Gilbert from our group , who have all worked closely together with my assistant Sheena Gooroochurn .
We have had great support from the Commission , from Peter Rodford , the Commissioner herself and her team , and also from the Council Secretariat led by Eva Veivo .
I mention that because I think many people outside do not realise the extent and engagement that we have in delivering these complex texts .
I look forward to your support for this tomorrow because it is so important for all our futures .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we shall be voting on the telecoms package , the final stage that will mark the end of months of work and negotiations to arrive at this compromise , which was reached after much wrangling with the Council in a context where the three institutions started from very different positions .
I want first of all to thank very sincerely Mrs del Castillo Vera , Mr Harbour , Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar , the shadow rapporteurs , the political groups , the chairmen of the committees and their secretariats , the Presidency of the Council and the European Commission for their tireless work throughout these long months , and I thank all those fellow Members who have chosen to place their confidence in me by giving me their support .
This package brings numerous advances .
They are important for consumers because they offer better services at fairer prices .
Telecommunications are in fact characterised by their impact on everyday life and play an obvious social role as a medium for development and growth .
The telecommunications sector alone provides more than 3.5 million jobs and accounts for an increasingly large share of the European economy - almost 3.5 % .
Well-regulated competition allows for a balance between old and new operators and ensures significant growth for the sector thanks to legal certainty , which in turn encourages investment .
That is why , throughout this round of negotiations , we have fought , together with my fellow rapporteurs and our shadow rapporteurs , to make a regulatory framework that is beneficial for all .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy approved in April the penultimate stage in the legislative process by adopting by a very large majority the overall compromise on my report and the report by Mrs del Castillo Vera .
We have laid the basis for a solid compromise which , I hope , will receive - together with the reports by Mr Harbour and Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar - your full support in tomorrow 's vote .
I would like also to come back to Amendment 138 / 46 and to make clear the meaning and scope of the text underpinning the agreement of Parliament and of the Council , the so-called ' last chance compromise ' .
Since the vote on this amendment at first reading the Council has continued to reject it outright , excluding it from its common position and refusing to mention it in the recitals or the articles .
The European Parliament has shown its commitment to this amendment by including in the compromise the key elements of Amendment 46 : defence of freedoms , right to a judgment and recourse to a court - the expression most in line with that of judicial authority - and has introduced two additional provisions for Internet users : the confirmation of the Internet 's vital role in the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms , with specific reference made to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
The spirit and the letter of Amendment 46 have therefore been respected and extended for the benefit of users , and the rejection of this amendment by Member States on the grounds that the European Parliament cannot impose a change in their internal judicial organisation - which would be required in order to implement this amendment - has thus been avoided .
Its place in Article 1 , which concerns the scope and the objectives , makes this proposal in essence a principle that applies to all the directives in the package , particularly where access and services are concerned .
This therefore rectifies the legal weakness that resulted from linking Amendment 46 to Article 8 , which defines the tasks of national regulators .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are faced with a choice : to support Amendment 46 as it is , and thus refer the whole telecoms package back to a conciliation process , which will reopen the discussion on all the points established in the negotiations and will lead to its being quashed because of the massive opposition from Member States to this amendment , or to support the new wording of Amendment 46 , which ensures respect for fundamental freedoms , thus confirming what Parliament adopted at the time of the vote on the Lambrinidis report .
I would add that the presence of Article 1 ( 3 ) ( a ) and its recital will have to be taken into account in the transposition of the directive , and that they will enable Parliament to legislate afterwards .
Faced with this impossible choice , I invite you , ladies and gentlemen , to think about the future of our work in the next parliamentary term , which will focus , among other things , on universal service but also on content and intellectual property , and I therefore invite you to support the new proposal , in an effort to put the rights of employees , artists and Internet users on an equal footing .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I wish to begin , like the other rapporteurs , Catherine Trautmann and Malcolm Harbour , by thanking them , firstly , for the extraordinary opportunity I have had to work on this reform of the European regulation of telecommunications markets because , in my view and still limited experience in this Parliament , it has been a model of cooperation between different Members from different groups .
So , thank you very much .
Naturally , I would next like to thank all those who contributed : the shadow rapporteurs and particularly the Secretariat of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which I think has played an absolutely fundamental role in reaching this point ; also , may I thank the Commissioner and the Commission for facilitating all the difficult tripartite negotiations .
I also wish to reiterate the efforts made by the Czech Presidency , from the very first faltering stages right up to this point at which the Czech Presidency has shown true leadership within the Council .
I would like to express particular thanks for the efforts it has made .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a reform of a regulation that affects a key sector for the future of Europe : key to citizens ' welfare and key to emerging from the deep crisis our economies now face , in Europe and elsewhere , but for now we are talking about the European Union .
If there is one industry that can truly provide the catalyst and the boost we need to emerge from the crisis , it is precisely the information technologies and communications sector , that is , the electronic communications and telecommunications sector .
That is why it is so extremely important that we have reached this agreement because it is going to enable us to move forward with an approach I consider to be the most crucial : keeping an open outlook , looking ahead , rejecting protectionism and , instead , encouraging competition and competitiveness ; and the role of this sector is vital for that .
With regard to the package - various aspects of the different reports have already been mentioned - I would just like to mention , as rapporteur of this report , the creation of a new body of European regulators in the electronic communications sector , a vital tool to ensure that the rules we are going to adopt tomorrow in the new regulation are applied consistently across the Union ; that , in practice , there is harmonisation enabling the creation and development of a true internal market with internal competition , because that is the best way to ensure that consumers benefit and the best way to ensure that European consumers have the chance to enjoy the best services at the best prices .
It is competition , and nothing else , that guarantees that end result and that benefit for consumers and for our economies .
So then , let us say ' No ! ' to all forms of protectionism and ' Yes ! ' to openness and competition ; the sector that can best ensure that is , indeed , the electronic communications sector and the telecommunications markets .
We therefore have cause to celebrate .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , as others have done , I would like to address my fellow Members and the Commissioner in order to thank them for the work they have all carried out , on which I believe we can congratulate ourselves today .
I would also like to express my thanks for the unconditional support I have received as rapporteur of the GSM Directive , particularly to the shadow rapporteurs who have worked with me and to Commissioner Reding for the flexibility she has shown throughout the process of giving Parliament back the role we had been demanding : to take part in the strategic planning of the use of the radio spectrum .
I must also , of course , thank the Czech Presidency for demonstrating its clear determination to resolve this directive along with the rest of the package before the end of the parliamentary term .
As rapporteur of this GSM Directive , I believe that we have found the correct end solution , placing strategic planning for the spectrum at Community level within future multi-annual programmes of radio spectrum policy and linking it to the framework directive .
It is the right decision because we are thus acknowledging that the spectrum , as a rare , public asset , needs legislative control as well as strategic planning in the development of new networks - the wireless and fibre optic networks - which are , as we have all agreed , the future , a future in which we must offer legal protection to operators so that they invest and we may recover the leadership that the European Union once showed .
I wish to stress the fact that it is also very important that we have established the principle of technological neutrality for the network within that general framework because , given that it was an exception to that principle , we are doubly legitimising Parliament 's actions in a situation of this scale .
In that context , I feel that this directive is a fine example to give spectrum management greater flexibility , as the reform of this telecommunications package intends .
We should not forget - and I should like to highlight this , as some of my fellow Members have done - that in the European Union services related to the radio spectrum generate a turnover of around EUR 300 billion , that is , 1.2 % of Community GDP .
Therefore , optimising the management of this rare , public resource will no doubt bring important benefits , particularly in this time of economic crisis , and is sure to help us to emerge from the crisis .
I think this is an investment opportunity for businesses to develop new services that can rekindle demand and also help to improve our citizens ' public services .
To be sure , an efficient spectrum policy in the European Union enables us to reap the greatest social and economic benefit from this resource , which we want to do as cost-effectively as possible ; it also offers the best business opportunity for service providers .
There is no doubt that it is of interest to us all to have more and better services for consumers , which is , ultimately , why we are legislating , and to have a better provision of public services for citizens .
In other words , we want to be able to collaborate to achieve greater social and territorial inclusion of European citizens .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think we can congratulate ourselves today for completing this work that is of tremendous importance to the telecommunications industry , a sector that , in 2008 , continued growing at a rate of 1.3 % in real terms , while overall GDP only made a real increase of 1 % .
I call on all of you to show your support for our work tomorrow so that we can finally implement this legislative framework .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this was a real model of cooperation between the different parties represented here , between the shadows , the rapporteurs , the Czech Presidency and all our collaborators , and I congratulate them on their great work .
That great work is a result of the agreement that is on the table today after the Commission put the package on the table in 2007 .
The results include new consumer rights , such as the right to switch phone operators in one working day , the establishment of a European telecoms authority , more interdependence for national telecom regulators , measures to ensure that Europeans can be connected to broadband Internet , the opening of radio spectrum for use by new wireless services , the new instrument of functional separation to boost competition and broaden consumer choice , a clear pro-competitive rule for investment in high-speed broadband networks , better rights and new guarantees for consumers , mechanisms to address data breaches , and so on and so forth .
Those are very important new measures for a sector that is worth more than EUR 300 billion in revenues and that is leading Europe 's global lead in mobile phones and high-speed Internet .
I would like to underline that if Parliament votes for this package it has to be implemented into national law by 2010 and the new telecoms authority will come into existence by this summer .
The vote of the European Parliament is very good news for consumers all over Europe .
With roaming we have provided a remedy for a symptom resulting from the lack of a single European telecoms market .
Now the reform goes to the heart of the problem ; it paves the way for a true single market for telecoms operators and consumers alike .
It is very important for our industry .
The legislative text will provide a stable legal framework , which supports investment and innovation and provides the regulatory consistency the industry needs to plan business strategies for the future .
This is very important at a time of economic turmoil because here , at this time , we have to maximise the contribution of this sector to the productivity and growth of the economy as a whole .
I must say very clearly that Parliament has not shirked its responsibilities in the face of this challenge .
The economy is very important also for consumers .
Therefore , I just want to say that access to emergency services , fewer barriers to switching operators in one day , privacy , where personal data is concerned - all this has found a solution .
I welcome Parliament 's strengthening of the rules concerning the use of cookies and similar devices .
Not only will Internet users be better informed about what happens to their personal data but it will also become easier for them to exercise control over their personal information in practice .
I welcome the endorsement for the mandatory notification of personal data breaches .
This is the first time an obligation of this kind has been introduced at European level .
I welcome also - and Parliament has always supported this - the fact that disabled people will have a stronger position .
I welcome most of all that now consumers will benefit from guarantees in relation to privacy , freedom of expression and access to information .
All of this together - whether through the adoption of harmonisation measures or through greater supervision of remedies chosen by national regulators - will ensure greater consistency in the internal market and will help the new authority which will play a key role in this process , bringing together the expertise and the experience of 27 national regulators and breaking down the remaining obstacles of a truly borderless Europe .
I am very glad that Parliament has played an important role in enhancing the role of the multiannual spectrum policy programmes , which will be proposed by the Commission , and for the first time Parliament will have a say in this .
For this purpose , we will , before the Better Regulation Directive comes into practice , modify the Commission decisions on the Radio Spectrum Policy Group in order to allow this policy group to report directly to the Council and to Parliament .
I also welcome Parliament 's support for the principles of technology and service neutrality and for agreeing to the possibility of harmonising the frequency bands where usage rights can be traded .
All this will be essential for the investment in the next-generation networks and for the return on investment , taking due account of the risks involved .
This will be very important also to guide the Commission when it comes out with more detailed regulatory guidance on the next-generation access .
I have to make two declarations in response to points raised by parliamentarians .
The first one clarifies that the Commission will promote a wide debate on the scope of universal service and will come forward with early proposals as necessary .
The second states that the Commission will start work without delay to consult widely and make proposals relating to the extension of data breach notification requirements in other sectors .
The other document on the table is the GSM Directive .
Here the Commission can fully support the changes aimed at clarifying the frequency bands to be covered by the amending directive .
I just want to underline that this directive alone leads to cutback savings of up to EUR 1.6 billion for the mobile sector , which shows very clearly that Parliament is managing to put on the table an equilibrium of decisions - decisions for the sake of the economy , decisions for the sake of the industry , decisions for the sake of the consumers .
All this together is a very good package in the interests of Europe .
Commission declaration
on universal service ( Recital 3a )
The Commission takes note of the text of recital ( 3a ) agreed by the European Parliament and the Council .
The Commission wishes in this context to reaffirm that , as stated in its Communication COM ( 2008 ) 572 of 25 September 2008 on the scope of universal service in electronic communications networks and services , it will in the course of 2009 promote an extensive debate at EU level that will examine a wide range of alternative approaches and allow all interested parties to express their views .
The Commission will summarise the debate in a Communication addressed to the European Parliament and Council and will bring forward by 1 May 2010 such proposals in regard to the Universal Service Directive as may be necessary .
on data breach notification ( Article 2 ( h ) and 4 ( 3 ) - ePrivacy Directive )
The reform of the Regulatory Framework for Electronic Communications introduces a new concept to EU data protection and privacy rules : a mandatory notification of personal data breaches by providers of electronic communications services and networks .
It is an important step towards enhanced security and privacy protection , although at this stage it remains limited to the electronic communications sector .
The Commission takes note of the will of the European Parliament that an obligation to notify personal data breaches should not be limited to the electronic communications sector but also apply to entities such as providers of information society services .
Such an approach would be fully aligned with the overall public policy goal of enhancing the protection of EU citizens ' personal data , and their ability to take action in the event of such data being compromised .
In this context , the Commission wishes to reaffirm its view , as stated in the course of the negotiations on the reform of the Regulatory Framework , that the obligation for providers of publicly available electronic communications services to notify personal data breaches makes it appropriate to extend the debate to generally applicable breach notification requirements .
The Commission will , therefore , without delay initiate the appropriate preparatory work , including consultation with stakeholders by 2011 , with a view to presenting proposals in this area , as appropriate .
In addition , the Commission will consult with the Article 29 Working Party and the European Data Protection Supervisor on the potential for the application in other sectors of the principles embodied in the data breach notification rules in Directive 2002 / 58 / EC , regardless of the sector or type of data concerned .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to begin by thanking all those who have helped make it possible to reach a satisfactory compromise on the telecom package at the end of the day .
My thanks go firstly to our House : above all to the rapporteurs , my fellow Members Mr Harbour , Mrs del Castillo Vera and Mrs Trautmann , and of course Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar as well .
Many thanks , Commissioner , for this excellent collaboration with the Commission as well .
You yourself were often present during the trialogue negotiations .
That is a good sign .
You have contributed really constructively , together with the Czech Presidency , to helping us reach this compromise at the end of the day .
The compromise is a good one and I very much hope that during the vote tomorrow it will meet with broad approval .
As has already been mentioned , the whole telecommunications sector is one of the most efficient sectors of our European economy , and right in the middle of the financial and economic crisis it is particularly important to create general conditions so that this job engine in Europe can start up again and run .
Many jobs are linked to the telecom industry and with the legal framework that we are adopting , we have created the conditions to allow this sector to continue to develop well .
Why is the telecom package so important ?
I would like to single out what in my view is the most important point .
We need fast Internet access throughout the whole of Europe , and not just in cities , but also in rural regions .
By we , I mean young people , who communicate worldwide .
By we , I mean our businesses which operate globally and are internationally established , and of course our authorities and administrations .
What does the telecom package achieve in this respect ?
It creates the necessary legal framework , so that businesses can invest in the expansion of broadband networks nationwide .
With this package and the investment protection included in it , we have created meaningful incentives , but at the same time have ensured , through the requirements of this regulation , that it is not new markets that are cemented .
The risks in building the new networks have been distributed satisfactorily and fairly .
What else will the telecom package regulate ?
Firstly , the effective use of frequency bands - this is also important for the nationwide development of broadband supply .
In the package we advocate a more flexible frequency policy in Europe .
The frequency bands which will be freed up through the switchover to digital television - the so-called digital dividend - should also be available for mobile broadband services , which in particular can close gaps in rural areas .
However , at the same time we have also recognised the special role which broadcasting plays in guaranteeing free opinion forming in our democratic society .
All in all therefore , a good compromise , and I hope it will find broad support tomorrow !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , it is fascinating to follow this debate - colleagues have already laid out the main topics and the Commissioner has made her statement - but to see that the Council is completely absent tells us a lot about the way we sometimes operate in the European Union .
This is completely unacceptable .
We are experiencing one of the gravest crises ever in the European Union and worldwide , and talking about a topic that is so relevant and so important for job creation - one of the areas where we still have stability to a large degree - and to see that the Council is not reflecting and debating with us today to my eyes tells us a lot .
I hope that we will see the next Council Presidency here more often , because we cannot continue to operate in this way .
Let me make two points .
I want to thank the shadow rapporteur , Pilar del Castillo Vera , who has done great work .
It was difficult , and it was not clear at the very beginning that we would make it and that we would have greater Europeanisation in this area .
We seem to have found a way that is acceptable and that will help the national regulators to work together and to learn from each other .
This will be a good breakthrough , especially for the new Member States .
Let me touch on two points , which I am glad the Commissioner mentioned : investment in new infrastructure , which will have a new framework and work under competition rules which , although different , will allow investment to flow in this area ; and the guidelines which will very soon be published for NGAs .
I hope that those guidelines will follow the philosophy established in this House , from which I hope the Commissioner will not depart .
On the universal service part , I hope that the Commissioner will find a way of ensuring that the telecom operators , which will now profit from new investment possibilities will , for their part , invest to make sure that all citizens have access to broadband in the future .
I hope this will be covered by the Universal Service Directive , which is to come in the second half of the year .
My last point would be to urge this House , my colleagues and the Commission - and the Council hopefully as well - to look into those areas where we have found compromises , but with which we are not completely happy .
This touches on Internet issues , such as the way States can intervene if they think citizens are unlawfully accessing Internet content , which is something we call ' Internet sparen ' in German , and network management .
I hope we will find a way to look into those issues during the second half of the year and find the right framework in order to build a greater consensus between us and the citizens , who are depending greatly on us .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , as shadow rapporteur for the Liberal Group , I would like to thank Malcolm Harbour and my other colleagues for their excellent cooperation .
This dossier is of great importance for all electronic communications users in the European Union , and the compromise we agreed in the end with the Council - and they were not at all easy discussions - was a balanced one .
There have been some important achievements as a result of the negotiations with the Council .
One of the great improvements in comparison to the first reading relates to access to the 112 European emergency number , and the obligation of operators to make caller location available without any derogation on the grounds of technical feasibility , at least for fixed and mobile telephone operators .
This is a major achievement since it will help the emergency services respond more efficiently , and will enhance the protection of all citizens ' lives wherever they are in the European Union .
The provisions on traffic management policies were a controversial point in the report , but I strongly believe that the compromise protects users ' rights to access content and use services of their own choice .
No one in this House ever wanted to restrict freedom on the Internet .
Our objective has been to allow traffic management procedures , as long as they are necessary , to ensure the best possible online experience for end-users , and as long as they do not restrict competition between service providers .
I consider the compromise to be totally in line with this objective , which is why I fully support it .
I also believe that all measures regarding access to , and use of , services should respect the fundamental rights and freedoms of all citizens , and this has also been safeguarded in the report .
Some among us may not be happy with this compromise , but I would like to stress that , despite its shortcomings , this is the best we could achieve with the Council , and I strongly advise you to vote for it tomorrow .
Madam President , there is one point I would particularly like to praise the rapporteur for .
I think it is very good that , on certain points , Commissioner Reding has distanced herself from her proposal .
The approach to frequency bands is - as the legal framework is now to be laid down - much more balanced , than was originally provided in the Commission 's proposal .
In my opinion - as we have now agreed - with frequency bands much better consideration will be given to public interests for the benefit of broadcasting .
In view of the current debate surrounding financial markets , I believe that with our debate we have actually prevented trouble .
This proposal , as it has now been brokered , will , in a much more balanced way , take into account the relationship between the market and what the market can create , and the tasks of the state .
I believe that it represents progress for the security of our democracy and that it can also make a valuable contribution to culture .
Even if we still have discussions within the Group ahead of us , I would like to state here and now that I am not at all satisfied with the compromise with regard to the restriction of the rights of Internet users in cases where infringements are believed to have been committed .
I know that the original Amendment 138 did not have the optimal form judicially .
However , I see that the compromise which has now been found fails to guarantee that , before the fundamental rights of a citizen in the European Union are restricted , a judge will be involved in this decision to restrict fundamental rights .
Commissioner , I would be very interested in hearing how you interpret the compromise , and in particular what , in your opinion , this compromise that we now have on the table , means for the French Hadopi model .
I believe that we will create two different situations for the consideration of basic rights .
Things will perhaps be better in one Member State than in another .
I think that it is a very , very badly worded compromise .
As Parliament we should do better than this .
As far as the rights of artists are concerned , Madam President , I agree with my fellow Member Mrs Mann that authors ' rights must be regulated in a different regulation and not within the framework of a market regulation .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
What we are seeing today is the growth of a new society .
We are seeing technological renewal within society where the old type of communication , which was single-direction of the type where ' one person speaks and everyone else listens ' , has been replaced by a more multi-dimensional communication , a form of participative communication , and many of us have embraced this new culture of freedom .
It is about interaction , freedom of expression , creativity and creative zest .
It is about an exchange of information that is often independent of commercial interests , but unfortunately old power structures feel threatened and therefore want to interfere and regulate and control what is happening on the Internet .
On the pretext of tackling organised crime and terrorism , they are trying to limit our civil rights , but this must not be allowed to happen .
Together with my fellow Members in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left I have therefore drawn up a number of amendments in favour of civil rights , to protect citizens ' rights on the Internet .
I am re-tabling my Amendment 166 , which was adopted at the previous reading .
The objective of the amendment is to ensure that the end-users of electronic communication , that is to say we citizens , will have the opportunity to access services and applications without unjustified restrictions .
We have to strike a balance between people 's rights to free expression and privacy , and protect personal data and the freedoms and rights of others , including the right to the protection of intellectual property and the protection of public safety and security .
In certain countries , governments want to introduce new , tougher laws , which allow Internet providers to block people 's access to the Internet .
We believe that it should not be possible for any citizens to have their access to the Internet blocked without it being preceded by a hearing in court .
As a citizen , I must also have the freedom to be able to surf around various sites on the Internet and feel safe in the knowledge that private undertakings are not able to obtain this information .
Those of us who actually love the Internet and the opportunities it brings say that the rights of users should be defined by what we use our subscription for .
We do not want to be reduced to consumers , with our rights consisting only of what is written in the subscription contract .
Unfortunately , both the Council 's common position and the compromise open up the way for this to happen , but we want to be citizens on the Internet , not merely customers and consumers .
The Internet is a meeting place , a forum for free information , a sort of common land .
Are we now to regulate this forum and tailor it to the interests of commercial representatives ?
No , I think not .
The question is , what type of society do we want to live in ?
Do we want to live in a surveillance society or do we want a society in which people can be sure that the rule of law is respected ?
A society where people can know that their privacy is respected and a society where freedom of expression is valued above control of people 's lives .
That is the type of society that I want to live in and work to enable us to have .
Therefore , I urge you to support the amendments for citizens ' rights tabled by myself and the GUE / NGL Group .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the Internet has changed the world as we know it .
Information that would have been difficult or impossible to find is now only seconds away , but the defining characteristic of the Internet is not speed or technology ; it is freedom : freedom to express opinions , freedom to exchange ideas and freedom to share information .
Some are advocating a restricted future , one where free movement of data is stemmed , where big business is allowed to stifle innovation , and where Internet providers become gate-keepers .
We have seen this approach before - in China .
I hope we choose to retain the freedom that has brought such success and changed our world for the better .
At a time when economies need all the help they can get , we need to choose openness for progress - not short-term protectionism for profit .
On behalf of my constituents , I will vote for our freedom of information and our future free access to Internet for all lawful use .
In so doing , I will vote for democracy and an economy with opportunities for everyone .
( FR ) Madam President , though presented on the legitimate grounds of protecting artistic creation , the so-called ' Hadopi ' law , which is being drafted in Paris , is in fact a freedom-destroying law .
Indeed , this text does not promote creation .
It merely provides for widespread policing of the activities of Internet users .
It includes no specific proposals to improve the legal supply of cultural goods .
It lags pathetically behind on the technical possibilities for hiding or spoofing IP addresses .
It is a step backwards in terms of the right to private copying , for which everyone in any case pays a tax on digital media .
It gives to a purely administrative authority the outrageous power to prosecute and impose penalties .
It re-establishes the double penalty for Internet users denied access to the web but required to continue to pay their subscription .
Finally , it scorns the presumption of innocence and the right to defend oneself .
By blocking this law , which is worthy of communist China or other totalitarian regimes , a law that Mr Sarkozy wants to force through , this Parliament would be reaffirming the right of each one of us to privacy , to access to information , to freedom of expression and to proper legal procedures .
This is absolutely vital .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must first of all thank and congratulate the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs .
We have all worked very hard over these last few months to arrive at a package that is , I think , consistent and of high quality .
Admittedly , the negotiations have not been easy either in Parliament or with the Council and the Commission , but opinions have changed a great deal since the first vote in parliamentary committee , where content-related issues completely overshadowed the rest of the elements of this package .
Therefore , in Mr Harbour 's report , the many advances obtained for consumers had practically no mention .
I hope that it will be different this time , not only because the compromises achieved on fundamental freedoms and respect for privacy are good , but also because this dossier has tremendous potential both for consumers and for the telecommunications sectors and their employees .
The compromises reached on the framework-directive and the Universal Service Directive make clear reference to the obligation for Member States to respect the principles of the right to a fair trial , which must surely be reassuring for those who oppose the French project of sanction by an administrative body .
These texts are anything but a Trojan horse for the graduated response , and even oppose the very principle .
Another concern is the neutrality of the Internet and the issue of limiting access .
The final text is very clear on this matter .
Any policy for network management is justified only for the purpose of maintaining a minimum level of service quality and should not lead to discrimination between services and applications , everything being under the control of national regulatory authorities .
I want also to emphasise what we have achieved for consumers in the context of the Universal Service Directive .
Henceforth , it will be impossible for an operator to hide behind issues of technical feasibility as a reason for not providing reliable access to emergency services and to the location of anyone using the emergency number 112 .
This vital point for the safety of European citizens will finally be sorted out ; it has been technically possible for years , but the authorities and the operators preferred to sacrifice safety on the altar of making savings on investments .
The same goes for improving the transparency and quality of contract-related information to be provided on a mandatory and regular basis .
Consumers will be able to benefit from pricing information matching their consumer profile and also to warning messages where they exceed their normal price package , which is particularly useful with special tariffs for use abroad or for young people , who are major users of premium rate SMS .
The duration of contracts will henceforth be limited to 24 months , with an obligation for operators to offer 12-month contracts , and in the event of a change of operator , this will have to take effect within one day .
We have achieved maximum access for disabled users as well as a review of the scope of universal service in order to extend it in particular to mobiles by next year .
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope that we will vote for this final text , which is the culmination of months of negotiations , without letting ourselves become too troubled by concerns which , although understandable , in view of the fundamental importance ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , as rapporteur for the directive on data protection in the area of electronic communications , I would firstly like to thank Mr Harbour , who has given a whole new meaning to the concept of enhanced cooperation .
It was not the first procedure of this kind , but in this form it was probably the most fruitful .
I would like to thank Commissioner Reding , who was present at each of the trialogues and personally played a part , something which nowadays cannot be said for all Commissioners .
I believe we were able to show , that , above all , the best consumer protection is effective data protection ; that at a time when people surf the Internet and do not know exactly what is going on behind their screens , it is particularly important that they should be enlightened .
We have taken up the Commission 's proposal to make the notification of security breaches compulsory , and have improved it .
It is a procedure that will be implemented in stages and has been developed in cooperation with national regulators , telecommunications providers and policy-makers .
I am delighted with the Commission 's announcement that by the end of 2011 a horizontal directive will be submitted to this end , because it makes no sense to simply address this in the area of electronic communications .
At the same time we have ensured that it is mandatory to obtain the consent of the user for the storage of programs or applications , including personal data , which are on the hard disk .
In this regard I would also briefly like to mention that we have developed the original proposals very closely with the industry concerned .
For some parts of the industry it did not go far enough or it went too far .
They then caused trouble and confusion in the Council and the Commission , before in the end wanting a return to what had originally been put forward , because they did not like the compromise proposals .
The lesson from history is that , as institutions , we should have faith in the fact that we can cooperate well together , and should not let those who have other interests drive a wedge between us .
To conclude I would once more like to refer to my fellow Member Mrs Trautmann 's report .
Some in my Group and others will not agree to a kind of ' three strikes and out ' law .
We need judicial control before net access is blocked .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you ; it has been a pleasure to take part in this most engaging process .
May I also thank the rapporteurs .
At this very moment , Mr Sarkozy is challenging the European institutions over the future of the Internet .
What is our response going to be ?
Are we going to remain silent and not answer ?
What is the position of the European Union and the Commission with regard to the new HADOPI law ( High Authority of Diffusion on the Art Works and Protection of Rights on the Internet ) on graduated response ?
We should listen to the vast majority of Europeans , particularly young people who have grown up in the digital era , and those people do not want there to be gate-keepers ; they do not want to put a heavy lock on the exchange of knowledge , culture and information on the Internet .
The vast majority wants freedom ; they want to maintain their privacy , to have access to culture without fear or anxiety , to retain the neutrality of the Internet ; they do not want screening or discrimination when it comes to data transmission .
What the immense majority does not want is for operators to become digital police , spies , both judges and litigators who marginalise the normal legal procedures of a democracy .
That must be made clear .
We therefore ask the rapporteur , Mrs Trautmann , to change the voting list so that , before voting on the compromise , the position already adopted by more than 80 % of the House , we can at least vote in favour of Internet rights and of intervening only when a prior legal decision has been taken .
The neutrality of the Internet is in danger , not only for this reason but also because of what is known as ' traffic management ' , and I am afraid that some aspects of the Harbour report regarding universal services do not clearly protect that neutrality .
Information given to consumers in contracts alone is not sufficient .
Madam President , this telecoms package is of very great interest to many citizens in my own country of Ireland and indeed across the European Union , and rightly so .
As MEPs , I hope that we can send a strong message on behalf of those citizens that we are in favour of a free Internet , where the privacy of users and their rights are respected fully .
Today we must stand behind the block of citizens ' amendments that have been tabled , as the best way of defending those rights of our citizens .
These amendments , if passed , will restore some sort of balance between end users ' rights and freedoms and the rights and freedoms of others , including the right to intellectual property protection and indeed the right to privacy .
The aim of this proposal should be to protect those who need protection , but also to strengthen the rights of citizens to access information within the law when and where they see fit .
Service providers should be made to act in a transparent manner at all times and , if in very exceptional cases restrictions to access are required , they should be fully accountable in justifying these restrictions .
National powers should have a role in investigating any restriction that service providers impose .
Finally , I hope that this Parliament will stand with our citizens this week in supporting the citizens ' amendment package , thereby standing in favour of the freedom of Internet users and civil liberties across the Union .
( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , I do not think that the compromise is good enough where the rights of citizens are concerned .
I am concerned that the French culture minister still believes that it ought to be possible to shut off access to the Internet administratively after ' three strikes ' .
Consequently , I and a number of my colleagues have re-tabled an amendment that has already been voted for once by this Parliament .
However , it is not possible to vote on it as the votes are tabled at present , since we must vote on the compromise first .
I am therefore asking my fellow Members to change the order of the votes so that we can vote on citizens ' amendments before we vote on the complete compromise text .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that the Internet should remain open .
Since the communications industry manages data transmission , it has de facto control over democratic discussion and the access to knowledge .
It effectively controls our access to trade and more generally controls the circulation of information .
According to the terms of the Telecom package , as negotiated at present , network operators will be able to block access to websites , content , applications and anything else .
For this reason , in my recently tabled question , I warned that the risk of limiting the freedom of the press , of thought , of speech and of association , as guaranteed by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , is round the corner when a national government , as was about to happen in Italy , or a communication industry is able to take responsibility for blocking a website at its own discretion , whether its content is illegal or not .
The latter is the main fact that leaps out : the possibility of blocking a website even when no crime is in progress , pending or instigated .
It is certainly a good idea to safeguard the national role in managing the radio spectrum , because we must guarantee and take due account of the specific features of national systems , but the compromise text that we approved in April contains certain elements that are undoubtedly encouraging in terms of consumer protection and , more generally , privacy , the fight against spam - I am about to finish - and everything else .
I remain convinced , however , that the contents of Amendment 138 are absolutely laudable and should therefore ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
The telecommunications industry is one of Europe 's leading dynamic industries .
It needs investment , competition and continual innovations so as to give citizens the greatest opportunities , both with regard to economic life and with regard to information , democracy and diversity .
What we see in this package is clearer rules for competition and a more distinct role for the European authority to ensure that the market is open to competitors .
We deal with issues such as frequency planning and the digital dividend : the new space created to allow more services and more operators to operate .
All of this , Madam President , will result in greater freedom for consumers and greater opportunities .
If I take my home country , Sweden , as an example , this will mean that the dominance that Telia , the old monopoly , has been able to enjoy with regard to competition to provide services to households will now be broken , because there will now be open competition right into people 's homes .
This is progress : it will open the way for more choice , creating better competition , and it will strengthen the power of the individual consumer and therefore also an individual 's freedom with regard to the Internet and broadband .
Madam President , the whole issue of the freedom of the Internet has been the subject of debate in this House .
I am sometimes surprised when those who are opposed to the European Union and to the Treaty of Lisbon demand a higher authority than the Member States that they vote against in all other contexts .
I heard my fellow Member on the left here today , Mrs Svensson , ask for an amendment to allow the EU to directly influence Member States ' approach to the legal process .
This is a deviation from the treaties we have in place today and from the Treaty of Lisbon that we are talking about , and it is a form of supranationalism that no one has actually discussed .
However , in the introduction to the legislation we have ensured a clear division of what legal authorities must do and what Internet operators must do .
We have ensured that no one will be able to violate the freedom of the individual user on the Internet without there being a legal and judicial process that meets the fundamental requirements .
The requirements of Amendment 138 are therefore met and the various threats that existed have been eliminated .
I think that this is progress that we should be happy with because , at the same time , we are ensuring that the European telecommunications market is opened up to provide more freedom , more diversity and more competition , thereby laying the foundation for it to be dynamic and a world leader in the future , too .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously I would like to thank Mrs Trautmann in particular , but also the other rapporteurs .
A very special thank you goes to Commissioner Reding , for the excellent levels of cooperation she has shown for so long .
We have a lot of Commissioners , but , as has been mentioned , you are definitely the number one as far as working with us is concerned .
We would like to improve the status of groups for whom new technology brings opportunities , but which will leave them with no access to the information society unless their rights are monitored .
Such groups include the elderly and the disabled .
The rights of customers should also be guaranteed , so that unfair competition does not prevent them from using new services .
In the end the Council accepted almost all of our suggestions regarding consumer protection , so that is a satisfactory outcome .
For over 10 years we have been reforming legislation that controls the information society and , more recently , the civilised society .
Today we are deciding on the notion that the use of the Internet is a civil right .
It needs to be protected and diversified .
We already decided earlier on that information is a civil right .
The worry is that electronic communications that reach wide audiences will be still more superficial in nature and nothing less than mindless rubbish .
The aim of a civilised society is surely such a demanding one that we simply cannot move towards one based on the sort of content we have at the moment .
We are using our excellent technical tools to lead humanity into ignorance in the information society and philistinism in the civilised society .
A bad book is bad , however good the print quality or the paper .
A crime is a crime on the Internet , and in the same way rubbish is rubbish on the Internet too .
Do intelligent networks result in stupidity then ?
Ladies and gentlemen , with this sort of content we really cannot become the world 's leading knowledge-based economy or society .
Our knowledge is simply insufficient for that .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what we should do , now that we have very effective tools in place , to bring the quality of content up to the level of a civilised society .
Madam President , I welcome the agreement on the telecoms package because this agreement brings in its wake another agreement on a less discussed issue : the repeal of the GSM Directive .
The mobile telephony industry has been understandably very anxious to get access to the radio spectrum bandwidth currently reserved for GSM , in order to maintain its global competitiveness .
However , MEPs were anxious to ensure that democratic accountability over use of the spectrum was maintained .
Previous spectrum-related pieces of legislation , such as the mobile satellite services decision , have shown that many issues said by the Commission to be technical do , in fact , have a political side to them .
What is technical may , in fact , affect principles of cohesion and access for everybody .
So I welcome the fact that , through the telecoms package , MEPs will now retain scrutiny of spectrum allocation .
I will be voting for the telecoms package , but I do so with a certain reluctance , because I believe there has been a fundamental betrayal , at the highest level , of the basic principle of the telecoms liberalisation that this directive was supposed to achieve .
I am referring to the words in Article 8 about ensuring access to incumbents and their approach to the market .
It seems to me that the deal that was done on this wording in a private conversation between Prime Minister Gordon Brown and Chancellor Merkel has given incumbents , such as Deutsche Telekom , a huge advantage .
We do not know what Prime Minister Brown got in return .
I am afraid that private deals by leaders behind closed doors are not the way to make EU legislation .
I regret that this occurred .
Madam President , I have a few observations .
I do not trust the Commission ; I do not trust unelected bureaucrats behind the scenes who have meetings for which I do not have any minutes .
I do not trust this place , which gives a veneer of democracy , but which is largely made up of placemen .
This looks to me like political editorial control over things on the Internet - the new medium .
It is the sort of thing we condemn when it happens in China .
I do not like it .
It smells a bit to me .
I do not know what is going on behind the scenes , as the previous speaker just said , and what deals are being done that we do not know about .
We have perfectly good copyright laws .
We have perfectly good data protection laws .
That should be enough .
I do not want any more control coming to this sinister and corrupt institution .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only recommend that my fellow Member does not stand for this Parliament again ; then he will have done his job well .

I would like to offer Commissioner Reding and also the Czech Presidency my sincere thanks , because together with our rapporteurs they have once again taken a great step for the citizens of Europe .
The concept of the internal market offers citizens great progress in the area of telecommunications in particular , as well as in all areas where we were previously confronted with monopolies .
In addition , we have already seen with the roaming regulation that there can be great savings here for households , and citizens are protected .
In particular , market access for small and medium-sized enterprises is quite an important prerequisite for ensuring that a good service is being offered , that network neutrality is implemented and that we of course authorise the independent regulatory authorities in the Member States to represent their industry and their enterprises , but also their consumers in other European countries .
The enforcement of the rights of citizens of one nation in another Member State is of particular significance to small and medium-sized enterprises , and we should ensure that in future broadband continues to be used for the benefit of the population and prices drop , because with the very dynamic development of broadband services and the Internet that is currently taking place , especially in the area of telephony , we have completely new possibilities for the use of broadband .
For that reason I am also grateful that the GSM 900 frequency band is also at the disposal of UMTS and that , for the first time , some thought has been given to the fourth generation network , which will hopefully receive the continued support of the Commission , so that we have comprehensive support for the provision of broadband , especially in rural areas .
Consumer protection is also regulated quite excellently in this legislation : the fact that the courts are working to ensure that the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights is applied accordingly , is great progress , so that we have a great chance in this area , with the allocation of frequency bands , to also take advantage of unrestricted and unimpeded use of the Internet , while at the same time we have the assurance that courts will decide if there are to be restrictions .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all my fellow Members for the really excellent work they have done .
I would also have liked to thank the Council , but I see they are not present ; however , the Commissioner is here .
I believe we have done something good .
Mr Harbour , you were the rapporteur for the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and I must say that our collaboration and the joint action were very positive .
We have achieved a great deal for citizens , which in the area of universal service is especially important for us Social Democrats .
This telecom package has been made much more customer friendly and so an important contribution has been made to consumer protection .
In future telecommunication providers will also have to offer contracts of just 12 months duration , which is very important .
Until now there were many providers who only offered 24 month contracts , which is a very long period of time and prevents people from exiting from a contract early .
That is quite an important contribution .
When changing provider , consumers must be able to keep their own number within a day .
Until now long waiting times have often made people give up switching to a cheaper provider and have hampered competition in this area .
Here too we have had great success .
The Socialist Group has meanwhile sought to ensure that , when making an emergency call from a mobile , the position is transmitted automatically , so allowing help to reach the person quickly .
There was a long struggle to push this through as well , because to start with many maintained that this was not technically possible at all .
It has been proven that it is possible and so it also had to be done .
This is a great help for our citizens .
Soon it should also be easier for people with disabilities .
They must be ensured unimpeded access to means of telecommunication .
Here too we must - particularly when we are talking about universal services - ensure that it goes ahead , and that too is very positive .
There was one point which has been controversial throughout : how do we deal with criminal prosecution where questions regarding criminal offences or matters of civil law respectively arise ?
We have taken an important step with the compromise we reached today with the Council , as we have included judicial reservation .
Judicial reservation means that we do not leave it up to enterprises alone to decide which sanctions are imposed ; instead , using rights , as captured in the European Convention on Human Rights , we have ensured that consumers can defend themselves and service providers do not have excessive power .
This is a really important point .
( FR ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I first of all commend our rapporteurs ' work on this telecom package , which is to be put to the vote tomorrow , because it is a good text .
It takes into account all the aspects of this revolution in communications that we are living through : telecommunications networks , regulation , economic aspects , consumer rights and access to the Internet .
However , on this last point , I have to say that the Democratic Movement 's delegation was disappointed .
The compromise reached last week on Mrs Trautmann 's report on this particular issue is unsatisfactory .
The weakness of this draft lies in the failure to take into account the case law relating to Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
This draft in fact only legitimises the French Government 's attempts to impose its concept of a high administrative authority , the infamous ' Hadopi ' law .
There are people who are afraid of the Internet , people who do not understand its development or its interest .
These people often say that the Internet is a lawless area .
It is precisely in order to prevent the Internet from becoming a lawless area that the Democratic Movement 's delegation considers that terminating Internet access should not be an administrative decision but a judicial decision .
The Internet is a wonderful tool for exercising one 's fundamental rights .
Some people believe that administrative management is the solution .
That tells us how much importance they attach to fundamental rights .
The rules that ensure freedom of communication between people are timeless and do not depend on one medium or another .
The right to a judicial process must not be called into question on any pretext .
( PL ) Madam President , people are afraid that measures such as the telecoms package are a restriction of their freedom .
I have received hundreds of letters on this matter , and not only from Poland .
I will quote from one of them : ' The European Parliament proposes to introduce changes to the law which will affect my access to the Internet , and which may restrict or create conditions for the use of certain Internet pages and sites .
The legislative changes proposed by the European Parliament will allow my Internet provider to offer me restricted or conditional services .
I am afraid that such changes will kill off the Internet and may have undesirable consequences for the economy in the European Union . '
This is the voice of Europe , the voice of the electorate .
I support them .
I advise people to be careful when voting , especially when it comes to candidates from Poland , where neither the Civic Platform nor the Law and Justice parties know what all this is about .
And to Mr Harbour , it seems that some clowns from Civic Platform and Law and Justice circles care more for seals and monkeys than for people .
Madam President , it is fair to say that the telecoms sector is a success story within the EU , which makes it all the more important that we set the right regulatory framework .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work and in particular my colleague , Pilar del Castillo Vera , on making big improvements to the Commission proposal for the regulators by turning it into this Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications ( BEREC ) .
It is a pity that a debate about the Internet and Internet censorship and the legal powers of Member States has distracted attention from the substance of this package .
I would like to compliment my colleague , Malcolm Harbour , for thrashing out a compromise text with the Council over this vexed issue known as Amendment 138 .
If nothing else , this part of the package has provoked a torrent of e-mail lobbying , and I have to say to those people who believe that large volumes of e-mails and many words will prevail , that they very quickly become counterproductive .
What is easy to send in an instant is equally easy to delete in an instant , but , unfortunately , too much time has to be spent scrolling down trying to find anything else other than spam .
I very much hope that the regulators will feel fully equipped to bring about more competition , a level playing field and much enhanced consumers ' rights , as well as striking the right balance to encourage investment and innovation to keep Europe at the cutting edge .
Another important aspect of this package is the enhanced consumer rights that have been delivered , in particular number portability within one working day and greater transparency in contracts and billing .
These are practical matters that are important to the individual consumer .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would of course firstly like to offer all the participants my sincere thanks for the significant work they have done .
I know that the committee and in particular Mrs Trautmann have shown much commitment , to achieve two goals : on the one hand to create a basis for modernisation , for the continued technical revolution in Europe in terms of the creation of new jobs , and also in terms of the competitiveness of our continent - thus also making an important contribution to Lisbon - and on the other hand , to protect consumer rights , which have already been mentioned here several times .
I think that both goals have been successfully achieved .
The release in the future of certain frequency bands , when we migrate to the digital system , will create more possibilities and more innovation .
This will also make an important contribution to an innovative society , and we are grateful for that .
Of course , there are also a few delicate matters .
As one who frequently uses the Internet , writes blogs and is active on Facebook and Twitter , I know that there are quite a few problems here .
Nevertheless , I am utterly convinced that we should not intervene without a judicial decision .
It would not only be wrong in principal , it would also give out the wrong signal , especially to our young people , who are constantly surfing the web and use these modern means of communication very heavily .
I am therefore very pleased that , among other things , it has also been indicated clearly in the recitals that , on the one hand , we are of course not prepared to accept criminal activity , but on the other hand we are also not prepared to allow intervention without the verdict of a judge , without a legal basis .
In my view , this is an essential principle which must be observed .
I am very grateful to my colleague Mrs Trautmann and all the others for persevering in this matter and ensuring a clear line .
( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I too wish to compliment the rapporteurs on their hard work and to express my thanks .
Yet I fear that I still have difficulty with the package .
It contains many good elements , and indeed regulation is clearly needed in this sector .
The progress that has been made here includes greatly improved consumer protection , and the Commission 's assurances that it will present proposals for a general notification requirement in the event of loss of data .
Nevertheless , I have a problem with this package .
The problem has already been pointed out by numerous MEPs , including my fellow Member from France : governments have attempted to introduce the element of ' three strikes and you 're out ' into the compromise through the back door , which actually has absolutely nothing to do with the Directive .
I have to say I find this extremely irritating .
I do not consider this an acceptable compromise , therefore , and so I should like to call on my fellow Members to vote in favour of the amendment by my colleagues Mr Alvaro and Mr Schmidt .
This is an essential condition for my support for this package .
In my eyes , it would be a crying shame if this amendment were not adopted .
We do want a compromise with the Council , of course , but not at all costs .
I also find it annoying that the Council leaves us with our backs to the wall every time , and that we just have to like it or lump it .
The Council bears just as much responsibility for reaching a compromise as the European Parliament .
The European Parliament has a reputation to maintain when it comes to the protection of civil rights , particularly in recent years .
I hope that Parliament lives up to this reputation during tomorrow 's vote .
Finally , Madam President , I too wish to say a few words about the lobby .
I must say that , even though I do not agree with Mr Chichester in substance , I too have been annoyed by the flood of sometimes fairly threatening emails .
I think , in fact I am convinced , ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , the Commission , Mrs Trautmann and Mr Harbour , who have succeeded in reaching a last-minute compromise .
After two years of intense work , we have achieved this compromise in an area that will mark the future of a leading industrial sector .
The Commission 's proposal on use of the spectrum has been amended in the right direction , with respect shown for the achievements in satellite technology , and the Commission 's announcement of a future debate on universal service and the other legal problems that still remain suggests that the work will continue .
This is therefore only a first step in anticipation of other regulations .
This project will provide citizens with extraordinary access to information and culture .
Many problems remain , however , from the point of view of infrastructure and quality , because access of the same quality is still not guaranteed to everyone , if one considers the many technical problems that still exist in relation to wireless communication .
Issues of freedom of access to the Internet , problems of copyright and confidentiality , combined with the concern to protect against crime , to safeguard ethical rules and to protect young people- is that not a bit too much to manage ?
As for those who are sceptical about the compromise , will they be able to put forward a ready-made solution that is applicable immediately ?
I think that this project represents a considerable advance .
Let us therefore give the regulators whom we put in place a chance , and the sceptics will then be able to influence these new institutions , which will have only to prove their effectiveness .
Madam President , two years ' work and my congratulations to all of you on this hard work .
The telecoms package makes a major contribution to the Lisbon Strategy as the sector represents 4 % of GDP and 25 % of GDP growth .
It is one of the basic sectors for European economic power .
The telecoms package makes a major contribution to a knowledge-based economy , not only through the sector itself , but also by increasing opportunities for users , whether they be companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , or individuals .
Everyone can benefit from it .
The telecoms package makes a major contribution to the European Economic Recovery Plan through its development of the network .
The telecoms package makes a major contribution to strengthening consumer rights and consumer opportunities as more and more consumers can use it .
The telecoms package also , however , makes a major contribution to the development of democracy .
It provides access to all Europeans and new means to practise our rights and obligations , but is also a balance established by the regulatory body : a balance between giving Europe an instrument to achieve a truly internal market in the telecoms sector , and using the expertise available at national regulatory level .
My congratulations to the rapporteurs and to the Commission .
Over the next five years , we shall make the first step , which then has to be followed by others .
( RO ) I would like to begin by congratulating our rapporteurs who have been working flat out on this package for more than a year .
This is actually an extremely important package for the European Union 's citizens .
This package includes numerous documents .
I think it is important for me to refer first of all to Mrs Trautmann 's report , which sets out the regulatory framework for the electronic communications sector and has covered a number of extremely important aspects , such as functional separation , spectrum policy , as well as the use and promotion of new generation networks .
I welcome the fact that functional separation was adopted and accepted as an urgent , special measure .
In addition , I believe that it is vital for us to emphasise here that consumers ' rights must be protected .
This is why Mr Harbour 's report touched on these aspects and our colleague , Reino Paasilinna , successfully supported the European Socialists ' point of view , which is that the key element must be the consumer .
It is important how the contractual clauses are negotiated so that any consumer can be protected .
On the subject of technological neutrality , it is useful that a wide range of technical options is made available to everyone in this way .
But I would like to stress that the Internet offers huge opportunities .
It is important for consumers and users to be protected and for there to be no interference with personal data , which must also be protected .
Above all , we must protect intellectual property , but not to the detriment of consumers ' interests .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Thank you Commissioner , we need increased harmonisation within electronic communications and clearer and simpler legislation , and this harmonisation must contribute to a well-functioning internal market .
The main objective is to increase competition , which will result in greater choice , lower prices and better quality for end customers .
In order to succeed , many different interests need to be weighed up and a good balance found .
The telecoms package must not , and is not intended to , be used for the purposes of criminal law or penal sanctions or to affect the Member States ' procedural law .
Improved competition must be central .
All citizens must be able to take their case to court - it must not be left to commercial forces .
I hope , therefore , that my fellow Members will now support the compromise .
The problem of privacy crops up in commercial legislation , data storage , criminal legislation and transparency legislation .
The European Union has not yet found a common approach , with common principles that can be applied to all three areas , and an overall appraisal will be necessary to avoid conflicting legislation in the long term .
It is still a challenge for the future to find a balance between the interests of the police , advocates of transparency , those who want to protect data and , of course , IT companies .
The Commission should be able to contribute to this by setting up a common task force to find common principles and a balance between the different interests within this important area .
Finally , I should like to congratulate Commissioner Reding and the rapporteurs on their good work .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like first to thank Mrs Reding , our Commissioner , the French Presidency , which in December came to a very intelligent common position , and then the Czech Presidency , which has just achieved its aim .
I would also like to thank and congratulate above all our three rapporteurs , Mr Harbour , Mrs Trautmann and Mrs del Castillo Vera , who have done a magnificent job .
The package that we are voting on today includes provisions that go absolutely in the direction one would wish for the development of the telecommunications market , in an orderly fashion and for the benefit of everybody : a European regulation entrusted to a Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications ( BEREC ) with mixed financing , without a veto ; a balance between competition and the need for new investment - functional separation is limited to exceptional cases ; a desire to focus attention on public services in spectrum management ; new services ; new freedom of access ; and , thanks to Mr Harbour in particular , a considerable increase in the rights of consumers .
I am just sorry that ' must carry ' has been rejected .
For France , this text is perfectly balanced , it is a good compromise , and here I mean that , with regard to those infamous controversial amendments , what has been proposed in the end is intelligent , in my opinion , because it makes it possible to implement intellectual property rights on the Internet without compromising freedom of access to the latter .
The Internet must apply the law in this field as in others .
The virtual world is not a lawless world and it must not submit only to the power of advertising brought in by operators and Internet access providers .
That is why I share Mrs Trautmann 's point of view .
The compromise puts the rights of employees , of artists and of Internet users on an equal footing , and that is a good thing .
Madam President , I wish to begin by paying tribute to all the hard work put in by the Commission and its officials , and also by all the rapporteurs .
I speak as one of the shadow rapporteurs for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs at the time of the e-privacy part of the whole package .
I would also like to pay tribute to the work of Alexander Alvaro and the other shadow rapporteurs , including Mr Lambrinidis from the Socialist Group .
We all worked very hard to achieve a balance between data protection , which we all agree is a very important issue , and the right of companies to develop security programmes to ensure that our networks are safe and target those who seek to initiate malware and viruses across networks .
This is something that sometimes involves examining data traffic .
What this was not about was going for ' three strikes and you 're out ' .
Very few people here support that , and it is very unfortunate that some people outside this House have sought to portray this as supporting ' three strikes and you 're out ' .
While we are on the subject of data packets , let me turn to the issue of net neutrality .
I think we have to agree that a certain amount of network management is necessary .
As companies build broader pipes , other companies are coming up and filling those pipes , and this could lead to problems of congestion .
Who could have imagined a few years ago that we would now have services like BBC iPlayer or YouTube ?
Therefore , it is important that operators are able to manage their networks .
This idea of ' first packet in , first packet out ' could prove detrimental , particularly when emergency services are being overridden due to traffic congestion .
I would like to thank all the rapporteurs on this subject for trying to achieve the right balance , and would ask the lobbyists outside this House not to portray this as ' three strikes and you 're out ' ; please do not portray it as a fundamental attack on our freedoms .
We are just trying to achieve the right balance .
( SV ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
I am sorry that I am a bit late .
I would like to start by saying that I think it is important to point out that the telecoms package , as it stands today prior to the vote , is essentially a good one .
It strengthens competition and users ' rights , and it is important to emphasise this because I think it is something that often gets forgotten in the debate .
We concentrate almost exclusively on the details and then sometimes miss the big picture , and this is after all what the telecoms package is all about - strengthening competition and users ' rights .
However , there are currently many threats to our civil freedoms and rights on the Internet and to the Internet 's open and free structure .
They have never been so clear as in the debate on whether we should exclude users from the Internet without a hearing in court .
I am very proud that we here in Parliament have agreed that we do not consider this to be acceptable .
People must not be blocked from the Internet without having their case heard by a court .
This is important because it is a very serious restriction of civil freedoms and rights .
It also turns legal principles upside down in a way that we would never accept in other contexts .
We do not prohibit someone who has stolen a bicycle from using the roads .
I am therefore pleased that we shall say a clear ' no ' to that sort of proposal tomorrow .
At the same time , this does not eliminate all threats to the Internet .
There are many other issues that will continue to be discussed , and I look forward to those debates .
There are certain areas where I would like us to be able to go a bit further , but overall this constitutes a step in the right direction .
I am proud that we shall make it clear tomorrow that citizens ' freedoms and rights on the Internet , in particular with regard to the possibility of not being excluded without a hearing in court , are something that the European Parliament will support .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to say that today 's debate has been dominated by the following question : how can we strike a balance between freedom on the internet , free access , copyright protection and observance of fundamental rights ?
This is indeed the magic formula for finding the right balance here .
I would like to stress that this is not about the arbitrary blocking of the Internet .
We cannot have YouTube being shut down , as it was in Turkey , because there had apparently been insults to Atatürk .
We do not want the sort of situation there is in China .
Of course , websites cannot be closed at random for political reasons .
However , I would like to say clearly that citizens cannot have an unlimited right to unrestricted illegal downloading !
This is not a point that can be negotiated here .
However , we must ensure - and this is the balance we are looking for and have yet to find - that producers of creative content , whose works appear on the Internet , can be fairly compensated .
We need a new model for this .
It is not the French model .
We want a judicial reservation , a judicial decision on fundamental rights .
However , we have still to find this new social contract in the knowledge society between copyright and the protection of fundamental rights .
Madam President , thank you to all those who have made it possible for this very important package to see the light of day .
I am thinking , of course , of the rapporteurs and their colleagues , but I am thinking also of the Czech Presidency , and I would like to say here , officially , that the ambassador , Mrs Reinišová , has been fantastic in the way she has cooperated with Parliament and the Commission to make this project possible .
We now have a balanced text , which allows for markets to be opened up , investment , freedom on the Internet and the right to the Internet .
We have a text that has potential for the development of the industry - and therefore for keeping and creating jobs - and for users .
This text balances , on the one hand , the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs , and , on the other hand , many advances concerning the rights of consumers who use the Internet .
Allow me to answer some of the questions which have been raised .
One of the questions concerned investment in next-generation access networks by ensuring that telecom operators receive a fair return on investment , taking due account of the risk involved .
It is already possible for several companies to share the investment risk under the current rules .
The new rules confirm this and say at the same time that effective competition and non-discrimination rules have to be maintained .
This is very important .
I want to underline it because I sometimes hear only part of the story , but it is the whole story on investment which has to be applied in practice .
The second question concerns data breaches .
Operators must assume the responsibility that comes with processing and storing these huge amounts of information .
The new rules therefore introduce mandatory notifications for personal data breaches for the first time in European law .
This means that communication providers will be obliged to inform the authorities and their customers about security breaches affecting their personal data .
In addition , the rules concerning privacy and data protection are strengthened in such areas as the use of cookies and similar devices .
Internet users will be better informed about what happens to their personal data and will find it easier to exercise control over their personal information in practice .
A second element concerns a more open and neutral Internet for consumers .
European consumers will have an ever greater choice of competing broadband service providers available to them .
Internet service providers have powerful tools at their disposal that allow them to differentiate between the various types of data transmission on the Internet , such as voice or peer-to-peer communication .
Even though traffic management can allow premium high-quality services to develop and can help ensure secure communications , the same techniques may also be used to degrade the quality of communications or other services to unacceptably low levels .
That is why , under the new EU rules , national telecom authorities will have the power to set a minimum quality level for network transmission services so as to promote net neutrality and net freedoms for European citizens .
In the new text , we have added new transparency requirements which are of the utmost importance .
The fourth element I would like to underline is the recognition of the right to Internet access .
The new rules recognise explicitly that Internet access is a fundamental right such as the freedom of expression and the freedom to access information .
The rules therefore provide that any measures taken regarding access to , or use of , services and applications must respect the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons , including the right to privacy , freedom of expression and access to information and education as well as due process .
( FR ) Madam President , I thought it was very important to emphasise these fundamental rights because they form the basis for our European values , European values that are also based on the new telecom rules .
Furthermore , I would like to say something about freedom on the Internet , because many Members have spoken about it .
The compromise reached is a victory for the freedom of citizens and of Internet users .
Firstly , this compromise very clearly asserts the freedoms of our citizens as laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , including the right of access to the Internet , which is an integral part of freedom of expression and of information .
Secondly , the compromise stipulates that the disproportionate solutions that were proposed to restrict the rights of Internet users are not legal .
Thirdly , the compromise confirms that the option must always be provided to refer a case to a judge , an independent and impartial court , whose decision must be respected .
All that is included in the compromise , and I think that , on the basis of this compromise , the work that the Commission and Parliament will be undertaking in the very near future will have a solid foundation that will underline the rights of our citizens and the intrinsic values of our Europe .
Having said this , I would like to ask the Council to act quickly so that the final version of the text , which I hope will be voted for tomorrow , can be made available as soon as possible .
rapporteur . - Madam President , firstly I would like to thank everybody who has participated in this debate .
It has been a very constructive debate .
I welcome in particular the support Parliament has given me and my colleagues on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for the significant improvements we have made on the users ' rights and data privacy elements of the directive .
I was delighted that , during the course of the debate , everybody contributed on those aspects .
They are important for every consumer .
Coming up to the elections I hope that all of you will talk about the work you have been doing in this House for consumers in the Internet world because it is absolutely crucial .
I think my second and important reflection is that the Internet space itself - electronic communications , the sector itself - is a thriving , evolving and dynamic sector .
Our task as regulators is to allow that dynamism , that innovation , to continue .
We put in place a framework of regulation to ensure that consumers can engage with that , to give them the right to know about those services , to empower them to take advantage of that - that is crucial .
But the Internet is not the thriving place it is - and you have seen how dynamic it is because of the mail you have been getting about this proposal - it is not there because we have been restricting activity on the Internet , it is not there because we have been imposing new business models .
We have been shackling the things that people have done .
We want new entrants to come in , we want small businesses , we want large businesses , we want investment .
It is that sense of dynamism and urgency that we need to move forward .
Mrs Reding is right : we must encourage Member States to get these improvements in place as soon as possible .
We want the new BEREC operating ; we want the new regulatory body to engage with us in Parliament , to ensure that these things happen as quickly as possible .
Let us move on from here and look towards the future .
Thank you , Commissioner , for the key declarations that you made in the areas of data protection and universal service which will enable us to work with you to make progress in these crucial areas .
Madam President , thank you very much , Commissioner , for your statement , which sheds very positive light on the debate that has just taken place , and I thank all those fellow Members who took part .
I would like to say that our Parliament , in voting in favour of this compromise on the telecoms package , will be indicating a clear choice : that of a regulated market , and not of unregulated competition .
It is evidence also of a strategy , a useful strategy of development in a context of crisis and which prepares European society for the digital age .
This vote will also make it possible to ensure a balance between the rights of States and the competences of the Commission , between the old operators and the new entrants , thanks to the non-discrimination clauses , but it will also signify that progress is being made by the European Parliament itself , in the exercise of its codecision powers , particularly in the matter of spectrum policy allocation , which is considered a public good , and in the support it expresses , once again , for broadcasters and services .
Many fellow Members spoke about the issue of the Internet as a public space which , as such , requires freedom and security , and I agree with them .
Consequently a link has been made between Internet accessibility and the fundamental rights of citizens , for the first time in a directive , with the new version of Amendment 46 .
Indeed , the expression ' measures taken ' acts in a way as a missing link between any measures taken concerning electronic communications networks , whether it be terminating access or filtering , and the fundamental rights of users .
With regard to the doubts expressed by my fellow Members about the rapporteur 's willingness to defend the right to a court judgment before cutting off access , I must say that the expression ' independent and impartial court ' is an expression that guarantees Internet users the right to such a judgment .
Proving that Hadopi would be an independent and impartial court would mean imposing on this high authority all the obligations that a judge has to respect : the right of defence , a trial in which both parties are heard , and publicity .
Obviously this would cause a system which relies , as the French law arguably does , on the computerisation and massification of accusations and penalties , to implode .
Therefore , I call on the European Commission to take the greatest care when transposing this telecoms package .
When a fundamental principle is enshrined in a Community text that is the subject of a compromise between the Council and the European Parliament as colegislators , it must be transposed properly into national laws .
I would like to conclude , ladies and gentlemen , by saying that I am delighted by the prospect of a wide , multi-partnership-style public consultation , which will allow us to follow up on our hard work , in the framework of a compromise that respects the law set out in Amendment 46 and makes it applicable .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , briefly I would like to reiterate my thanks to all those who have played a part in this already lengthy debate process on the telecommunications package : the Commissioner , the other rapporteurs ; in short , all those who have been involved besides the Presidency-in-Office of the Council .
I am going to outline three main points , those I consider to be crucial in order to summarise the benefits of this decision which , I believe , is going to be adopted by a great majority tomorrow in this House .
This revision of the telecommunications legislative framework has three immediate implications .
The first is that it facilitates the development of next-generation networks and , therefore , will benefit consumers as they will have the chance to access , navigate and perform transactions on a faster , safer Internet that is more beneficial in every way , not only for individual consumers but also for small and medium enterprises , for whom the Internet is essential .
Secondly , there will be more competition in the internal market , which will also benefit consumers , be they individuals or companies .
The benefits will come from better prices , better products , and greater innovation as a result of that competition being wider , greater and more real .
Finally , this will all be done - and let nobody outside this Parliament and across Europe be in any doubt - with respect for fundamental rights ; there can be no national law that does not respect those rights because Europe has decided that the principle on which this reform is based guarantees the fundamental right of access to the Internet .
Madam President , I wish to reiterate my thanks to all my fellow Members for their speeches and for this debate which has been a very positive one indeed .
I do not think there can be any doubt that this reform has made a great contribution to our innovative 21st-century society .
We have paved the way so that we can continue bringing new opportunities to the telecommunications industry , a sector that is tremendously dynamic for the economic and social development of the European Union and , above all , for consumer protection .
I feel sure , and I believe the debate has shown , that there is mostly light , although some shadow here too , such as the inclusion of the debate on content in this package , as the Commissioner herself and a number of other Members have commented .
Yet I feel that the compromise has also resolved that aspect well because , as has been said , for the first time the scope of the two directives , in Article 1 , includes the recognition of fundamental rights and freedoms as well as Internet access .
Let there be no doubt that I wish to support Mrs Trautmann in her request that when Member States are responsible for guaranteeing privacy , freedom of expression , freedom of information and , in general , all those rights contained in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , they do so under the strict , rigorous supervision of the European Commission which , I believe , is the best safeguard at this time , along with Parliament , so that freedom on the Internet is a principle balanced with all other rights .
That is all . Thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
I think we have done a good job and should congratulate ourselves ; I therefore ask that you vote in favour .
Thank you very much , the joint debate is now closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday .
° ° °
( SV ) I note that the Council is not here to comment on this agreement .
I would like you to demand that they be here before the vote tomorrow .
I believe that many European citizens would like an answer from the Council as to why they are opposed to a text which expressly states that no one should be excluded from the Internet without a prior ruling by a court .
I would like the Council to stand up and explain its opposition .
I believe that thousands of Europeans want to know why .
We will forward the request .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The European Union telecoms legislative framework arose in the 1990s , and was intended to liberalise domestic markets dominated by state monopolies .
In the meantime we have witnessed revolutionary technological changes in the development of mobile telephony and the Internet .
The draft reforms to legislation regulating the telecommunications market in the EU , which Parliament will be voting on tomorrow , are intended to adapt EU law to these changes , for example by improving the position of users in the market for electronic services .
My personal view is that Internet access is a significant factor which supports the education process , and it shows that people are able to use their freedom of speech and have access to information and the job market .
Internet users must not be denied access to the Internet or have their access restricted without the prior ruling of a competent judiciary body .
This is why I feel very strongly that we should restore the two most important amendments , numbers 138 and 166 , which were adopted by Parliament at first reading in September 2008 .
These amendments would restore the guarantee of users ' rights , place the obligation of monitoring on domestic regulators and make illegal the arbitrary blocking and discretionary restriction of citizens ' access to applications , services and content published on the Internet .
In the form in which they have been submitted for second reading on 6 May , both amendments , which have apparently only been modified but in fact have been significantly changed , are a serious threat to freedom of expression , freedom of access to the Internet and the right to information - pillars of modern , democratic , civic societies .
in writing . - ( ET ) The new rules presented in the new telecommunications package will help regulate the telecommunications market and promote consumer protection .
It will be significantly easier for consumers to obtain information from their service provider and change service providers .
Precontract information must indicate whether a consumer is tied to a contract for a specific period of time .
In addition , service providers cannot hold on to customers for longer than 24 months .
The moving of a telephone number from one service provider to another must be done within one working day .
The transparency of the provision of services has improved , and consumers are able to compare prices on web pages , and local operators can be obligated to provide services to handicapped people .
Consumers can ask for a maximum price level to be set , once their monthly consumption reaches a certain level .
If a service provider inadvertently divulges an individual 's personal information on the Internet , they must properly notify the person of that fact .
The new rules will also help regulate the telecommunications market and ease the arrival of new services onto the market .
The coordination of the radio spectrum in the EU creates an opportunity for the provision of completely new services , and removes the obstructions that have existed until now , for instance on the viewing of television programmes on mobile phones .
The rights of state regulators have been increased , and a new EU regulator has been created , with the objective of strengthening independent market supervision , which will definitely benefit consumers . Thank you .
Energy labelling and standard product information ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Podimata , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the indication by labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products ( recast ) - C6-0412 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to welcome the European Commission 's proposal to recast the directive on energy labelling with the basic objective of extending its scope to all appliances which consume electricity during domestic , commercial and industrial use and to energy-related products .
This directive forms part of a broader package of legislative proposals which aim to promote energy efficiency , which is a matter of top priority for the Union , because it can play a decisive role in strengthening energy security , reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and reviving the European economy , so that it will be able to get out of the recession and the crisis more quickly .
I want to warmly thank all my fellow Members for their proposals , especially the shadow rapporteurs , the PSE secretariat and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy because , with their help , we have managed - I believe - to strengthen the directive on energy labelling .
That is why we attach particular importance to the provisions relating to public procurement , that is why we attach particular importance to the adoption of incentives to promote the most efficient appliances and that is why we want to strengthen the provisions relating to market control and supervision .
I shall comment on just two issues which have caused serious confrontation .
The first relates to our proposal that advertisements should include a reference to energy consumption , which caused disproportionate reactions from the Federation of European Publishers and from radio and television station owners .
I say disproportionate , because extreme arguments were heard , such as that it restricts the freedom of the press , that advertising revenue was falling in the sensitive area of the mass media and , finally , that financing of a free and independent press is being undermined .
Let us look at the facts of the matter , at what we are proposing in our report .
We consider that advertisements for energy-related products should include a reference to energy consumption or to energy savings or to the category of energy label only if the advertisement includes references to technical specifications or technical information .
Where the advertisement does not include any such reference , there is no obligation to refer to energy consumption .
I have left until last the question of the layout of the energy label , which proved to be the most burning issue in this directive .
This directive will not have achieved its objective and will not be effective if the energy label cannot be easily recognised and compared by the consumers at whom it is primarily directed , in order to help them make the best possible choices .
Today we have a successful energy labelling model on a scale from A to G , where Α is used for the most efficient products and G for the least efficient , a scale which is used today as a standard in many countries outside the European Union .
It is undoubtedly very successful and recognisable and has made a huge contribution towards energy savings .
It certainly also has numerous problems .
The most serious of these problems , the basic reason for these problems , is that the label is not accompanied by an indication of its period of validity .
Where there is no indication of the period of validity of the label , when a product is classified in category Α and stays in that category for life , even when more energy efficient products have been launched , it is clear that we are sending out mixed messages .
So how can we address this ?
By introducing an obligation for labels to have a specific period of validity , for example 3 to 5 years and , once this period has expired , for the energy efficiency scale to be revised on the basis of progress achieved in the specific category of product .
To close , I should like to say that I am firmly convinced that , in the debates to follow and in order to reach agreement at second reading , we shall find the best possible solution , a solution which will be recognised by consumers and will promote innovation in European industry .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , energy labelling is something we started in 1992 with the goal of achieving energy savings for products in the household sector .
This initiative has been very successful and has given many benefits to EU citizens in the last 15 years .
However , 1992 is some time ago .
Some time has passed since then , and the Commission decided to bring forward a proposal for recasting the Energy Labelling Directive , intending to bring further benefits to European citizens , industry and public authorities alike , firstly by extending its scope to all energy-related products , secondly by strengthening market surveillance , and thirdly by encouraging energy-efficient public procurement and incentive practices .
I am very grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Podimata , for producing , in a short period of time , the report on a highly complex proposal , giving the opportunity for a second-reading agreement , when the Council will really enter into the discussion .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and all the members of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) for having given this proposal careful consideration .
The report will definitely add some very significant improvements , welcomed by the Commission , to the initial proposal .
The rapporteur is right to highlight two issues that will be the cornerstone of future debates between the Council and Parliament .
The first is the issue of advertising and how far we can go to promote energy-efficient product selling practices without hampering the role of civil liberties or freedom of the press , and the second is the issue of the layout of the label - whether it should be a closed label or an open-ended scale label .
On my way to Parliament this morning , I found some leaflets in the lifts which demonstrated that this ostensibly simple issue of labelling is not so simple .
We have , on the one side , consumer organisations , and on the other side producers , who would also like to follow the same goal of providing more energy-efficient products to consumers .
At first reading there was substantial debate in the ITRE Committee , and we need to find the best solution to the issues raised by the rapporteur at second reading .
I can assure you that the Commission will try its best to accommodate different points of view because it is working for the benefit of consumers and society .
Labels should be effective and strong , and at the same time the right incentives should be provided to producers to develop more efficient products .
Thank you for the report .
I really am grateful to the rapporteur for all the work that she has put into preparing it .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , we are discussing the report on energy labelling , which is of the utmost importance for several reasons .
Firstly , increasing energy efficiency is the quickest and the most cost-effective way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
Secondly , energy efficiency can be part of the solution to the current economic recession : addressing energy demand and energy use can help create long-lasting growth and solid job opportunities .
I agree with the intention to ensure that end-users will be able to receive full information on the label , even if the product is bought at a distance , via the Internet or telemarketing .
The same holds true for the intention to reinforce the provisions on market surveillance in order to ensure proper and EU-wide harmonised enforcement of the Energy Labelling Directive and its implementing measures .
There are , however , two points that I must strongly oppose .
First , I would like to warn that , if adopted , Amendment 32 would hamper the independence of the media .
It must be stressed that advertising is key for free , independent , diverse and high-quality media .
Our group has therefore come up with an alternative amendment - Amendment 2 tabled for the plenary - respecting the importance of free and diverse media for democracy .
Our solution is to give producers and retailers the possibility of providing information on specific energy-consumption-saving aspects .
Second , I call for the rejection of two motions for a resolution on the implementing measures , rejecting implementing measures on TVs and fridges .
This initiative , opposed by industry , the Commission and the Council , would impair the coherence of the new energy labelling legislation as a whole .
Let me conclude by stressing that the report on energy labelling is a very important piece of legislation that is worth adopting , provided that the advertising issue is tackled in a satisfactory manner .
I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Podimata , for her report .
I believe that the directive on labelling and informing consumers about products ' energy consumption is of paramount importance .
The European Union has proposed to cut energy consumption by 20 % .
If we manage to inform consumers correctly so that they have an option available to them based on the information they have been given , then we can actually cut energy consumption for products currently in use too .
As regards labelling , it must be simple ; this is a vital element .
It must also be complete and naturally offer consumers the information which they need to be able to make the necessary investment .
This is why I believe that it is important for the label to mention information about energy consumption or about the energy savings which could be made .
In addition , I think that it is important to have this A-G scale , which is simple .
However , I would like to mention that I believe it is important for the period of validity to be specified so that the consumer has information even from the time when certain products are advertised .
I do not believe that the obligation to provide information about energy consumption will interfere in any way with the freedom of expression and the provisions concerning the mass media .
I think that it is in all our interests to have well-informed consumers who can make an enlightened decision to reduce their energy consumption .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
This is a very important document which is part of an energy efficiency package .
I will continue to support us having an interesting debate , even during second reading .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my sincerest thanks go to Mrs Podimata for her quite excellent work , which I fully support .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has supported clear , consumer-friendly energy labelling , which I would like to see preserved , as would the Committee .
It is important that the consumer can always have confidence that equipment in Category A absolutely always reflects the best technology - the most energy-efficient technology - there is on the market .
The EU energy label has been a success .
It has rid the market of energy-wasting equipment , and that model has been followed in such countries as Brazil , China , Argentina , Iran , Israel and South Africa .
It is very unfortunate that the manufacturers of equipment now want to make this successful and clear system of labelling an unclear category , and that the Commission is inclined to support this .
The new model being promoted by manufacturers would be the equivalent of continually calling a record in sport going back decades the world record , and when the record is beaten , calling it the world record minus 5 % , the world record minus 10 % , the world record minus 20 % , and so on .
It would make no sense , and the same system of clarification that we use when we speak of world records should also continue to apply to energy labelling .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an appropriate and important project to realise energy efficiency and save more energy .
It is right that we should focus on methods which we are unfortunately not applying in other areas , namely , using labelling to help the consumer choose energy-efficient products , and , at the same time , to spur competition in more efficient appliances .
This decision is wise and right .
The procedure in place up to now was also sensible and it worked well .
In this respect I believe that this system of labelling with classes A-G , which has worked well for over 15 years and which was enhanced a few years ago with the A + and A + + categorisations , must now logically be extended and amended again , because we have new challenges .
However , we should consider things carefully and I would also like to take seriously the reservations which the Commission has put forward .
If we do what the majority in the committee here in Parliament have suggested , namely to simply keep A-G , I fear that old appliances will continue to be categorised as A , while new more energy-efficient appliances will only be classified as B. We will therefore either have a transition period for re-labelling - which will lead to confusion - or we will have constant change , constant new labelling .
Therefore the proposal to use minus is much simpler and clearer .
We need a procedure which is intelligible to consumers , which will be adopted and which results in consumers continuing in the future to support what had previously been adopted .
We need a system which also encourages manufacturers to invest in eco-design .
Therefore , in my opinion the Commission 's proposal is the smarter , more sensible one .
Very briefly a second comment , which to my mind is also important : I believe that everything that has been proposed here with regard to burdening media advertising with compulsory information is wrong .
It is not acceptable !
We must not do this .
There is no sense in it !
It is also not at all necessary .
We can do without it , the information on the label is enough .
( DE ) Madam President .
I think you feel uneasy here today , Commissioner , and I think I know why .
The reason is the Commission is taking a position which is more an industry lobby position than one which simplifies consumer protection and environmental protection in Europe .
I have followed labelling legislation for the last 15 years .
What is in the labelling directive from the beginning of the 1990s ?
It states that A to G should be regularly updated in line with the state of the art , so that only the best are in the A category .
What has industry done ? It obstructed the updating at the end of the 1990s .
Consequently , at the beginning of 2000 more than 50 % of all appliances were in category A. Then they came up with the gimmick of A + and A + + .
Now they have come up with the gimmick of A-20 , A-40 and A-60 .
Mr Reul is always on the side of the industry lobby .
I am therefore hardly surprised that he is defending this .
Come on Commissioner , please !
A to G is easy to understand .
Fifteen years of shameless lobbying by various industry circles to undermine the European labelling system , that is what is going on here .
Tomorrow , we , Parliament , must put an end to this terrible episode .
( CS ) Madam President , I have spoken here a number of times on energy issues , and this may be my concluding comment during this term .
I think it is appropriate at this point to express thanks to Commissioner Piebalgs , who had a very difficult task , because making a European energy market out of the 27 separate markets of the individual Member States is a remarkable undertaking , it is a labour of Sisyphus which will not end with this term , and there will certainly be many tasks remaining for our successors .
I would like to say that for us in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , he was one of the most popular Commissioners : those Commissioners from whom we learned a great deal , and whose level of enthusiasm we admired .
I hope we have not been too demanding on the Commissioner , because I think we will certainly be meeting him during future Parliamentary terms , and Mr Piebalgs has really worked very hard to make it possible even to speak of a European energy market .
I support energy labelling , it is a necessary standard , and I think reproaches about who belongs or does not belong to a particular industrial lobby should be set aside .
Likewise , I think it is unfortunate if this Parliament has in the past months become a place for scaremongering .
We need decisions based on facts .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is difficult .
I thank Mr Ransdorf for his very kind words , but I think it is wrong to accuse somebody - industry , lobby or not - because industry provides jobs and creates growth .
Industry is also looking for more energy-efficient appliances to produce and place on the market .
At the same time , ' A to G ' is well known to consumers .
There is a strong need to consolidate the experience of ' A to G ' and involve industry , not by force , but by really involving them .
That is what the Commission is trying to do .
In this debate there have been two elements that have been rather , perhaps , confusing .
One is the framework directive , and Mrs Podimata 's report is exactly about this .
I know that at second reading there will be a lot of work between the Council , Parliament and the Commission to find the right balance between these two elements : industry 's drive and the positive experience we have with this energy label .
The second was about the eco-design measure for fridges and TV sets .
It is not a perfect solution , but at least it is a solution that brings these two products into the labelling scheme , because today we do not have any labelling on TVs , while the situation concerning fridges is confusing : every fridge is in a category .
We have therefore proposed and agreed to this measure as a temporary measure until we have framework directives that establish clear rules .
It is not because we have been bound by industry , but it was the best way to consolidate both approaches .
It is not that we are seeking enemies : we are trying to consolidate the positive experience but also bringing in industry .
Industry is not fighting it , but should , I think , accept stronger consumer views sometimes and really see the benefits of this .
The report does not at this stage give a complete solution .
There are differences of opinion , but we are on the way , and , as always , the most complicated legislation is adopted in compromises and consensus .
We will need to continue to work , but not to label somebody that is fighting against energy efficiency , because labelling is the easiest way to bring about our goals for energy efficiency .
People make informed choices about their appliances in a way that corresponds to the global society 's interest .
This is the best way , and we should promote it .
I would be sorry if we ended on a sad note by saying we are on the brink of some catastrophe : no , we are working together .
We would all like to achieve the same result , but at this stage we have not yet found the compromise that suits and brings all the potential together to resolve this issue .
Thank you for the debate .
I know there have been different opinions , but the Commission is committed to working further to find a speedy solution at second reading .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , I should like first of all to thank all my fellow Members for their speeches and the Commissioner , both for his recommendation and for his speech , now , at the end of the debate .
I should like to make two very brief comments .
First of all , as regards the burning issue of energy labelling .
I would like to point out that the A to G scale , which we all consider to be very successful and recognisable and to have made a huge contribution towards energy savings , obviously has problems which , Mr Reul , I listed in my opening comments ; in other words , this scale needs to be updated .
The basic problem with the existing energy label is that it has no period of validity , resulting in the situation which you described , namely that we have energy products on the market with the same label and different levels of energy efficiency .
The crucial issue is for us to introduce a specific period of validity for A to G energy labelling and for us to update energy efficiency indicators every 3 to 5 years on the basis of progress made on the market .
Finally , I consider that the conclusion which we need to draw is simple .
We have - and we all recognise that we have - a tested and successful recipe for energy labelling which has also become a standard for other countries outside the European Union .
When you have a successful recipe which has become outdated over the years , you do not abolish it , you update it because , if you abolish it and you do not replace it with a new system , you risk losing the added value which you generated in previous years by opting for energy labelling .
Europe 's message to consumers over all these years has been : choose energy label Α . We alone must not weaken this message .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 a.m. pending voting time and resumed at 12 noon . )

1 .
Marketing standards for poultrymeat (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just want to briefly explain that this report includes the amendments unanimously adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , further to the resolution adopted in this plenary on 19 June 2008 , which rejected the Commission proposal aimed at authorising the marketing of poultrymeat for human consumption , even after being subject to anti-microbial treatment .
I therefore want to thank all those who worked with me on this report , including the members and the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
We hope that the European Commission and the Council will take account of this report and the opinion of the European Parliament in defence of public health , food safety and producers of poultrymeat in the European Union .
2 .
Defence of the immunity and privileges of Aldo Patriciello (
3 .
Defence of the immunity and privileges of Umberto Bossi (
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (
5 .
Recommendation to the European Commission in Complaint 185 / 2005 / ELB (
6 .
Petrol vapour recovery during refuelling of motor vehicles (
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , as the debate was not held for technical reasons , allow me to say a couple of words before the vote .
Following intensive negotiations with the Council and the Commission , I believe that we achieved a good compromise at first reading .
With the contribution made by the European Parliament , we have accelerated the application of the directive by one year , broadened the scope to service stations in residential areas , strengthened information and control mechanisms for service stations and information mechanisms for citizens .
This is a change , the application of which will improve the quality of the atmosphere and will considerably limit the greenhouse gases which cause climate change .
The Commission has undertaken , at our proposal , to submit a recast proposal after a certain period of time , so that we will have better technology which will allow us to achieve even better results in future .
The final compromise is supported by all the political groups and I think that this is a sign that we have done a good job .
7 .
Public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents (
rapporteur . - Mr President , I was given a mandate by the House to enter into negotiations with the other institutions on this important dossier .
Sadly , I have to report that the negotiations have not been productive , and therefore I am recommending to the House today that we do not vote and that we refer the decision on this important dossier to the next Parliament , when I expect the Commission to produce a new proposal in the autumn of this year .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission takes note of the decision of Parliament to postpone the vote on the legislative resolution accompanying Mr Cashman 's report until the next parliamentary term .
While fully respecting Parliament 's decision , the Commission is not convinced that the vote closing Parliament 's first reading would tie the hands of the next Parliament .
Therefore , the Commission will reconsider its proposal only after the two branches of legislative authority have adopted their positions , but intends to continue to pursue a constructive dialogue with both institutions in the mean time and confirms its willingness to seek a compromise with Parliament and the Council .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I think that illustrates why it is extremely important that the next Parliament exercises every single prerogative that it has .
A dialogue means that each institution has to listen .
So far , neither of the institutions is listening to Parliament .
For that reason , we should not take the vote and we should fully empower the next Parliament .
( Applause )
I am not sure whether congratulations are in order for Mr Cashman .
Yes ?
Then we congratulate him .
8 .
Organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , in order not to interrupt the flow of the vote once you start , I would like to inform the House that the Socialist Group is withdrawing the third part of Amendment 62 , that is the part concerning points b and c of Article 2 ( 1 ) .

Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission takes note of the position expressed today by the European Parliament and , in view of the commitments made before this House , the Commission will draw the most appropriate conclusions from today 's negative vote , also taking into account the Council 's position .
The Commission will consider the best way to achieve the required result , in other words to guarantee the social protection of workers while at the same time avoiding an increase in administrative burdens in the road transport sector .
9 .
Trade in seal products (
Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to an error that has crept into the voting list of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
In the final vote on both the amended proposal and the legislative resolution , it should say ' free votes ' .
I ask you - and I include the Group here - to bear this in mind .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask you which article of the Rules of Procedure allows Groups to correct their voting lists here with your consent ?
This is an abuse of the parliamentary independence of individual Members !
10 .
Protection of animals used for scientific purposes (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs who have been very willing to work with me on what is an incredibly technical and difficult dossier .
By working together we have been able to come up with what , I believe , is a good compromise .
Animal testing is a highly controversial and emotional area which does involve a moral dilemma .
We have done our best to create a position which will improve welfare for animals used for testing and , at the same time , ensure that top-quality and reliable medical research can continue within Europe .
We have built upon the Commission 's proposal in many areas and , most importantly , we have clarified the severity classifications .
We had a good compromise in the Agriculture Committee and it should not be picked apart at this stage .
We all want to work together to refine , reduce and replace animal testing .
However , we must remember that many vaccines and cures for diseases have been developed using animals , and especially primates - for example , vaccines for polio , diphtheria , hepatitis B , along with deep brain stimulation for Parkinson 's disease .
All are examples of the benefits of animal research .
To allay concerns that many Members have with the use of embryonic stem cells , Amendment 170 , if supported , will ensure that ethical decisions on this issue are made by Member States themselves and not by the Commission .
We have a huge opportunity here to improve legislation for animal welfare and research .
We should put our party differences aside and support this report .
Industry , medical research and animal welfare organisations are convinced that this is a step forward and that we will update and improve the current legislation .
If we do not deal with it in this Parliament , the legislation could be put back by a further two years or more , which would be a retrograde step .
I urge Members of the House to support this report .
Finally , as this is probably the last time I will speak in the Chamber because I am retiring to go into national politics , can I thank you for the courtesy with which you have treated me and thank the Members of the House , who have also treated me with great courtesy .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Parish .
When you go back to your national Parliament , we wish you the same zest for work that you had here in the European Parliament .
11 .
Ship-source pollution and penalties for infringements (
12 .
Energy labelling and standard product information ( recast ) (
13 .
Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2010 (
- Before the vote on the resolution :
What I was about to say was that this is the last vote with me in the chair .
I would like to say a special word of thanks to Paul Dunstan to my left , who has done his job so splendidly over the years .
( Loud applause )
Paul , I would like to tell you , together we have made few mistakes - sometimes I have made them , sometimes you . However , we were an unbeatable team .
I give you my sincere thanks .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I am grateful to you for calling me .
I supported this report but , as I shall be leaving this Parliament in the coming elections , I want to use this as a final opportunity to underline the very powerful message that the President of the Czech Republic , the President-in-Office , recently gave to this Parliament : ' We now seek a new people 's mandate ' .
The truth is , however , that the people are not really represented in this Chamber .
As the President-in-Office said , there is no opposition here to the European project .
The people - the men and women in our constituencies , particularly in Britain - do not want a European Constitution , they do not want a treaty imposed on them .
What they want is the right to vote and I hope , sooner rather than later , they will be given that opportunity .
Mr President , I welcome the adoption of this report .
My group and I voted in favour .
This is a very important signal that Parliament has sent .
We must now , however , follow it up .
( PL ) Mr President , the antisocial behaviour of employers is forcing employees to become self-employed , and this includes workers who are drivers and people who offer transport services .
Employers want to save on social insurance costs and gain greater flexibility , but this has led to a situation where we have to vote under pressure from this antisocial behaviour .
This is why it was necessary to reject this report , because the scale of this antisocial behaviour is so great .
Its existence threatens not only the occupational hygiene of workers , but above all it threatens the safety of road traffic , and can affect practically each one of us and the situation of everyone who is on the road , whether it be in a car or as a pedestrian .
This is a very clear reason why we should deal very seriously with this problem and why we should come back to it , because the proposed solution did not provide us with a way out of this situation .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to say that I voted in favour of the report despite the fact that our two amendments were not accepted .
I believe that it would have been a very good idea to provide for and help the Inuit people to achieve peace and tranquillity as far as their way of life , their way of living and their way of hunting is concerned and also to achieve greater respect with regard to European Union LEADER programmes for Scandinavian countries on seal hunting .
I also wanted to take the opportunity to say that what takes place in Canada and has nothing to do with the Inuit is not a hunt as we understand it but a slaughter of animals , not a hunt in the true sense of the word .
I therefore believe that the two things must be treated separately , whatever attitudes people adopt subsequently .
I also believe that it would have been better to deal with this topic in a post-electoral period and not a pre-electoral period as at present .
( CS ) Mr President , I , too , welcome the fact that the European Parliament , with its ban on the import of seal products into the European Union , has followed the example of the United States and Russia .
I am sure we are sending a clear signal that the Canadian government will have to change its methods of monitoring compliance with the law when it comes to humane methods of seal hunting .
However , I am also sure that our proposal will enable traditional peoples , both in Europe and outside the EU , to continue hunting seals by their traditional methods .
My thanks to everyone , especially to the Czech Presidency , for enabling Parliament and the Council , to reach the compromise on 24 April which we have been able to adopt today .
Mr President , I am absolutely delighted that this report has been adopted by such an overwhelming majority and we can look forward to a ban on the import of seal products into the European Union .
I must say that I was saddened to see that our rapporteur , the Liberal Democrat Diana Wallis , was not fully in favour of this course of action .
As rapporteur , she should have represented the views of the committee , where there was a very clear majority , and not sought in a number of ways to overturn what was clearly the will of a very large majority in this House .
Nonetheless , I am glad that Parliament has shown such clear determination by such a clear majority to settle the issue in the way that we have now decided .
Mr President , this report presented me with something of a dilemma .
There is something not strictly rational about singling out seals for special treatment .
They are not an endangered species - even the WWF says so .
We do not get anything like the clamour about hunting seals on behalf of wasps or woodlice or wolverines or worms .
Then again , democracy is not strictly rational .
People are not always calculating machines .
It may be , as evolutionary biologists would argue , that it is the childlike features of the baby seal - its large eyes and so on - that on a deep genetic level give us a predisposition towards empathy with them .
I do not know .
The point is that you open a dangerous door if you say that the voters are wrong simply because their objection to seal hunting is aesthetic rather than rational or ethical .
Once you have started down that road , it is a short step to saying that they are wrong to be against the European Constitution or the Lisbon Treaty or whatever .
So , after a lot of thinking , I have reached this view about this report : because it is obviously such a sensitive and important issue for a number of our voters , it should not be decided at EU level at all , but should rather be determined properly through the national , democratic mechanisms and procedures of every Member State .
Mr President , I rise with pride that this House voted for this report with an overwhelming majority .
I voted for this report because I am pleased that we are making a strong statement , without loopholes , on the trade in seal products in the EU .
Many people in my constituency contacted us - and millions have got involved in this - to say that this was the most disgusting and cruelly-deployed killing of lovely creatures .
I know some may say this is just because they are attractive , but when one sees videos of the methods used one realises that commercial seal slaughter , in particular , is unnecessary because many alternatives are available .
I am very pleased that we have voted in such large numbers to stop this cruel trade .
Mr President , this ban is great progress and represents a true victory for campaigners across the South East of England particularly - as you could imagine - and across the European Union , many of whom have written to us in the House to demand the end of this cruel trade .
The fact that a Labour chair of committee led this campaign , in the face of intense lobbying by the perpetrators of this cruel and obscene trade , is crucial in realising its success .
It was not the watered-down original - as my colleague , Richard Corbett pointed out - but , after critical amendments were proposed by Arlene McCarthy , the ban was voted through in the committee and now in Parliament .
I was intrigued just now to hear Mr Hannan from the Conservative Party suggesting this should be a matter of national discussion and democracy .
If we were to rely upon that particular route , only eight countries would be signing up to this particular ban , as opposed to the 27 by voting it through the European Parliament .
It shows that trade and animal welfare are compatible and we should rejoice in that .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ( ... ) the Wallis report represents a step forward for the general protection of animal rights because it greatly limits the import of seal products into the Union .
The Union has made a civilised choice in this context and we hope other countries will follow , even though we would have preferred the Commission text to have been the one submitted on the internal market , which very clearly limited possible exceptions to the sale of such products to cases dependent on the subsistence needs of the Inuit people .
Unless they are properly controlled by border customs authorities , new exceptions could open up dangerous loopholes that will make it possible to evade the measure that , after a long struggle , punishes the futility and cruelty of certain of Man 's practices that should no longer be allowed to offend our consciences .
I hope that today 's step forward does not stand in isolation , that more effort may be put into reconsidering ways of preventing our countries importing products derived from animals that have been killed with incredible suffering .
On this subject , I also remind you of the great vileness of continuing to support the practice , in Europe , of butchering animals without stunning them and letting them bleed to death .
Mr President , while the vote on seal hunting was so successful , something which fills me with joy , the vote on the Parish Report is particularly disappointing .
Here too I would have liked us to take a clear position on animal protection , a progressive position , which shows the way forward , which makes it clear that we need alternatives to experiments on animals .
Animal testing should be a thing of the past .
However , here there were obviously palpable interests on the part of industry - in particular the pharmaceuticals industry - and as a result my Group and I are very disappointed that we failed to ensure that animal testing and the barbaric conditions in which animals are kept are consigned to the past .
Unfortunately , we did not succeed in amending the genuflection , which the Commission has already made with the clear banning of animal testing on great apes .
That fills me with sadness , as a society must always be measured by how it treats animals , and the European Union must no longer stand as a synonym for unnecessary animal testing .
As such I would have liked the assessment of non-animal testing alternatives to have been given more consideration in this proposal for a directive , as only clear support of alternatives to animal testing will result in the end of barbaric and unnecessary animal testing in the European Union .
This will not be accomplished with declarations of intention , but only by underlining the significance of alternatives to animal testing and by providing the appropriate research funding .
We cannot talk about alternatives to animal testing , but then fail to support their development and quick recognition .
Funding for non-animal testing alternatives must not dry up .
The Commission 's good draft should have demanded more backing in Parliament .
Mr President , I was glad in the Parish report on animal testing that Amendment 170 passed .
This prohibits the use of human embryos or foetal cells as an alternative to the use of animals in this directive , though there is little consolation for me that the amendment leaves the ethical decisions to the Member State , as the Irish Government and courts have consistently refused to protect embryos and I have been assured that in Ireland we also import aborted foetal cells for research .
We have protected the seal and this is good .
We have taken some measures towards limiting and reducing animal testing and we must go further , but at no time can we forget the principle that we cannot use human beings as a substitute for other forms of testing .
We must reduce animal testing , but humans are still not to be seen as the alternative .
Mr President , although today was a good day for animal welfare in terms of seals , it was a less good day in terms of the way we have just voted on animal testing .
Earlier this month , I had the pleasure of visiting a firm in my constituency , Simcyp , which has just won a national award from the Dr Hadwen Trust for developing alternatives to research on animals .
That company has shown that it is possible to develop alternatives that work .
Indeed , it has also shown that often the results of research on animals , when it comes to medical research , are not necessarily giving you data that it is reliable when applied to human beings .
Simcyp is pioneering alternatives to this .
It is possible to go further .
We should have gone further today .
We have only made a small step .
We need to do much more .
Mr President , I abstained on this report because I am a long-term campaigner for animal rights .
This is one of the issues that it is important for the EU to focus on if we are to balance justice with the internal market , and we must insist on market morality .
I have received a number of letters on this issue and constituents across my region express their dismay .
They believe there should be greater protection for animals used for scientific purposes .
The reason I abstained is because I wanted to end the capture of monkeys from the wild for breeding purposes and I therefore support the Commission text .
Also , amendments that remove the obligation for accurate record-keeping in the user establishment were not supported .
Furthermore , I believe that amendments that reduce the commitment to the three ' R 's - replacement , reduction and refinement - needed to be supported .
I also believe that the accommodation should be tailored to the experiment and accommodation should be part of the project authorisation .
I want to avoid animal suffering and ensure we have humane methods of killing or at least less painful .
That is one of the reasons why I abstained because I did not feel the report went far enough .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
As a former Latvian environment minister , I have been concerned for a long time about what happens in this sphere , about this amazing cruelty towards animals , as well as the fact that this amazing cruelty is practised on an industrial scale .
I would like to say that this has no connection at all with the traditional way of life of the Inuit , since their traditional way of life does not involve the slaughtering of animals on an industrial scale , in order to supply the entire world with seal products .
I abstained on the amended proposal , because I feel that on this issue no compromises are necessary .
On the other hand , I resolutely voted for the legislative resolution , and I am really pleased that Parliament has accepted the commendable decision by European citizens regarding this trading ban on seal products . Thank you .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
With regard to the Podimata report , I would like to say that in fact we can support both the Commission 's proposals and the report by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and also the proposals by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and other political groups , since as I see it , the main interests dealt with in the report are consumers ' interests .
The main point is that consumers should know , as regards these electrical appliances , which are the most economical and which are the least harmful to the surrounding environment .
In voting , therefore , I am trying to demonstrate a balanced approach and in this case to highlight the interests of European consumers .
Mr President , as we speak , there is a live radio programme about the European Parliament on the British radio station 5 Live - it has been going all morning .
There are people phoning in and one of the questions that they constantly raise is the cost of the European Parliament .
How much does this Parliament cost , and can it justify its cost ?
As I pointed out recently , if you relate the cost to the number of citizens , then the European Parliament costs GBP 1.74 per citizen per year , about the price of one pint of beer .
By contrast , the House of Lords costs GBP 1.77 and the House of Commons GBP 5.79 per year , far more per citizen .
Of course , this Parliament , with a wide electorate , spreads its costs widely .
We have costs imposed on us by the Member States in terms of the three working places and the 23 languages , which no national parliament has to bear in its budget .
Yet , despite that , we manage to provide value for money .
Mr President , I shall not dispute the figures that Mr Corbett has just read out .
I do not particularly care if this Parliament costs less per capita than others - though I think there are one or two more people across the European Union than there might be in the United Kingdom .
My concern with this report is that it is a missed opportunity .
It highlights many of the expensive regimes that we have all noticed in our time here - I have been here for 10 years , like you , Mr President .
It is interesting , for example , that the European Parliament 's main library is in Luxembourg , where no one can access it , because the Members rotate between Brussels , Strasbourg and their home seats .
There are lots of missed opportunities in this place , and this report is most definitely one of them .
At a time when all our constituents are having to tighten their belts , we should have signalled in this report that we were willing to tighten ours too , and we did not .
It is a missed opportunity .
Thank you Mr Heaton-Harris , if you are here next term , you can help us to do things better .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour .
According to Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 , poultrymeat may be sold on the international market even if it has undergone anti-microbe treatments .
In June 2008 , the European Parliament managed to approve a resolution prohibiting this type of marketing after several attempts .
Since the United States export only poultrymeat treated with chemical or anti-microbe substances to the EU , the Commission has , however , not honoured the resolution .
This strategy is at odds with the investments made by poultrymeat professionals in their field , in accordance with Community law , which states that only EU-approved protection methods , such as cold treatment , can be implemented in order to reduce the risks of meat contamination .
We therefore support the following proposals to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 : 1 ) withdrawal of Commission Recital 5 , stating that ' the exclusive reference to cold treatment in the definition of " poultrymeat ” is too restrictive in view of technological developments .
This definition should therefore be adapted ' ; 2 ) replacement of Recital 5 with another requiring the source of the meat to be monitored in order to inform and guarantee transparency to the consumer ; 3 ) maintenance of the cold method as the only protective treatment .
I voted for this draft because I think that the scope of marketing standards for poultrymeat must be extended to also cover poultrymeat preparations and products , as well as poultrymeat in brine , which is being marketed ever more widely .
We must bear in mind that when poultrymeat is sold as ' fresh ' , the consumer expects that it has never been frozen before , even quickly , which is a guarantee of quality for the consumer .
Consequently , the current principle stipulating that poultrymeat sold as ' fresh ' cannot be frozen beforehand must be reinforced and extended to cover poultrymeat preparations and products .
It should be noted that this proposal does not affect the Community budget .
The objectives of the marketing standards for poultrymeat are to safeguard the stability of market prices in the sector , to facilitate the marketing of products and to ensure consumer safety and high food-quality standards .
The marketing standards for poultrymeat need to be reviewed in the light of technological developments and to include poultrymeat preparations , as consumer habits have changed since the 1990s .
The principle that poultrymeat sold ' fresh ' may not have been frozen beforehand is proposed to be reinforced to cover poultrymeat preparations and products , and I agree with this .
I voted for the proposal on the marketing of poultrymeat .
The aim of this proposal is to update the standards that date back to 1990 on the marketing of poultrymeat , by adapting them to the new market reality .
It also aims to safeguard the stability of market prices in this sector , facilitate the marketing of products and ensure consumer safety and high food-quality standards .
I believe that the treatment of poultrymeat with decontaminating substances is not acceptable and I therefore argued for treatment by refrigeration .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have voted in favour of the draft amendments by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as they reinforce the wordings relating to the labelling of the origin of poultrymeat .
We believe that this is a good thing .
However , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's amendments also contain wordings that we believe should be dealt with at an administrative level .
Since everything is voted on in a single vote , we were not able to oppose these proposals .
Our ' yes ' vote for the amendments concerning the labelling of the origin does not , of course , mean that we in any way support the common agricultural policy .
We have arrived at a good compromise on this report , which will enable us to have a balanced regulation that meets the European Union 's requirements with regard to food safety .
By prohibiting the marketing of frozen poultrymeat under the label ' fresh product ' , by rejecting the use of toxic substances , such as chlorine , to decontaminate poultry carcasses , and by opting for clear labelling of origin and date of slaughter , we have favoured a common-sense approach and chosen to make defending the interests of European consumers our priority .
In adopting the resolution of June 2008 , Parliament had already expressed strong opposition to authorising the marketing of ' chlorinated poultry ' on the European market , and it was followed in that respect by the ministers of agriculture at the Council of last December .
With today 's vote , we have confirmed our desire to ensure that , from farm to table , food in the European Union is as safe as possible for consumers .
The matter seems obvious .
The motion under discussion is the second in succession which intends to authorise the marketing of poultrymeat for human consumption where it has received anti-microbe treatment .
This time the motion was introduced at the suggestion of the USA , which fears imposition of a ban on the import of their meat to Europe .
In a situation where research has shown that the use of anti-microbial substances does not contribute to a reduction in bacterial infection rates , and when Europe is fighting for healthy food , we must speak with one voice .
As indeed we must also do in the case of GMOs .
It is a pity that in the case of genetically modified organisms the matter is not so obvious to everybody .
in writing . - I welcome this report because it concerns an issue I have been working on for some time now .
On a visit to the Michelin factory in Stoke-on-Trent , management and trades unions explained to me their support for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I have since written to the Business and Enterprise Minister in the UK , Lord Mandelson , to request he consider an application to the EU for the activation of the Adjustment Fund .
It strikes me , as it did the people I met at Michelin , that this fund needs to be put in place as soon as possible .
This is exactly the kind of thing the EU was set up for - to collectively help Member States , and most importantly , their workers , at times of difficulty .
Because the fund is not about simply bailing out companies - it is about supporting a strategy which will lead to sustainable growth and employment for the future .
The report 's focus on the importance of small business for economic recovery , and the stress that the fund places on skills and training , will do much to ensure that people who lose their jobs will be reintegrated into the labour market .
in writing . - ( SV ) We are strongly critical of the reasoning behind the establishment of a Globalisation Fund .
For a start , it is based on the idea that globalisation per se is a problem .
In our view , globalisation is a way of increasing prosperity , especially for poor , developing countries , provided that significant economic actors , such as the EU and the US , reform their protectionist trade policy positions at the World Trade Organization .
The Member States of the EU are capable of implementing national measures to support those sectors that they deem to be in need of financial assistance .
A special EU fund would guarantee arbitrariness , inefficiency , bureaucracy and unjustified expenditure .
How is the Commission to decide , in a relevant way , whether globalisation has had a negative impact on a given sector ?
Moreover , the amounts that are currently under discussion indicate that this could almost be considered to be a PR stunt by the EU .
For the above reasons , we have voted against the report in question .
The need to deliver cleaner air has been recognised for several decades with action having been taken at national and EU level and also through international conventions .
Improving the quality of our ambient air remains a major challenge to be addressed .
The problem of air pollution can only be solved in the long term and within a European framework , particularly by stepping up crossborder measures .
The Commission 's proposal is necessary , given the need to further target VOC emissions to improve both regional and local air quality and public amenity , the successful uptake of VPR II systems around the world , and the ability of the technology to reduce refuelling emissions by 95 % .
in writing . - This legislation represents another example of how the EU is targeting the car industry and the way in which the EU usually seeks to impose grossly disproportionate legislation to resolve a relatively minor problem .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety voted to bring forward the date for garages to comply with new measures to limit the amount of petrol vapour released into the atmosphere when cars are refuelled .
The committee also voted to lower the threshold of petrol sales in order to bring many more garages into the scope of the proposed law .
Targeting small independent garages in this way would have a knock-on effect on other local businesses , generate hardly any environmental benefits and potentially increase exhaust emissions if drivers have to drive further away to refuel when a local station has closed .
The cost of upgrading equipment in terms of capital expenditure and lost business owing to temporary closure would be substantial .
I voted for the report on petrol vapour recovery .
Petrol contains volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) that evaporate inside the fuel tank , filling the empty space in the tank above the fuel .
As a vehicle is refuelled , these vapours are pushed out of the tank by the incoming fuel and , unless captured , escape into the atmosphere .
The Commission 's proposal aims to recover petrol vapour which is emitted into the atmosphere during the refuelling of passenger cars .
It is very important to install petrol vapour recovery systems with high capture efficiency in service stations , in order to improve air quality .
in writing . - ( LT ) Transparency is a fundamental principle of the European Union .
This is clearly stated in Article 255 of the Treaty establishing the European Community : ' Any citizen of the Union , and any natural or legal person residing or having its registered office in a Member State , shall have a right of access to European Parliament , Commission and Council documents ' .
The present regulation No 1049 / 2001 was a significant step towards greater openness .
In the six years since its implementation , it has contributed to the creation of a more transparent culture of administration in the European institutions .
In my opinion , openness contributes to conferring greater legitimacy on the institutions in the eyes of European citizens and increases their confidence in them .
Transparency is a fundamental principle of the European Union .
Decisions shall be taken as openly and as closely as possible to the citizen , thus conferring greater legitimacy on the institutions in the eyes of European citizens , at the same time as helping to increase their confidence in them .
The Regulation adopted in 2001 was undoubtedly a significant step in that direction , but many amendments now need to be made .
These will make the European decision-making process more understandable , increase the level of transparency and improve the practices of the institutions .
The aim of this initiative is therefore to make these improvements .
However , despite some positive proposals , these are regrettably overwhelmed by those which the European Parliament regards as negative .
In fact , the majority of the amendments requested by Parliament , in its April 2006 resolution , were not taken into account , as is the case , for example , with the proposals concerning the possibility of the EP exercising its right of democratic scrutiny through access to sensitive documents .
I therefore support the proposal of the rapporteur , Mr Cashman , to return this initiative to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
While public debates on the Treaty of Lisbon conducted in all languages are being budgeted for , the ' no ' to the reformed EU Constitution is not being accepted and referenda are being avoided .
While the EU 's web pages proclaim the importance of multilingualism , this is not reflected in the actual design of their website .
This does not consistently use the three working languages , German , English and French , with which we could reach the majority of the population .
Not even the current Presidency thinks this is worth the effort .
Now the EU is agonising over access to its documents , but at the same time wants to cancel EU-tenders in national newspapers and thus in all native languages .
Nevertheless , some good approaches for improving access to documents do appear in the report , which is why I also voted for it .
I voted against the report by my Greek fellow Member from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities .
My vote was motivated by the fact that this report , which is aimed at organising the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities , would have actually had the effect of excluding selfemployed drivers from the scope of European legislation on the organisation of working time .
My socialist colleagues and I share the view that we cannot accept two-speed social legislation : legislation that protects some but that leaves hauliers by the wayside .
Adopting the Commission 's proposal would have meant that self-employed drivers were unacceptably discriminated against when compared with employed drivers , who are protected by European legislation .
Parliament has taken note of our reservations .
It now falls to the soon-to-be-elected Parliament to give its verdict during the new parliamentary term .
I voted for the rejection of the Commission proposal on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities , as I feel it is unacceptable and discriminatory for this proposal to exclude self-employed road transport workers .
Everyone performing mobile road transport activities must be protected by the Community rules limiting the number of working hours per week .
This is therefore a question of protecting the health and safety of these workers as well as ensuring road safety .
It was very important that the majority of Parliament voted for our proposal to reject this proposal for a directive presented by the European Commission on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities .
The proposal for a directive represented a backward step in terms of the current situation , both as regards genuine self-employed workers and ' false ' self-employed workers , and as regards current working hours , particularly night work .
Our proposal had already been presented to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , where it was adopted by a majority .
However , the rapporteur ( from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ) insisted on bringing the report before plenary , to continue the attack against the fundamental rights of workers .
That is why this rejection in plenary was so important , with the current directive remaining in force , which requires the same labour legislation to be applied to self-employed workers .
During the debate in the Committee on Transport I introduced two amendments , which affect all transport employees .
In my view it is an advantage for a harmonised social and employment policy in Europe that working conditions affect all employees equally .
The idea of including self-employed people in the working time directive is unrealistic .
It is simply impossible to control the working hours of self-employed people .
As far as safety is concerned , all drivers , including those who are self-employed , are subject to the rules on driving time and rest periods in buses and lorries over 3.5 tonnes .
Broadening the driving and rest period rules to include drivers in lorries under 3.5 tonnes would do more for safety .
The Commission should review this , but has yet to introduce a proposal .
I hope that the new Parliament will take up these proposals .
We welcome the rejection of the proposal from the European Commission , presided over by Mr Durão Barroso , which aimed to exclude ' self-employed ' road transport workers from the directive on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities , as a result of our proposal to reject the Commission proposal .
In February , in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we tabled a proposal calling for the rejection of this unacceptable initiative by the European Commission .
This is the best possible response to yet another attempt to intensify competition and the exploitation of road transport workers , thereby threatening their labour rights and road safety .
What we must do is defend and improve the rights and working conditions of road transport workers , by combating job insecurity , respecting rest periods - without any loss of pay - and ensuring compliance with the labour legislation or collective agreements existing in each Member State .
What we need is for the rules on working time and driving and rest periods to be applied equally to all professional drivers , including self-employed drivers , in order to ensure their safety and road safety , thus preventing excessively long working hours and inadequate rest periods or work patterns .
The report by Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou recommends rejecting the Commission 's proposal for amending a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities .
I voted in favour of this report , which seeks to reject a proposal by the European Commission that will not make it possible to remedy the failings identified in the implementation and monitoring of the rules in relation to driving times and rest periods directly linked to safety and social rights .
Furthermore , there is no clarification as to the scope of this directive and possible ways of monitoring .
In any case , Member States must assume sole responsibility in this area .
Finally , this proposal does not define any better the notion of ' mobile workers ' or ' self-employed drivers ' , and with good reason , since this is where the real challenge of this directive lies .
Should we exclude all self-employed drivers from this directive ?
The question remains open , because the problem is complex .
Indeed , there exists a widespread practice of drivers working as ' false ' self-employed drivers , when they are in fact employed by companies which , for reasons of profitability , bypass the rules in relation to driving times and rest periods .
in writing . - There are any number of reasons why the Commission proposal to exclude self-employed drivers from this Directive had to be rejected .
In voting to reject the Commission proposal I voted in favour of safety on the roads , to rule out discrimination in terms of health and safety , pay and working conditions for drivers , and to ensure fair play for employers and employees in the road transport sector .
in writing . - ( EL ) I voted in favour of Amendment 54 because it is an important political message to the Commission and the Council .
The European Parliament supports the rights of drivers and refuses any competition between salaried and self-employed drivers .
This proposal would exempt self-employed drivers from the scope of the current directive and , for the first time in European legislation , we would have an attempt to distinguish between ' real ' self-employed persons and ' false ' self-employed persons .
This is , however , an imperfect distinction and may open the floodgates for the interpretation of other provisions of Community law .
It is a victory for road safety and social Europe .
in writing . - ( BG ) The EP directive on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities , which has been rejected by the votes of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the extreme Left , will make self-employed mobile workers less competitive .
The irresponsible rejection of the European Commission 's proposal means that it no longer makes sense for the self-employed to continue as such .
They are no longer free to determine the length of their working hours themselves .
There is no such regulation in any other sector .
This decision will have an irreversible adverse impact on the European economy 's competitiveness .
Unlike salaried workers , those who are self-employed in the transport sector do not work on the basis of a labour agreement , but freely determine their own customers and consignments .
What they earn does not depend on their working hours , as is the case with salaried workers , but on the number and type of shipments .
Determining their working hours based on the new directive limits their ' entrepreneurial ' freedom .
As a result of today 's vote , Member States have had the opportunity taken away from them of defining for themselves the time framework determining the night period and therefore , the opportunity to maximise the number of working hours for transporting passengers or goods according to the varying daylight conditions in the various Member States .
The directive 's rejection jeopardises competitiveness .
Small carriers and sole traders will be hardest hit .
They will be forced to implement the requirements applicable to employees of large transport firms , which will inevitably threaten their positions on the market .
in writing . - ( EL ) The rejection of the Commission proposal for a directive is a manoeuvre by the forces of the ' European one-way street ' in the run-up to the European elections .
The Greek Communist Party opposed the Commission proposal from the very beginning , voting against it both in the competent committee of the European Parliament and in plenary .
It informed the workers and supported their demonstrations .
The exemption for self-employed persons only serves the monopoly companies in the transport sector ; it damages the interests of the workers and self-employed drivers and creates huge dangers for road safety .
It will exacerbate drivers ' working conditions even further , it will push working / driving times to as high as 84 hours a week and it will intensify the exploitation of working drivers still further .
The workers ' demonstrations and their fear of being ousted at the European elections forced a large section of the MEPs in the parties that support the European one-way street to vote against the proposal .
However , the workers must know that the monopoly groups will live to impose their demands by finding the parties of capital willing to satisfy them .
This achievement demonstrates the power and importance of the workers ' fight .
However , we would point out that it may prove to be fleeting if the working and grassroots movement fails to organise its counterattack and lay down the terms for radical changes at the level of power and the economy .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to vote in favour of the compromise negotiated with the Council , as our interpretation suggests that the negative impact on Swedish hunting that we had feared is eliminated by the exception in Article 3 ( 2 ) .
We have all been appalled by the pictures of Canadian seal hunting .
Most consumers would therefore reject products from seal hunting that does not come close to meeting requirements corresponding to those to which Swedish hunting is subject , results in unnecessary suffering and takes place on a large scale under uncontrolled conditions .
We are , in principle , opposed to the EU directly or indirectly interfering in issues relating to hunting , which is a national matter , particularly when it may undermine well-functioning Swedish rules .
In this case , we have chosen to make a judgment based on the overall situation .
Under these circumstances , we have accepted the compromise , as it sends out the clear message that Parliament does not find it acceptable for people to treat animals any way they like .
I am thoroughly convinced that seal hunting must be banned , with certain exceptions for local communities .
We should also not ignore the fact that various opinion polls in different EU Member States demonstrate that a large majority of EU citizens are against large scale commercial seal hunting and its methods .
Moreover , a clear majority of citizens are in favour of a complete ban on trade in seal products .
We have voted against the proposal to ban the trade in seal products and the compromise entered into between Parliament and the Council .
We do not believe that a ban on trading in seal products will improve animal welfare and we find it regrettable that the proposal was adopted despite having no basis in the Treaty .
in writing . - I have been lobbied heavily by animal rights groups and constituents about this issue but I am very sceptical in principle about banning things .
Ultimately consumers will decide if they want to buy seal products .
I was proud to have contributed to the campaign to ban imports of cat and dog fur from China but the import of seal products is a very different issue based on traditional culture and practice over centuries .
Bullfighting and cockfighting are unsavoury spectacles but the EU recognises that they should be allowed to continue within the EU in regions where an unbroken tradition exists .
It would therefore be hypocritical for the EU to ban seal products from Canada on the basis of animal cruelty .
I am also hesitant to antagonise Canada , which is a great ally of the EU and shares our common values .
I reject animal cruelty but I believe this issue has been deliberately distorted in order to provoke an emotive response among MEPs .
We should approach such matters in a more balanced and dispassionate way .
I voted for the report on trade in seal products as it is based on two considerations : the ban in the European Union on the trade in certain seal products , and respect for the traditions and cultures of indigenous peoples of the Arctic .
Each year around 900 000 seals are killed in the large-scale commercial hunt ( number uncorrected for struck and lost or unreported killings ) , of which 60 % occur in Canada , Greenland and Namibia .
Norway and Russia are the other main countries conducting a large-scale commercial seal hunt .
Within the Community , Sweden , Finland and the United Kingdom ( Scotland ) engage in a small-scale seal hunt , mainly for fish stock management and pest control reasons .
I believe that this agreement will protect seals from cruelty and , at the same time , protect the culture of the Inuit communities .
I also believe that this regulation will ensure that the unscrupulous trade is stopped and that harmonised rules will be developed to change the whole internal market .
in writing . - When I was first elected to the European Parliament 25 years ago , it was shortly after an ' initial ban ' on the trade in seal products in 1983 .
Unfortunately , despite revisiting the issue on a number of occasions , this is still unfinished business .
The situation , a quarter of a century on , is scarcely any better than back in 1983 .
We still see hundreds of thousands of seals culled in Canada in the most cruel and brutal slaughter .
Hopefully today 's vote will be sufficiently overwhelming to finally achieve what we thought we had managed 25 years ago .
Neither I nor the seals want us to be back here in 2034 .
Personally , I find it regrettable that the committee 's proposals , which were very clear , have not been adopted by the groups .
Species conservation - especially faced with the known conditions of slaughter - demands decisive measures without compromise .
The jobs related to this business can easily be reoriented .
The decision of the European Parliament to ban the trade in seal products in the European Community is a step in the direction of bringing an end to the brutal methods used by some countries to cull these animals .
The draft resolution is a response to the concerns of public opinion over issues of animal welfare during the culling and skinning of seals .
The text of the regulation allows for several exceptions which in some cases are necessary .
In particular this includes an exemption from the ban to allow seal products which are obtained by Inuit communities using traditional hunting methods as a means to ensure their subsistence .
I am glad that the European Parliament has declared its support for adoption of this regulation by such a clear majority .
It is a very clear signal on the part of the European institutions that the citizens of Europe do not agree to the brutal treatment and killing of animals .
in writing . - We understand and share concerns about the trade in seal products .
We have no problem with individual states banning seal products , but we believe that this should be a matter for individual states and not for the Commission .
Therefore , we have been unable to support this proposal .
In the current term the European Parliament has devoted a relatively large amount of attention to the protection of animals .
The introduction of a ban on the trade in certain seal products in the European Union undoubtedly strengthens that protection .
It is also a source of satisfaction to the 425 MEPs who signed the written declaration on this subject .
It should also be noted that in its resolution Parliament has expressed its desire to respect the culture and traditions of indigenous peoples .
The way in which measures to protect seals develop in the future will depend on many factors in the international context and the WTO .
Nonetheless , this initiative of MEPs deserves approval and support .
in writing . - I am pleased today that we voted to ban the EU trade in seal products .
In January 2007 , Belgium became the first European country to ban all products obtained from seals , and a number of other Member States subsequently followed suit .
The Belgian legislation does make an exception for hunts traditionally conducted by Inuit communities , and so I am pleased that the European Parliament is following Belgium 's example today .
The proposal to permit the import of seal products subject to a labelling requirement did not receive our support .
If fur traders from Canada , Greenland , Namibia and Russia can no longer sell seal fur skins on one of the largest markets in the world , this will mean an enormous step forward for the welfare of this species .
In addition , a ban is the most efficient way of putting an end to the inhumane practices to which hundreds of thousands of animals fall victim each year .
In my opinion , a total ban is the right approach . For this reason , I have endorsed the report by Mrs Wallis .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
Until now , Directive 86 / 609 / EEC has guaranteed the protection of animals used for scientific purposes : just after it was issued , this directive was implemented and applied in different ways within the various Member States .
However , we need to table a proposed amendment to this directive in order to guarantee an overall unity of intent within Europe and also greater protection for laboratory guinea pigs used for scientific purposes connected with human and animal health .
The most important of the many amendments that should be made , which we hope are in line with the Commission 's ideals , are : 1 ) setting up an ethics committee for animal wellbeing ; 2 ) extension of the guinea pig concept to include various species of invertebrate and foetal forms in the last trimester of development , or to larvae and other animals used in basic research and training ; 3 ) use of animals only in experiments for which they have been reared ; 4 ) examination of alternative methods to animal testing to minimise the number of animals used ; 5 ) assurance of the fact that the main purpose of Member States should be to improve rearing methods to minimise animal suffering ; 5 ) partial or total use of anaesthesia .
in writing . - Although it contains much that my party ( UKIP ) would agree with , this report is tainted by its illegitimate and anti-democratic origins in the machinery of the EU .
Consequently , I cannot support it .
The European Commission 's text is a nonsense .
It is a nonsense where science is concerned , because it holds back and penalises research , and it is a nonsense where medical progress is concerned , because the scientists who resort to animal experimentation are working daily to find medicines and treatments that tomorrow will cure new pandemics .
Finally , it is an economic and social nonsense . While our pharmaceutical groups will be prohibited from carrying out research , laboratories set up outside of the European Union will be able to carry on with it !
The Parish report fortunately restores the balance , because I will not support anything that weakens the competitiveness of our industry or that provides incentives for relocation .
in writing . - ( EL ) The proposal for a directive on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes is directed more at the completion of the single internal market , at competition and at limiting costs in the field of research than at animal protection .
The multinationals are demanding more and more profits from research .
The animals used in it are generally sacrificed and tortured on the basis of the criterion of increasing profits , not serving scientific requirements .
No one can expect animal-friendly conduct from capital , whose motivation is exploitation and which behaves inhumanely and coarsely even towards people .
Research requires experiments in order to address important public health problems and numerous and even incurable diseases .
Animals are often needed for this research .
However , the protection of animals , like the protection of public health , requires a fight against the monopolies , against the power of capital , which protects drugs with patents in order to secure huge profits from the commercialisation of health .
It requires a fight which will free research from the shackles of capital and will use scientific findings from research to satisfy grassroots requirements .
I voted for the report on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes .
This proposal covers the protection of animals used for scientific purposes related to human or animal health or animal welfare .
Every year in the EU approximately 12 million animals are used for scientific purposes , including 12 000 non-human primates .
The new directive will make it compulsory to carry out ethical reviews and will require that experiments where animals are used be subject to authorisation .
With this proposal , specific invertebrate species and foetuses in their last trimester of development and also larvae and other animals used in basic research , education and training will now also be included .
I therefore believe that the proposal aims to improve protection for animals used in experiments and reinforce animal welfare rules in light of developments in scientific research .
Thanks to the European Commission 's initiative , which makes it possible to review the directive in force on protection for animals used for scientific purposes , the European Union is able to play a decisive role in the research and development of tests and technologies that do not use animals .
The scope of this directive must , moreover , be extended .
Some of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , against the protection of laboratory animals , were contrary to this objective .
It is essential for European research not to suffer because of it ; rather , it should be developed .
Nonetheless , that must not happen at the expense of animal welfare , or of the development and validation of methods that offer a complete alternative to the use of animals .
The development of these alternative methods requires a budget .
Moreover , it is essential for the use of non-human primates in research to be progressively phased out , for there to be monitoring for this purpose and for transparency in this matter to be increased .
It was time for the partners concerned to consider the welfare of animals used for research purposes and the ban on trapping wild monkeys for use by breeding farms , which results in violence ; stress during capture , then confinement ; the separation of family groups ; the splitting up of social groups ; an impact on the environment ; the disturbance of the natural balance of the population ; and the withdrawal of females .
We will therefore support the aim of making maximum use of animals bred for this purpose whose genetic and medical history are known , and who therefore offer greater consistency and comparability of data .
If , on the other hand , the animal welfare standards used for research purposes resulted in the exporting of research , the impact would then be more obvious in those countries which already operate under strict regulatory controls , such as Switzerland and the United Kingdom .
The fact is , in those countries the pharmaceutical industry has continued to prosper despite 20 years of strict regulation .
Regulation has not , therefore , curbed the success of this industry .
The controls have even improved the standards of scientific practices .
This therefore confirms the fear of seeing research exported in the wake of these regulations .
in writing . - I am disappointed at the Parliament 's position on the revision of Europe-wide rules on animal testing .
In the end I decided to abstain on the final report .
While I fully support the provisions on developing and pushing forward the use of alternatives to animal testing and the thematic biannual review of the use of primates , both of which I see as crucial in moving our research away from its reliance on animals , particularly primates , overall Parliament 's position has weakened many of the important animal welfare provisions proposed by the Commission .
The fear that has prevailed over the Parliament is that the research industry will leave the EU if too many demands are placed on our research establishments .
However I believe that there are some demands that are essential if we in Europe are to ensure high levels of animal protection and I fear that today 's result goes against this thinking .
Two crucial issues for me were to move Europe away from the use of wild-caught monkeys for breeding purposes and the absolute need for authorisation of all experiments involving animals , thereby cementing our commitment to the replacement and reduction of animals in experiments .
Sadly the European Parliament missed the opportunity to take a strong line on animal protection today .
in writing . - We accept that experimentation on animals is sometimes necessary , but we also understand and accept that the necessity of some experimentation is questionable .
We support the advancement of alternative methods of research , and would wish to see experiments on all live animals reduced to an absolute minimum and performed under the strictest possible humanitarian guidelines .
We believe , however , that this should be a matter for individual states to decide on , and so regrettably we are unable to vote in favour of this proposal within an EU context .
I voted for the proposal on ship-source pollution as I believe it is essential to tackle this continued practice in sea transport , namely illegal discharges of polluting substances into the sea by certain ships .
I believe that this amended proposal is absolutely essential to prevent environmental disasters and the deterioration of water quality , through criminal penalties which are harsh enough to dissuade potential polluters .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report recommends the amendment of an existing directive on ship-source pollution . This is to enable criminal law measures to be implemented in the event of pollution .
The June List supports measures to prevent pollution from ships . However , we believe that criminal law is entirely a national matter .
In addition , discharges from ships in international waters should be dealt with at the level of the United Nations .
We have therefore voted against it in the final vote .
in writing . - ( EL ) The much-vaunted directive which , various forces advertised , would apparently punish shipping companies with criminal sanctions for polluting the sea and would protect the environment has achieved exactly the opposite .
It protects shipping capital from the imposition of sanctions against it .
Even this inadequate Commission proposal is dead letter following the proposal by the European Parliament not to punish minor ship-source discharges of polluting substances .
Our people know full well what minor discharges are and who will judge them and on what criteria .
The inhabitants of Santorini , for example , who have protested about the wreck of the Sea Diamond cruise ship , which is still in the island 's waters , are sick of the replies given by the EU and the New Democracy government - the same replies given by PASOK in the case of the Express Samina car ferry and others - that apparently wrecks do not cause pollution .
With the loophole of minor discharges of polluting substances , shipowners , operators , managers , agents , insurers , charterers , cargo and ship owners and those responsible for crimes at sea and environmental disasters will go unpunished .
On the other hand , very strict use will again be made of seamen as scapegoats .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
Speaking of energy consumption policies , the EU should take the statements made by the renowned British economist Nicholas Stern as a guide to its choices : ' There are more incentives to invest in energy efficiency during a recession and when oil prices are high .
Spending on renewable and other low-carbon industries could help stimulate the economy ' .
It would be useful to try and create an energy policy able to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , to keep faith with the agreements taken under the Kyoto protocol and to support the EU 's guiding role in combating climate change .
Implementing this protocol would make a very important contribution to employment and also to competitiveness in the economic and social field .
Although industry and consumers ' associations are in favour of the current Directive 92 / 75 / EEC on energy labelling , it cannot be said to have kept pace with technological developments and with innovation in the energy market because , first and foremost , there is a need to move forward from this situation of inertia throughout Europe so that a new dimension can be opened up in the lives of users .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and Council on the indication by labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products ( recast ) .
I feel that it is necessary to provide better information about products ' energy efficiency .
Any advert promoting the technical features of refrigerators , washing machines or domestic ovens must indicate the product 's energy consumption .
Energy labelling helps consumers assess their energy costs when they are purchasing domestic electrical appliances , such as refrigerators , washing machines , tumble dryers or ovens .
Manufacturers must indicate the products ' energy consumption , regardless of whether they are ' more efficient ' ( green ) or ' less efficient ' ( pink ) from an energy perspective .
Labelling will also be applied to commercial and industrial energy-using products , such as cold storage rooms or chilled display cabinets .
Any advert must indicate energy consumption and energy savings .
Member States can adopt incentive measures , including tax credits for products which are extremely energy efficient .
I voted for the directive on the indication by labelling of energy consumption .
Environmental issues and in particular energy efficiency are assuming new importance and becoming fundamental to tackling climate change .
The recasting of this directive aims to allow the labelling of all energy related products in the household as well as in the commercial and industrial sectors .
Taking into consideration that there is an urgent need to tackle climate change and that the European Union plans to achieve the target of increasing energy efficiency by 20 % by 2020 , I believe that simple , clear and easily recognisable labelling may persuade consumers to take more sustainable decisions and help to promote more energy efficient products .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List believes that tackling cross-border environmental issues is one of the EU 's most important tasks .
We think that the amendments do better than the Commission 's proposal at giving end consumers a chance of making wiser choices by improving the information on the energy consumption and environmental impact of products .
However , we are critical of certain individual wordings in the amendments , which seek to regulate European energy policy in greater detail .
The good intentions of the amendments outweigh the negatives , however , and we have therefore chosen to support the amendments in their entirety .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Preparation of the European Council ( 18-19 June 2009 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements of the Council and of the Commission on the preparation of the European Council on 18 and 19 June .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I very much welcome this opportunity to appear before you well in advance of the next meeting of the European Council , which I will not personally attend .
Of course , this time the circumstances are a bit unusual , as a new Czech Government is about to be appointed .
I will say a few more words about this at the very end of my statement .
Let me first run through the main issues on the agenda of the June European Council as we the Presidency are preparing it .
I shall start with the institutional issues .
In December 2008 , the European Council agreed on a path designed to enable the Lisbon Treaty to enter into force by the end of 2009 .
In essence , this involves giving legal guarantees and assurances on a number of issues of concern to the Irish people , in return for which the Irish Government is committed to seeking ratification of the Treaty before the end of October .
Work on implementing this agreement is still ongoing , and I am not at this stage in a condition to go into details .
I am confident that the forthcoming European Council will be able to fulfil its side of the bargain .
As you all probably know , tomorrow there will be a vote on the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in the Czech Senate .
I am going home in the middle of the night to be there from early morning .
I believe that the result of this vote will send a positive message to the other Member States and that it will calm down some unfounded apprehensions .
I am working hard !
Nevertheless , the Czech senators must in any case be granted unconditional independence in this democratic decision-making .
It is obvious that any attempt to put pressure on them might prove counterproductive .
Last December , it was also agreed that the process of appointment of the future Commission , in particular the designation of its president , will be initiated without delay after the European Parliament elections of June 2009 .
I am fully aware of the views expressed here on the desirability of involving the European Parliament in this process in an adequate manner .
The Presidency will of course work closely not only with the Member States , but also with this Parliament .
I shall now say a few things on the economic and financial crisis , which will certainly dominate an important part of the agenda , and on the need to respond further to the economic and financial crisis .
The crisis demonstrated the acute need to strengthen the effectiveness of the supervision and regulation of financial institutions and to enhance crisis management mechanisms .
We have already begun doing so , both at EU level and more globally .
In that context , the group chaired by Mr de Larosière has produced very interesting ideas , and the Commission tabled a first set of proposals last week .
Further proposals are expected in the coming weeks .
These are being , and will be , discussed by Ecofin - and we have the Ecofin meeting today - and our objective will be to reach first decisions by the European Council .
This is an ambitious objective and , clearly , work will need to continue beyond June , so it is of fundamental importance that the June European Council is able to give a strong signal for the rapid adoption of the proposals to be presented by the Commission .
More generally , the June European Council will take stock of the situation on the financial markets and assess the effectiveness of measures taken so far .
It will also take stock of measures taken to support the ' real ' economy , and , in this connection , look at the employment situation .
On Thursday , the day after tomorrow , we will be holding a special employment summit with the social partners in Prague that should address these important issues .
You will be informed in detail about the agenda of this summit later today during a special debate .
Aside from the outcome of Thursday 's summit in Prague , as well as the very interesting seminars and workshops organised in recent weeks in the Czech Republic , in Sweden and in Spain , the Commission will also issue a communication very soon , in the run-up to the June European Council , so that by the time of the European Council we will have a number of interesting ideas and recommendations on the table for our consideration .
However , let me underline that this is not about launching a grand new strategy for employment .
We already have one - the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Employment .
We have recently reaffirmed the existing employment guidelines and adopted country-specific recommendations .
More generally , let me recall that the stimulus packages that the Union and the Member States have adopted since the end of last year constitute major contributions to supporting employment .
On climate change , the June European Council will revert to the preparations of the Copenhagen Summit on Climate Change .
It will take stock of progress achieved , both at international level and as regards our own internal preparations .
This is a complex issue , especially since negotiations with our international partners run in parallel to our own internal discussions .
There was a summit yesterday between the EU and Japan in Prague .
It is clear that significant amounts of financing will be required in order to underpin an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen .
The EU is committed to shouldering its fair share of that , which of course also requires a fair internal burden-sharing agreement .
How far we go at the June European Council as regards the EU 's own internal arrangements will very much depend on how far our international partners , including the US , have gone and on the status of negotiations in the multilateral framework .
Let me emphasise the EU 's continued will to demonstrate leadership , with the objective of reaching an ambitious outcome in Copenhagen .
It is rather premature at this stage to speak in detail about the agenda of the European Council as far as external relations are concerned .
However , two important summits with third countries will be held in Prague at the end of this week : the Eastern Partnership Summit on 7 May and the ' Southern Corridor - New Silk Road ' Summit the day after .
It is very likely that the European Council will discuss follow-ups to these events which are crucial for the Union 's interests in the long-term perspective .
Likewise , we can expect some debates on the Troika summits with Japan and Canada and other important summits and meetings already planned for May , Russia included .
The external relations agenda will in any case be updated on the grounds of current developments , namely the General Affairs and External Relations Council meetings in May and June which will be dealing with defence and development issues on top of the usual agenda .
I would like to express my thanks for your interest in the upcoming European Council agenda and I will certainly be glad to hear your inspiring comments and views in the following discussion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the next European Council will take place in the same month as the European elections .
This essential ballot will be held against a background of real difficulties for many of our citizens .
I am thinking in particular of the impact of the crisis on jobs , and we shall have occasion to speak about this in more detail later on this afternoon .
Our response to the crisis must be founded on our fundamental values of responsibility , solidarity and social justice .
This crisis is an opportunity for us to renew our European model of a social market economy that is environmentally aware and based on our values .
All Europeans of heart and conviction must be prepared to get involved .
They must explain why Europe is so important , why citizens must play their part in it and why they must vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , you can be justifiably proud of the work that has been accomplished .
The parliamentary term that is coming to an end can pride itself on its remarkable record .
Parliament has shown its determination to achieve concrete results for citizens .
It has proved that it had an ambitious vision of our common future .
The legacy of these last five years is very important .
Historic decisions have been taken to fight against climate change and to strengthen our energy security .
Measures have been adopted that have had direct effects on the security and freedom of citizens , and which have also opened up new possibilities to them .
Fundamental reforms have been carried out in the areas of the internal market , the social agenda , telecommunications , energy , the environment , justice and internal affairs .
On all these points , the modernisation of Europe that has been undertaken bears Parliament 's stamp .
Also during the few last weeks , you have worked with the Czech Presidency to reach agreements on a great number of key issues .
To date , almost 50 legislative proposals from the Commission have already been definitively adopted in codecision under the Czech Presidency .
Allow me to quote a few that have been at the heart of the agenda for the Commission of which I am President : the internal energy market , maritime security , measures to strengthen the regulation and supervision of financial markets , and the EUR 5 billion package of recovery measures to transform Europe into a sustainable economy .
I wish to congratulate Parliament and the Czech Presidency , under the leadership of Mr Topolánek and Mr Vondra , for the work that has been accomplished .
I am sure that this work will continue until the end of June .
We have to speak clearly and with conviction to the electorate about this Europe of results .
That is what will enable us to give new momentum to a bold and confident European Union .
Europe needs it .
It needs to make this year of crisis and transition a year that is more active , more imaginative and more determined than ever .
This will be our guiding principle for the June European Council .
We cannot allow ourselves to slow down the pace of our efforts .
We have to succeed for the sake of Europe .
Therefore I am not going to look now at other issues - which Mr Vondra has mentioned anyway - such as the Council for the Eastern Partnership , which is very important , but I want to concentrate in particular on the areas which , in my opinion , constitute priorities for the June European Council .
The European Council will be called upon to move forward on a series of issues of critical importance for the months and years to come .
It will be called upon to continue the work to take us towards our goal of seeing the Lisbon Treaty enter into force .
The European Union needs the benefits that this Treaty will bring .
So we must put in place the institutional package agreed last December and supported by this Parliament : to settle the legal guarantees needed to take forward the referendum process in Ireland , and to take forward the steps to ensure a smooth transition and institutional stability .
On climate change , we need to keep up the momentum towards an ambitious agreement at Copenhagen in December .
We have shown that strong and credible targets are possible .
Now we need to encourage others to take on a comparable level of ambition - and to show that we are prepared to help those who need it .
In short , we have to translate this momentum into a truly global result .
Inevitably , the main focus of the European Council will again be the economic crisis .
From the first , the European Union has had to adapt to the different demands of the crisis : to stabilise the immediate financial crisis ; to rebuild confidence in the financial system ; to get banks lending again ; to ensure global action that matches the global reach of the crisis ; and to bring direct help to those made unemployed or at risk of losing their jobs .
Between now and the European Council , attention will be mainly focused on two areas .
The first is the continuing work of rebuilding a regulatory and supervisory regime - a regime which must command the confidence of the public and the investment community alike .
This is not only about building a stronger system for the long term to ensure that we do not expose our economy in the same way again ; it is also about rebuilding confidence now , and showing the markets and the public that the European Union knows what has to be done .
Last week saw our proposals on hedge funds and private equity , as well as on executive pay .
Those proposals demonstrate our capacity to be a prime mover in delivering the reforms agreed in the G20 , and to set a standard for the actions we expect our international partners also to adopt in the coming months .
Indeed , the Commission is the first executive body in the world to come up with concrete proposals on this very difficult and complex matter .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council will have to cooperate closely over the next months to achieve agreement on those proposals .
The next step will be to set out in detail how we propose to organise supervision at European level .
There is no point in beating about the bush .
The current system of national supervision has failed .
That is why I set up the de Larosière Group to provide input on how to build an effective European architecture for supervision .
At the end of May , the Commission will present its blueprint for how to organise such a system of financial supervision in Europe .
Here , again , I would like Europe to be the first to move at global level .
The second volet , of course , is employment .
We will discuss the Employment Summit in more detail later .
I can already announce now that the Commission will follow up this summit with a detailed communication ahead of the June European Council .
I am determined that the European Union should do everything in its power to help those suffering most acutely in this time of crisis .
Our response to the crisis cannot be limited to technical measures to address regulatory problems .
It must be , and it must be seen to be , grounded in our core values - values like solidarity , social justice and responsibility , and also responsibility towards future generations .
We need to seize this opportunity to rebuild the foundations of our very own European brand of social and ecological market economy .
This should be the overriding message of next month 's European Council : an active European Union , looking to the future , working hard for the benefit of citizens and deserving of the confidence of those citizens .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council , which will bring the Czech Presidency to an end , is still looking fairly vague as regards both date and content .
Today 's task is therefore a difficult one , but it is an opportunity for us to reaffirm our priorities as we reach the end of this parliamentary term .
The first job of the European Council in June will be to nominate the new President of the European Commission , pursuant to the results of the European elections .
As was the case in 2004 , the Council Presidency will be invited to choose a candidate from the main European Parliamentary group , to hold this important position , and it will then fall to our Parliament on 15 July to voice its opinion on this choice , which will constitute one of the first major political actions of the new parliamentary term .
Ladies and gentlemen , the public often complains that Europe has no face .
We want to give Europe a face , by putting an end to the system of a rotating Presidency , and thus providing a stable European Council .
The Treaty of Lisbon stipulates this move , which would be a positive development .
However , since the Commission Presidency has a five-year term , Europe already has a face that everybody knows , and the President of the European Parliament , for its part , embodies the voice of 500 million citizens .
The June European Council will take place within the legal framework of the Treaty of Nice , and it seems that certain Member States will be tempted to wait for the Treaty of Lisbon before making any institutional decisions , and , notably , before nominating the President of the Commission .
It is also unfortunate that we do not yet know if and when the Treaty of Lisbon will come into force , and we clearly need to bring it into force without further hesitation .
Did we defer the European elections because the Treaty of Lisbon would have been more popular within the European Parliament ?
No , we did not , and our group is awaiting a clear message from the Council as soon as possible , regarding its intentions on this institutional matter .
Similarly , the Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats sincerely hope that the vote in the Czech Senate , expected tomorrow , will clear the way for the forthcoming ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon by the country holding the Council Presidency .
That would be a fantastic present for the 1 July , Mr Vondra .
I would also like to say how much we appreciate the manner in which you led the work of the Parliament over the first few months of this Presidency , in a difficult situation , with the energy crisis between Russia and Ukraine , and of course , the financial crisis .
You also highlighted the importance of the continuity of European politics , and demonstrated the importance of unity between our countries with regard to our relationships with our main partners , during the European - US Summit in Prague with Barack Obama .
I hope that the Czech Presidency ends in as positive and constructive a spirit as it began .
The credibility of the European Union is at stake .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council will naturally also debate the latest developments in the economic crisis , and the measures implemented at Europe 's request in order to clean up international financial systems .
I should like to commend the European Commission 's latest proposals in this regard , and particularly with regard to severance agreements , bonuses paid to traders or speculative funds .
These are all measures that are heading in the right direction , by imposing rules on the financial markets , in order to help us to get back on track towards growth and employment as soon as possible .
These are all measures that highlight once again that those who , often by demagogy , accuse the Commission and the European Union of paralysis or weakness are mistaken , and deceive our fellow citizens .
When this Presidency draws to a close , giving way to the Swedish Presidency , Europeans will express their views through the European elections , and I hope that the choices they make will help us to collectively take on the important commitments that await us .

Mr President , I would firstly like to thank you , Mr Vondra , for your personal commitment , as it is only thanks to this that it was possible to push through the large legislative packages during the Czech Presidency .
For this I would like to offer you my sincere thanks .
However , I would like to pick up on what you have said , to be precise about the appointment of the new Commission .
You said you would consult Parliament .
I should give you or the Council a word of advice straight away : you know very well , and President Barroso knows too , that we want a change of course .
We want a change of course , we want a Commission which pays more attention to social policy than was previously the case .

Unfortunately , President of the Commission , what Mr McCreevy has put forward as regards hedge funds , is not what Mr Nyrup Rasmussen proposed and it is not something we can accept .
The European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats seem to be behind it .
We are not in favour of such a directive , which , like Swiss cheese , has more holes than substance .
We have no faith in Mr McCreevy 's plan .
Again , I would like to come back to your consultation , which you can have today .
For us , choice of direction means that social policy must be much more strongly represented in the work of both the Commission and the Council .
In our view you must also trust the candidate and give them the authority to move the social strength to the fore .
In case this is too abstract we , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , have set it all down in a position paper entitled ' For a Europe of Social Progress ' .
This ranges from the amendment of the Posting of Workers Directive to the Social Chapter , which in addition to the treaties , in addition to Lisbon , should also clearly set out the social dimension of this Europe .
This is different , Mr Daul , from the paper which the PPE-DE recently concluded in Warsaw .
If you compare both papers , there is a huge difference .
We commit ourselves clearly to the social market economy and ' social ' is underlined three times .
In its paper , the PPE-DE mentions the social market economy in some parts and the free , that is unrestrained , unregulated market economy in others .
That is not what we want , that is precisely the difference between the PPE-DE and our Group .
Let me say a few more words about the economic situation , which you mentioned .
Mr Nyrup Rasmussen will express this clearly and articulately .
In addition to this activity , which Mr Schulz is publicising and promoting throughout Europe at this very moment - I therefore ask you to accept Mr Schulz 's apology - I would once more like to make it clear : the economic crisis has again made it obvious that the lack of economic coordination , for which not only the Commission , but also the Council is responsible , is partly to blame for the weak manner in which we are dealing with this crisis .
There would have been a crisis one way or another , but the fact that we do not have sufficient instruments to counter it , that we still have not made progress with Euro funds , is something that depresses us deeply .
The last point I would like to mention , because it is of particular concern to me , is rising youth unemployment .
Commissioner Špidla put it quite clearly : now a generation of young people are coming on to the labour market and what do they experience ?
Mass youth unemployment !
So we all have to do something about this .
All of us - the Council , the Commission and individual governments must strive to ensure that the first thing that young people experience in the labour market is not unemployment , but training and further education , so that they are better equipped for the labour market .
We have to send out this message to young people together , because this is extremely important for social stability in our society .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we approach the next European Council with anxiety tempered by ambition .
One important item on the agenda should , of course , be the nomination of the next President of the Commission , but that nomination cannot be seen in isolation .
The President is underpinned by the Commissioners and , in the light of the Lisbon stalemate , we are none the wiser on how those posts will be filled .
So , when we ask the citizens of Europe to choose their new parliamentarians in just four weeks ' time , we do so on the basis of uncertainty and we run the risk of that vacuum being filled by the opportunism of Europe 's opponents .
The time has come to make clear how we will proceed .
Mr Daul has expressed his determination that the largest group should propose the President of the Commission , as was the case five years ago .
My group follows that logic .
The next President of the Commission , whenever he or she is appointed , must know the legal basis and the timeframe for the appointment of the College of Commissioners .
The logical approach is to make all the appointments on the basis of Nice or all on the basis of Lisbon .
That is the kind of certainty citizens need .
Those Member States yet to ratify the Lisbon Treaty should act to make that deal easier to strike .
Tomorrow the Czech Senate will vote on the Treaty , with a three-fifths majority required .
Assuming its assent , the document will be delivered to Mr Klaus 's desk .
He should sign it forthwith .
President-in-Office , your Presidency has not been bad .
As Mr Barroso said , a number of legislative acts have successfully been brought to conclusion , but the headline facts - despite the best efforts of you and your team , Mr Vondra , and we wish you well - are that we have had the first Eurosceptic Council President and the collapse of a government half way through the Presidency .
Also , I am sorry to remind you of it , but it may take some time to forget the Entropa sculpture , no matter how much we may want to .
So , when the President replaces the Prime Minister in the summit chair , let him end his term of office on a positive point .
Let him confirm his signature of the Lisbon Treaty .
For all that Lisbon matters , it will not define this European election campaign .
Europe 's voters are interested less in constitutional questions than in practical solutions to the problems they face , and I urge you at your summit to recognise these problems .
Europe 's economy continues to creak under the weight of recession , and citizens need to know how we will lighten that load .
My group welcomes the hedge fund proposals from the Commission in that regard as a good first step .
Europe 's environment remains in peril as climate chaos draws ever closer and voters must see that the European Union can lead the fight back .
Europe 's values are undermined by human rights abuses occurring on our doorstep , and people should understand that the European Union retains its resolve to right those wrongs .
These are the challenges of our times .
This election campaign must show that Europe is up to the task and that Europe alone is equipped to do so .
- Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , the Council meeting that will take place next month will have a particular focus on the economic affairs of the European Union .
Proposals must be created that will return the economy to its previous state .
These proposals must be implemented immediately to restart the economy .
Today , when we speak about the future of Europe , 99 % of the people we speak to , or we claim to speak to , do not care about the future of Europe so much as their own future .
They care about the economic situation and the uncertainty that is there at present .
Too often within this Chamber , or even within the institutions of the European Union , we seem to be stuck on getting one ideological fix over another ideological fix , rather than dealing with the real and exacting problems that people face .
To that extent , I think we have already seen great leadership from the Commission and from the Council as regards their initial response to the economic crisis .
Decisive , quick action to put stability into the banking system ; decisive , quick action to create a level of certainty and confidence within the operation of the markets within the European Union ; and , most importantly of all , ambition - an ambitious vision of what the future can be .
Not waiting to react or to respond to events elsewhere but leading the charge as to what will happen .
Rather than point the finger of blame at one Commissioner or another Commissioner , and rather than make party politics , as some have tried to with regard to this , we should be striving to come together collectively and chart a new way forward on how best we can respond .
In doing that , we have to be innovative , we have to be creative , and , most importantly of all , we have to be honest with people as regards what we are capable of delivering and of doing .
Too often we tend to speak in sound bites and play to the gallery rather than dealing with the factual events that are before us .
We have made mistakes in the past : to err is human , to forgive is divine , as the old saying goes .
Even more importantly , as the old saying goes , we may all be lying in the gutter , but some of us are reaching for the stars .
That is the kind of ambition that we now need to ensure that we can lift up the economic situation within the European Union , create new employment , new hope and new opportunities to ensure that the collective wisdom , the collective strength and the collective power that the European Union now presents can be used as a force of good , not just within Europe but around the world to set an example of what should happen .
Finally , I want to thank the present President-in-Office , Mr Vondra , for his continuing contribution to this debate within the Chamber , for the respect and courtesy he has shown us at all times and , despite the difficult political circumstances that exist at home , for continuing to deliver the programme for the Czech Presidency .
In conclusion , I wish to say that when we fight these coming elections I do not have the luxury that other colleagues may have of being on a list .
I have to go out and meet ordinary people every day and deal with their ordinary concerns .
What they are worried about is their jobs , their mortgages and their children 's future , and that is what we should respond to .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow you will decide whether or not to approve the Treaty of Lisbon .
We naturally hope that you will extricate us from this prickly situation .
Having said this , we can only say that the situation in which we find ourselves today reveals yet again the total inadequacy of the treaty reform procedure .
The unanimous procedure is a mistake .
This Parliament made it a point of contention back in 1984 and proposed , together with Altiero Spinelli , that the treaties should be ratified by a majority and whoever did not wish to ratify them should be shown the door without compunction , with an agreement on how to move forward .
We believe that this would have been a constitutional reform for the times and I am afraid that this Parliament has really wasted an opportunity in this term to be a driving force for integration and a driving force for the positive reform of treaties by putting up with this unsatisfactory procedure .
The President also emphasised , it is true , that the next European Council will take place after the elections - and also said , and many of us reiterated the sentiment , that this European Council should appoint the next Commission President .
We do not think that this is necessary , however , particularly if there is no clarity over what will happen with the treaty : we believe that either the entire Commission , including its President , should be appointed in accordance with the Treaty of Nice , or that the President and also the Commission should be appointed in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
I think it would be a mistake to ' mix and match ' ; it would be a swindle for the voters and the public , because it would make it even plainer that this institution is simply a door mat when it comes to the interests of Member States and governments .
Mr Swoboda , you very slightly laid into President Barroso for his politics , but I would like to repeat to you what our group has already been saying for some time : if we want to avoid President Barroso 's policies regaining the majority in this Parliament , not only must we win the elections but we must also put forward another candidate ; something that your group refuses to do .





President Barroso is obviously completely on his own in this campaign and I believe that this is a very serious mistake for which I believe that your group is chiefly responsible : the problem is not poor Mr McCreevy , but the approach of this entire parliamentary term , the efforts of Social Democrats like Mr Verheugen and other things that have not impressed us , or you , this term .
I want to say two things very quickly about the matter of the leadership , or the supposed leadership , of the European Union over climate change .
One thing is very clear : the European Council did not want to put its money on the table .
We do not therefore have a deal as things stand today , because it is clear that even if the United States comes in with us , if we do not offer a financial deal , EUR 100 billion , to countries that must adopt measures to adapt to and alleviate climate change , we will not have any agreement in Copenhagen .
Since we were the ones that gave ourselves so many airs and graces as leaders , if we cannot put this money and these measures on the table , we will not succeed in obtaining a deal and most of the responsibility will lie with Europeans .
Moving on to the matter of the crisis in the financial market , I would like to say that we are a little inconsistent because on the one hand we are saying that we must absolutely manage them , we must limit them and we must regulate them , but on the other hand , when for example we propose that CARICOM should reach an agreement over this matter , what are we actually proposing ?
Total liberalisation of current accounts for all residents , of capital accounts for investors of practically limitless assets without any rules for financial services : for the matter of financial services , as for the matter of climate change , therefore , we are adopting rules that we cannot then manage to ensure are respected either internally or in our external dealings .
I believe that consistency is the European Union 's true problem these days .
Mr President , the next Council meeting must consider the grave economic and social situation caused by the crisis in capitalism and neoliberal policies .
The leaders of the European Union can no longer evade their responsibilities .
Neither can all those who pushed into the background the defence of production and social and labour rights in order to give priority to the liberalism of the Lisbon Strategy , the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , and the approach taken by the European Central Bank , with its false independence which has in fact only ever served the interests of economic and financial groups .
The European Commission 's current forecasts , which point to a fall in GDP of around 4 % this year , with stabilisation only in 2010 , accompanied by a loss of 8.5 million jobs over these two years and a prediction that the unemployment rate will reach around 11 % , are very serious and demonstrate the ineffectiveness of the measures taken to date .
Who can be indifferent to this exponential growth in unemployment , which may reach 30 million unemployed in the European Union ?
We therefore need to urgently break away from the neoliberal policies at Community level that have worsened the crisis in capitalism .
We urgently need to give priority to the creation of jobs with rights , to the defence of Community-based production , to the improvement of public services and to a fair distribution of income in order to reduce poverty .
We urgently need economic and social cohesion to stop being merely an expression without any clear content , and we need the principle of ' save yourself if you can ' to be dropped .
We need an extra EU budget to ensure that there is solidarity with and increased support for the people most affected and for the weakest economies .
We need to create jobs with rights for young people , women and the unemployed , increase the purchasing power of the population , stimulate demand and support micro , small and medium-sized enterprises .
Instead of continuing to insist on the draft Treaty of Lisbon , we need to respect the sovereign decision of the Irish people .
Instead of continuing to insist on priority for the financial sector , we need to put a stop to tax havens and give priority to the productive sectors of the European Union , doing away with the Stability and Growth Pact and replacing it with a social development and progress pact .
Instead of continuing to liberalise regulations and increase labour market flexibility , we need to concentrate on public investment , which can stimulate the productive sectors , prevent redundancies , reduce the average working day without any loss of pay , prevent unemployment , and ensure universal access to high-quality public services in health , education and training , research , housing , justice and the environment .
This is what the people of our countries expect from us .
If we want more European citizens to take part in the European elections , then we must respond in the way that the general public and workers in our countries want and deserve .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the summit on employment was actually planned for 7 May in Prague .
As we all know , in recent years employment has been a regular item on the agenda of the spring summit .
Here the leaders of the Member States discussed the so-called Lisbon strategy , which is the EU 's plan for more and better jobs .
It is also the forum at which representatives of the parties in the labour market had opportunity to present their views on employment .
However , it was not to become a major joint summit on the rising unemployment in Europe .
Instead there will be a Troika summit , which is far less ambitious .
Those at the top of the EU have thus chosen not to send out clear a signal ahead of the elections to the European Parliament .
It could almost have been done on purpose !
At a meeting with the General Secretary of the ETUC , John Monks , I was given to understand that the announcement is a very bad signal to workers .
Mr Monks is in no doubt that it gives the impression that the leaders of Europe are not sufficiently concerned about unemployment .
Workers feel they have no opportunity to have their voice heard at the highest level .
According to the Commission - a number of my fellow Members have touched upon this - unemployment will rise by 11 % in 2010 and the budget deficit will increase substantially to 7.5 % of gross domestic product .
This is not an overestimate of the situation ; rather the contrary .
It represents a significant challenge to the present single currency system .
A number of countries are having very great problems with the euro .
These include Ireland , the Mediterranean countries and the countries of Eastern Europe , and the problems have been significantly exacerbated by the international economic crisis .
Countries that are outside the euro zone , such as the UK , Denmark and Sweden , are coping well .
Consequently , I believe that a summit in June may avoid adopting a position on the fact that there are so many internal tensions in the euro system .
The June summit must make a statement on how the countries having particularly significant problems can extricate themselves from the iron grip of the euro .
Naturally one can choose to create ' economic government ' , but I have yet to hear of a country wishing to hand over substantial chunks of its financial policy to the EU - not even the strongest nation in the EU , Germany .
I would therefore ask : how many people in the EU will have to suffer under a euro system that in reality means that people in Europe must suffer under the hopeless criteria of the stability and growth pact ?
As mentioned previously , the situation is particularly acute in Ireland , Greece and a number of other states .
I believe that these countries need to know that they can of course extricate themselves from the strict requirements of the euro , even if there is no clause concerning withdrawal .
I believe that it is time that the countries were able to set their own employment policy .
( CS ) President-in-Office of the Council , Deputy Prime Minister Vondra , although you are the representative of a failing government , this does not exempt you from the responsibility you bear not only towards the citizens of the Czech Republic , but also towards the entire European Union .
I therefore call on you to stop the undemocratic and false promotion of the Treaty of Lisbon , and to inform citizens of the true state of affairs .
Please tell them that the European Union is functioning effectively even in an economic crisis , that it is taking the necessary measures , that the Member States are able to help each other and that the Treaty of Lisbon is completely unnecessary for all of this .
You should publicly withdraw the Czech Presidency 's outrageous assertion that whoever does not accept the Treaty of Lisbon should leave the Union .
You should say frankly that the legal trump cards are now in the hands of those who did not ratify the Treaty of Lisbon , the Irish and the other free-thinking peoples in the EU .
You should say that the current treaties cannot be revoked unilaterally , and that withdrawal from the EU is possible only with the consent of all Member States ; and that , consequently , no Member State can be excluded from the EU without its own consent .
Lastly , Deputy Prime Minister Vondra , you should withdraw your untrue assertion that 25 countries have approved the Treaty of Lisbon .
If you are aware of events , then you must know that ratification has not been completed in six countries , including Germany and Poland .
Please also bear in mind that the Treaty of Lisbon was rejected not only by Irish citizens , but , for example , by the prominent German left-wing politician Oskar Lafontaine , by the prominent Christian Democrat politician and former President of the Federal Constitutional Court and President of Germany , Roman Herzog , and by the former member of this Parliament , Graf von Stauffenberg , son of the would-be assassin of Adolf Hitler .
Last but not least , it is rejected by the president of your own country , Václav Klaus .
The arguments put forward by these people have a common denominator : concerns about the impact of a massive loss of Member State sovereignty on the everyday life of citizens of EU Member States .
Deputy Prime Minister Vondra , 20 years ago you personally contributed to the fall of a regime that oppressed its neighbours , held its citizens in contempt and lied to its people .
For this , you are rightly respected .
I therefore cannot understand why you are now lowering yourself to the same practices .
You are lending weight to the arguments of all those who compare the European Union to the socialist Council for Mutual Economic Assistance , and who liken Brussels to Moscow .
I would like to point out to you that the reputation of the Czech Presidency has not been dented by the fall of the Czech Government , but by the blatant pressure being put on Ireland , in which the Czech Presidency is playing a part .
Not to mention the lies told about the Treaty of Lisbon by the highest representatives of the Presidency - lies with which you are discrediting the democratic processes of the European Union .
You may have resigned , but you still have responsibilities .
Please make sure that the final European Council under a Czech Presidency performs its function in such a way that the impression left by our country is not one of totalitarianism , coercion and lies , but one of respect for democracy , freedom and , above all , the true facts .
Only in this way can you confirm that the demonstrations of 20 years ago , when people jangled their keys in the town squares , were not in vain .
Mr President , the Czech Presidency has achieved important successes in difficult times and this record is due not least to the personal skills of Prime Minister Topolánek and Minister Vondra , who is with us today .
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to them and thank them for their work over the last five months .
Undoubtedly the economic situation will dominate the June summit , which will of course focus on short- and medium-term measures to get consumers spending and banks lending again .
However , it should also look at how the EU can assist enterprise in the longer term .
For some small businesses this will mean improving access to finance and maximising their opportunities in the single market , but for many the answer will simply be for politicians to cut down on red tape and interference .
That is why Europe cannot be allowed to go down a Socialist route this June .
The economic downturn has caused the Socialists to show their true colours .
They believe politicians should dictate how many hours you can work .
They believe trade unions should prescribe your working conditions .
Above all , they believe that they , rather than the people , know best .
Nothing epitomises the ' politician knows best ' attitude better than the recent debate over the Working Time Directive .
Conservative MEPs were pleased last week to be able to see off the latest attempt by UK Labour MEPs to scrap Britain 's opt-out to the directive .
In Britain , 3 million people use the opt-out .
Its businesses , workers and public services rely on that possibility .
The Czech Presidency is on the side of the workers in this debate , and I congratulate it for helping us to see off this latest onslaught by Socialists .
I urge the June Council to sort out this issue once and for all , and to make it quite clear that workers , not politicians , should choose their working time .
Mr President , I am standing here with the feeling that I am on another planet and wondering what is happening right now .
It is strange .
We are in the worst crisis since 1929 .
Two days ago Commissioner Almunia said that we are going to have minus growth of 4 % this year and next year we are going to have 27 million unemployed .
Mr Barroso , compared with the past two years - this year and the year before - that is equal to an increase of 10 million unemployed people .
And what do I hear ?
Nothing !
Nothing !
I hear that the intention is to have a message and I hear that you intend to do something to help those who suffer most .
But can I remind you that an unemployment level of 11.1 % next year is 27 million unemployed people ?
Can I remind you that at the G20 Summit , with some resistance from some European leaders , you accepted that if there is a reason we are willing to do more to engage in having high economic growth ?
President of the Commission , I have 27 million good reasons to do more .
That is why I appeal to you today .
I know you are a reasonable man ; I know that you listen to arguments .
Can I put the following proposal to you ?
I propose that you hold three very carefully planned summits before the June Summit , with a selective group of people , where you formulate a new recovery plan - a recovery plan corresponding to plus 2 % in real demand , with 0.5 % finance at European level - one half financed by the states and one half financed by the municipality ; where you add a new social plan to take care of the immense costs of this unemployment crisis and to move into intelligent work-sharing while you use the Erasmus programme to ensure that young people , instead of being unemployed are allocated to a training scheme ; and , lastly , as you said yourself indirectly today , that you now try seriously to propose Eurobonds in a well-focused , well-done , well-planned way to take care of those countries that cannot finance their own recovery plan .
We can do it if we take a new decision ; we can do it if we exercise true crisis management and we can do it if we now really say : let us not start by asking Berlin , London or Paris what to do , but let us start by showing Commission leadership by making a proposal that is not intended to fit everyone 's shoes .
Not everyone will be happy at the beginning , but that is a precondition for moving Europe out of this terrible economic crisis .
Elisa Ferreira , our excellent rapporteur , together with the majority of the European Parliament , has proposed to you a new strong recovery effort .
So this is not only our position from the Socialist Group , the Party of European Socialists , the Social Democrats , but a common wish that you should do something more .
Please do it .
Leadership is about taking chances , taking risks and taking the lead .
Mr President , I do not propose to put pressure on the Czech senators or the Irish people in the debate this afternoon , so I am going to increase pressure upon the Commission - and especially upon the President .
It is expected that the European Council is to nominate President Barroso for a second term and , in such circumstances , we would expect to see and to discuss a manifesto from President Barroso .
Will he publish such a programme , and what will it contain ?
Centrally and surely , it should draw conclusions from the financial turmoil and the economic crash , especially as we approach the budgetary review before 2012 .
We have to change the size and the shape of the budget so that it more squarely responds to our top political priorities .
The new Commission should make the case for a transfer of spending from national to European level in the interests of cost efficiency and added value .
It should include , as an important objective , an expansion in the size of the eurozone and support a far stronger Eurogroup , committed to tighter fiscal discipline and a common economic policy , not simply the poorly-coordinated national macroeconomic policies that we have at present .
And , yes , it should include a proposal for the raising of Eurobonds , plus greater federal supervision for the financial sector and a proper fiscal stimulus , accompanied by a proper trade stimulus triggered by the reopening of the Doha trade negotiations .
( EL ) Mr President , the only new thing that the European Union Council summit on 18 June 2009 can add is new hardships for the working classes and grassroots classes and new subsidies and support for monopoly groups in the European Union .
The European Union and the governments of the Member States are consistently serving the interests of capital and the workers will pay the price of the capitalist crisis .
We all know what that means : mass redundancies , spiralling unemployment , drastic wage and pension cuts , new oppressive tax measures , the abolition of the eight-hour day , the division of working time into active and inactive time , an increase in unpaid working time and a 78-hour working week and the general application of flexicurity , which means minimal industrial relations , part-time temporary employment , revolving unemployment , an attack on collective agreements and further privatisation of insurance and pensions systems , health , welfare and education , on the one hand , and subsidy and tax exemption packages for the monopolies , on the other .
The forthcoming Employment Summit on 7 May is being prepared on the basis of this strategy of serving the interests of capital .
At the same time , imperialist aggression and the militarisation of the European Union are being stepped up .
The imposition of the Treaty of Lisbon is being promoted , despite and against the will of the people and their opposition expressed in referenda , as in France , the Netherlands and Ireland .
The anticommunist hysteria and the unutterable and vulgar equation of fascism and communism are becoming the official policy of the European Union and of the Member States , which are targeting the communist parties in order to strike at the fundamental rights and achievements of the workers .
At the end of this period , the workers must take stock of the European Union on the basis of the criterion of their daily reality and life experience .
What have the workers gained ?
What have the monopolies gained ?
( NL ) Madam President , we are actually bidding farewell to the Czech Presidency , which started brilliantly with the speech by President Klaus in this House , on rather a low note .
Unfortunately , that speech has been followed up by almost nothing of any consequence .
If the Czech Parliament also ratifies the Treaty of Lisbon tomorrow , this will mean that we were completely fobbed off back then .
Yet official Europe is at a dead end .
What we really need is a Union that is prepared to confine itself to its core tasks and is not set on acting like a major superstate in the making .
We are currently experiencing a particularly frightening economic crisis , with an enormous growth in unemployment in the European Union , and we have not seen the end of it yet .
A Council of Heads of State or Government that fails to decide at this time that it is a mistake , for example , to strive for even more immigration and to consider integrating Turkey , a country still way behind us in economic development , is , in my eyes , an incomprehensible Council that , in any case , is making a particularly grave error .
( SL ) I very much salute the ambition of the Czech Presidency and am pleased at the great results which it has achieved during difficult times .
I do not think that the upcoming rotation of the presidency and the European elections should limit the scope of the EU 's ambitions in meeting challenges which definitely require more common policies .
I will not repeat how important it is , in that respect , that we ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
I was pleased to hear both Deputy Prime Minister Vondra and President Barroso speak about targets .
If we are to succeed in the fight against climate change , we shall have to set high targets in Copenhagen .
These targets are crucial to the success of economic restructuring .
We all know that when , many years ago , the Japanese state set high environmental targets , the Japanese economy actually strengthened its competitiveness , for the first time .
I would also add that some people are now challenging the sustainability of the European Social Model .
Naturally , it is easy to implement such a model at a time of economic boom and during decades of positive growth , but I think that it is precisely in a time of recession that the strength of the European Social Model and the social market economy model needs to be felt .
I firmly believe that we will be able to overcome this challenge , too , and I hope that we will be able to use this period of crisis to improve our approach to development .
I also hope that we will be able to affirm the environmental dimension of that approach , not just the social one .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr Vondra , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , the world economy is plunging further and further into a serious recession .
Despite numerous summits and other meetings between various parties , the fall in economic activity continues to be a high priority within Europe and around the world .
The various plans for economic recovery have at best slowed down this descent into the underworld , but signs of recovery are not yet apparent .
What is worse , unemployment is continuing to rise , and will go beyond 25 million in Europe , perhaps even to 27 million unemployed this year , as suggested by Mr Rasmussen .
However , instead of focusing on the dramatic situation of employment , the Heads of State prefer to busy themselves at the next Prague summit with ' major policy ' regarding future relations with certain countries on the Union 's Eastern border .
Good neighbourly relations are most certainly very important , but we need to be perfectly clear here : Parliament has declared itself on numerous occasions to be opposed to any future enlargement of the Union , unless an institutional reform enabling the 27 existing Member States to operate more efficiently is implemented as a precondition .
I should like to add that any future enlargement must be preceded by fundamental reform of the financial perspectives , and by an appropriate increase in the Union 's budget .
Diplomacy without financial resources is merely a useless gesture .
The Union 's Czech Presidency would have better served Europe 's ambitions by organising a full employment summit .
I realise however , that the Sarkozys , who prefer publicity stunts to real political work , sabotaged this badly needed summit , and I hope that next June , the European electorate will use their vote to choose Members capable of determining the real priorities for Europe : employment , employment , employment , social protection , and the defence of purchasing power .
I do not always agree with my Prime Minister , JeanClaude Juncker , but he is certainly correct when he predicts , and I quote , ' a social crisis in the event of a steep rise in unemployment , expected in the coming months ' .
Therefore , by limiting themselves to an informal meeting on the subject of employment , the European leaders have backed away from the crisis , and are running the risk of a very serious social and political crisis .
( LT ) On 9 May 1950 Robert Schumann proposed the ' Schumann Plan ' , which laid the foundations for economic cooperation between European nations .
Europe 's great politicians and thinkers understood very well that the force which could unite Europe was a common approach to economic problems .
Inter-state financial and economic groups , which have created added value and jobs , formed the basis of this approach .
By implementing their own national economic recovery plans , Member States have disrupted the activities of these European groups ; therefore we are experiencing many problems , which we will have even more of , if we are unable to rebuild the coordination of economic policy at European Union level .
I hope that , among the new leaders of Europe , there will be people like Robert Schumann , Jean Monet and Konrad Adenauer , who will look beyond their own national interests .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the Czech Presidency on the initiative to come forward with an Eastern Partnership which will shortly be officially introduced , and I would like to call upon the Member State governments to fully commit themselves to this initiative .
Above all , our neighbours in the east need to feel themselves as equal partners that are genuinely accepted as long-term associates .
I agree that the Eastern Partnership should be governed by the principles of joint ownership , differentiation and conditionality .
However , the main goal is to secure a convincing victory for democratisation and the establishment of the rule of law in these countries .
As for Belarus , we need step-by-step progress in reacting to every sign of concrete progress towards democracy by Belarus ' current leaders .
One of the most crucial aspects of the Eastern Partnership is going to be visa freedom .
I would like to remind you of the Commission 's proposal from last December to remove all visa requirements over time for the citizens of the six future partners .
Unfortunately , this revolutionary approach was replaced by a much more modest one : an offer to introduce long-term simplified visa procedures on a case-by-case basis .
A successful Eastern Partnership , however , needs determination on our side and a positive openness .
It is vital to motivate our partners to make a full commitment to European values and rules .
This applies especially to Ukraine .
We cannot start our Eastern Partnership with vague and hesitant messages about Ukraine 's future .
A democratic and firmly European Ukraine is key to a democratic , reliable and law-abiding Russia .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , the June summit will have to deal with the Treaty of Lisbon again - hopefully for the last time before it enters into force .

Mr Vondra , I wish you all the best tomorrow in the Czech Senate , I hope it goes well and then we will only have the referendum in Ireland to come .
Then you would have to negotiate the package of guarantees with Ireland .
Of course , we then have to fulfil the expectations of the Irish population and the Irish Government .
However , we must be careful not to create new hurdles for all the other Member States , for example , if one of these guarantees were then to have to be ratified once more in all states .
Perhaps you can add something about how this package is being prepared for June .
Secondly , President of the Commission , we are of course interested in the election of the new President of the Commission .
We , the European Parliament , would like an agreement with the Council on the procedure for June / July .
We would like consultation , as established for the future in the Treaty of Lisbon .
President-in-Office of the Council , could you also say something about this ?
( SV ) Thank you , Madam President , Commission President Barroso , Mr Vondra .

One of the main points at the summit in June will probably be the appointment of a new President of the Commission .
The media have reported that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will not vote in favour of your re-election , President Barroso , if you do not promise to open up the Posting of Workers Directive .
This is a strange discussion .
The position that the Commission has previously taken is to try to avoid opening up a very complicated and politically sensitive directive and instead to see to it that the Member States that have problems meeting the requirements of the directive change their own national laws .
Commissioner Barroso , I would like to ask you this very explicitly , in view of the forthcoming election campaign : is the Commission and are you yourself still of the opinion that , as things currently stand , there is no reason to open up the Posting of Workers Directive ?
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Vondra , Mr Barroso , I am slightly surprised by Europe 's chronology .

The Commission presents us with economic forecasts , predicting that within three months , growth prospects will drop from minus 1.9 % to minus 4 % within the European Union and the euro zone , and when the finance ministers meet , their main areas of concern are long term viability , the quality of public finances , and the pursuit of structural reforms .
You must be joking .
On the campaign trail , the voters ask us outright .
Where is Europe ?
What is Europe doing ? What proposals has President Barroso made to help those people who may find themselves unemployed tomorrow ?
We are in a situation where it seems increasingly obvious that the reality of the current team 's chosen strategy , under the leadership of Mr Barroso , is a strategy à la japonaise : in other words , acting too late , and thus in an inefficient and costly manner .
This is not what we want .
Let me also say , Mr Barroso , since this will no doubt be the last time I will see you in this House , that your response to the challenge of the directive on hedge funds and investment funds has been totally unacceptable .
You suggest that perhaps we ought not to have commented on the ongoing work within the Commission .
What kind of text would this have been if we had not brought it to your attention ?
Your conclusion on this matter is to think that you can legislate on it , but you are only legislating in relation to the managers , and doing nothing to intervene in the reality of these funds .
Your only concern is to protect investors , whilst the challenge is also about price stability .
You have missed the point Mr Barroso .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , the statements of the Council and of the Commission on the preparation of the session of the European Council greatly disappointed those of us who are interested in transport .
During the current global economic crisis in particular it is essential to adequately upgrade transport infrastructure - rail , roads , inland navigation , maritime navigation , ports and airports - and develop a forwardlooking European transport policy with intelligent transport and logistics systems for the upturn in trade within the European Union and in imports and exports , which will hopefully soon take place .
In addition , our citizens expect clear statements from the European Union as to how the volume of transport can be managed in an environmentally friendly way , not with dirigiste instruments , but market-based instruments .
A good example of this is the introduction of the emissions trading scheme for aviation from 2012 , which has just been concluded by the European institutions .
However , other rules , for maritime navigation for example , are still lacking .
We therefore need an environmentally compatible streamlining of transport policy .
This subject is important , President-in-Office of the Council , because it is essential to discuss and agree upon similar solutions to the environmentally compatible streamlining of transport with the most important third states , like the US , Japan , but also Russia , China , India and Brazil .
Only in this way can we achieve global environmental improvement .
Only in this way can we avoid unilateral rules which distort competition to the cost of the European economy .
My Group therefore appeals to the European Council - and I hope that the President-in-Office of the Council will take this up - to discuss and prepare at the next Council balanced approaches for global , environmentally friendly transport policies , ahead of the climate conference in Copenhagen .
If we want to be successful in Copenhagen , we must also discuss an environmentally compatible transport policy .
( ES ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council meeting on 18 and 19 June will be held two weeks after the European elections , and in a democracy elections are fundamental .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , to whom the Czech Senate will be giving the green light on the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon tomorrow .
Now all that is missing is for the Emperor President in Prague Castle to deign to sign the Treaty but , anyway , we do seem to be making progress .
Now , one important point : the elections will be held under the Treaty of Nice but the next term of office will be administered under the Treaty of Lisbon .
From a democratic point of view , that means giving the Commission greater power than in the previous term , and may I now address one of the candidates , Mr Barroso : you have been a candidate since last Sunday but you are already the acting President .

Mr Barroso , I think it makes a good deal of sense for you to ask yourself what the economic and social solutions might be to the problems we have at the moment and the crisis we are experiencing , not taking advantage of the Commission 's services but as leader of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ; I think this is of great importance so that we do not find ourselves in a situation in which the European Council wants Parliament merely to be consulted ( let us recall the Buttiglioni case ) .
Madam President , in my last speech to the European Parliament , may I ask that you speak to the President of Parliament and tell him that it is extremely important that , in the European Council meeting , he mention the fact that the next Parliament will lack 19 Members because the Treaty of Lisbon has not yet been ratified .
This is a crucial issue for democracy and I think that the President of Parliament should defend it .
( ES ) Madam President , allow me , first of all , to thank Enrique Barón for his career in Europe and all he has done for this Parliament .
We will miss him a great deal .
Madam President , on 9 May we celebrate ' Europe Day ' in all our countries , but the truth is that we should sometimes hold a ' No Europe Day ' to see what Europe would be like if the European Union did not exist .
However , I think there has been a certain election fever today in Parliament , and it seems to me that much of the criticism we have heard here , especially about the European Commission , is entirely unjustified .
I think the Commission has reacted well to the crisis and I wonder what would have happened had we not reacted .
I would also remind one dear colleague and friend , who is not actually listening to me , of a compatriot of hers , André Gide , who said that everything exaggerated lacks value , and I think we need to set things straight .
Madam President , allow me to add to what Chairman Leinen said .
I believe it is very important that , throughout this process of electing the President of the Commission , we remember the spirit of Lisbon .
I am sure that Mr Vondra and his successor will do so , because it seems to me that it makes no political sense to hold European Parliament elections and not take the result of those elections into account , nor consult the parliamentary political groups before presenting a candidate to the Chamber .
This is something that must be said with total clarity to the Council : ' Do not make the mistake of going against what this Parliament is going to adopt by a very large majority in Mr Dehaene 's report ' .
Finally , Mr Vondra , I would like to congratulate you on your Presidency .
Ultimately , a distinction must be made between what is accidental and what is necessary and important , and I think you have done a good job .
Many years ago , I learned from Milan Kundera and others that the Czech Republic was an important part of Europe ; you have demonstrated that and I thank you for it .
You have had some difficult times but ultimately , Mr Vondra , I like to think that tomorrow is going to be a great day in the Czech Senate and ( ' Are we never to say how we feel ? ' , as a classic writer said ) I feel and will feel great pride when the Czech Republic ratifies the Treaty of Lisbon tomorrow .
Thank you , Madam President , and may it be so , as we say in my country .
( PL ) Madam President , the Czech Presidency has not been easy , mainly because of domestic problems , and also because of the world economic crisis .
I believe , however , that it will end with a very significant success , if it manages to deliver a favourable outcome to the process of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Therefore I would like to ask if the Presidency intends to approach those Member States which have completed parliamentary procedures in this matter and only the Head of State is procrastinating over the signing of this document .
This includes my country , Poland .
The second matter which I would like to raise is civil dialogue .
I was the rapporteur for that report , and I know that Europeans expect the European Union to tackle serious matters and develop suitable solutions .
They believe that Europe will do this better than their own Member States .
I would ask that this also be taken into consideration .
And the last matter , Madam President . Please do not forget about solidarity , and do not allow the European Union to become a platform for nationalism .
We do not want a return to nationalism .
I would like to appeal very , very strongly for solidarity .
( PT ) Madam President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , at the beginning of this legislative term , one of the central issues under debate was the institutional issue .
We started with the Treaty of Nice and , five years later , it will still be the Treaty of Nice that we have to use to take some important decisions .
The re-election of President José Manuel Barroso , which I of course support , is certainly one of those decisions .
I still hope that the Treaty of Lisbon can quickly enter into force , not only because of its virtues and the improvements from which it has benefited over time , but also to allow the institutional debate to be stabilised .
I especially hope that our energies can then be better used for and directed at the Europe of results , of which the Commission President spoke and has always spoken .
If , in the next referendum , the Irish say yes , it will be more because they have realised that Europe is a safe harbour , particularly in times of crisis .
The current situation is therefore our most powerful ally , but it could also be our most fearsome adversary .
Nowadays , Europe 's modern promise is particularly one of prosperity and well-being for everyone , and this promise greatly depends on what we are capable of deciding , including at the next European Council .
We particularly need the political will to respond to the current economic situation .
Protectionism , nationalisation and fear of globalisation will not help us .
We need to release and create space for the forces that can build our economies , we need to insist on reforms and compliance with the law , and of course we need to support the most vulnerable .
In this way we can achieve a Europe of results , without the abstraction from which people will inevitably remain alienated .
Now as I am leaving Parliament , Madam President , it is this hope that I want to express , and it is this hope that encourages me .
Madam President , could I suggest that those in this House from Member States other than Ireland who wish to speak for the Irish people on the Lisbon Treaty put their names down on the ballot paper in Ireland for the European elections !
It is a matter for the Irish people to decide whether we ratify the Lisbon Treaty or not .
I hope we do , and I will work very hard to achieve that .
I want Ireland to remain at the heart of decision-making in Europe .
All those who are calling for a second Irish ' no ' are hoping that Ireland can be used as a sledgehammer to begin the destruction of the European Union .
I will not stand for that .
Our history predisposes us to be cautious .
It has also taught us that solidarity and power-sharing with other European states is the best guarantee of our sovereignty and the best guarantee of our prosperity .
Minister Vondra , in his opening statement , made no reference to the social crisis we are facing at the moment .
I would urge him to revise his line .
We are in fact facing an economic , financial and social crisis : 27 million people and their families are facing total hell over the coming years .
We cannot have a European Union that ignores that .
( PT ) Madam President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , we are facing an unprecedented crisis .
It was not in fact the time to discuss internally how we organise ourselves , which is why I want the Treaty of Lisbon to be quickly ratified so that we can face the world stage united , standing shoulder-to-shoulder as Europeans .
As regards the economic crisis , the report for which I was rapporteur , and which this House adopted by a majority , accepted that the recovery plan presented by the Commission was not sufficient .
We are now certain that it is not sufficient .
A crisis that began as financial is now spreading into the real economy , into employment and into the social arena .
The recovery plan is insufficient and has no focus .
Every crisis creates an opportunity ; this is the Commission 's opportunity to respond to the real problems of Europeans through far-reaching financial regulation which is not as limited and as piecemeal as possible , as it currently is , and which is not made up of national and individualistic schemes , but a real European initiative .
The Commission 's response must not consist of a myriad of measures , but must concentrate on the real challenge , which is employment .
In every crisis there is an opportunity ; this is the opportunity for the Commission and Europe to respond to the real problems of European citizens , and I hope that this will happen through a new approach to the recovery plan .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I think this will be my last appearance here in front of this Parliament so I think it is the right moment to thank you .
I would like to start with that because it has been a unique experience for me .
Occasionally we have had some differences of view but I think in general my experience is that it was worthwhile working here .
Despite all the problems at home , as well as in Europe , in facing the current crisis , we have achieved results .
I am leaving early and you are also leaving early because you are going to campaign .
The Presidency will meet with you here at the end of June .
Some of the people may be different but the work continues .
Once again let me thank you for the work we did together in the last couple of months , with you as the co-legislators .
I think we did a good job .
I am leaving but the Presidency continues .
A new government in Prague should take office in the afternoon of Friday 8 May after the last big Southern Corridor meeting ends .
I have no doubt that it will contribute to a successful conclusion of the Czech Presidency .
Today I had the opportunity to spend an hour with Mr Jan Fischer , who will be taking command .
He is a committed European and a man who understands what it is all about .
He will be ready to meet President Barroso on Tuesday in Brussels , during his first visit to the capital , and will be working hard until the end of June .
I have no reason to doubt that the European Council in June will be held on time as planned and that the agenda will be professionally prepared .
On the Senate , many of you were talking about tomorrow 's vote .
The Senate is sovereign and I cannot determine the outcome of the vote , but we have worked hard and I am pretty sure that there is no reason for concern .
This also goes for the Presidency work regarding one of the most important outcomes of the June Council , namely the text of the declaration for Ireland .
It will be prepared .
On the question of whether we are talking with the others , the answer is ' yes ' , but we do not want to exert any pressure .
I am not calling on the German Constitutional Court .
Of course , it is sovereign but we all believe that the outcome of the game will be positive .
Many of you talked about employment .
In the context of the current economic crisis , this is the most important challenge for all of us .
Jean-Claude Juncker talked about this on Monday - yesterday - before the Ecofin meeting started in the Eurogroup .
We and the Commission have been working hard since the beginning of this year and we will be talking about this later here today .
I would like to underline the meeting which will be held in Prague in the presence of the Czech Prime Minister , the President of the Commission and the social partners , as well as the two upcoming Presidencies - Sweden and Spain - to discuss measures and recommendations .
The intention is clearly to prepare professionally for the June Council and the measures which can be taken , both at national and Community level , regarding the employment situation .
To Mr Rasmussen , I would say that it was José Manuel Barroso who assumed the leadership and encouraged engagement in discussion at a time when many politicians preferred rather to fix problems at home because it is a serious challenge .
( Applause )
I would not mix the Eastern Partnership with the challenges of employment .
That is a strategic mission to promote stability , well-being and prosperity in our eastern neighbourhood .
It has problems but we need to extend a helping hand and offer them help to fix those problems .
Going back to the June Council , many of you were talking about the future Commission .
I said clearly that we , as the Presidency , will consult the European Parliament immediately after the elections .
We have to wait for the result of the elections of course , but we will immediately engage in the consultation and can do this in the spirit , not in the letter , of the Lisbon Treaty .
Now I would leave you with my personal testament .
We are talking about who is going to be the good leader , and I have no doubt that this gentleman is the real leader of the European Commission .
If you want Vondra 's private recommendation - and I am a private man and just an ordinary Senator as from next Monday , looking forward to a trip to France because I have just read that the average time for sleeping in France is nine hours a day and I have been sleeping just two to three hours a day over the last months - I think that this is the man to lead us for the next five years .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as some Members have already said , this is the last time that they will be here , in plenary session , at a debate preceding a European Council .
I will not be able to see them in July , or September , since the mandate for this Commission comes to a close at the end of October , as you know .
I should therefore like to address in particular all those who have worked on the European project , who are members of the European Parliament , and say to them once again : You can be proud of the work accomplished by the European Parliament .
If we take a step back and assess the work done during this parliamentary term , I believe that we can all be proud of it .
The truth is that Europe has led the way in many areas , such as the fight against climate change , the struggle for a new policy on energy security , and in all matters relating to the response to the financial and economic crisis , which is affecting Europe very seriously indeed .
However , I have not heard much about any of this yet today .
This crisis is affecting the United States , and indeed it began there .
It is affecting Russia , Japan , and even China .
It is affecting the emerging markets .
Europe has tried from the start to react to this crisis , not only in the short term , but also via programmes tackling the bigger questions of regulation and supervision .
This is the message that I should like to get across to you here today .
Given the current electoral period , some of you have issued me challenges , but I believe that I cannot , nor should not , take up these challenges now .
The future Commission must , of course , develop its own programme , but it is not for me , now , to tell you what will be in the next Commission 's manifesto .
Therefore , I accept your challenge ; I take it as a sign of confidence , moreover .
However , I cannot respond to this challenge at present .
I believe that , by assessing the track record of this parliamentary term , we have good reason to be proud .
However , I would now prefer to concentrate on the June European Council , which has to deal with some very important questions indeed , requiring huge responsibility .
Firstly , there is the question of the Treaty of Lisbon and the transition that we need to make from one parliamentary term to another , and there is also the question of the constitution of a new Commission .
It is an extremely delicate challenge , as some of you have said , since we do not have the Treaty of Lisbon in place yet , a Treaty signed but not yet ratified by the 27 governments .
That is not the European Parliament 's fault , nor is it the Commission 's fault .
The truth is that these governments have signed a Treaty that they were not in a position to endorse definitively , and due to this setback , we have a serious problem as regards institutional transition .
This is a problem that requires a huge sense of responsibility on all sides : Council , Parliament and Commission .
That is why I welcome the wise words of the Czech Presidency , as well as the Members who stated their official position on this matter .
We need to find solutions that fully comply with the current treaty ; we are a Community based on the rule of law , we cannot suspend a treaty that is already in force .
In full compliance with the law , we must find sensitive solutions that guarantee the stability of the European project .
I will be calling on the Heads of State or Government at the European Council in June , to discuss this subject .
The other issue that we need to resolve concerns our response to the economic question .
I think we also need to realise that in this instance , presenting new programmes on a daily basis does not show real responsibility .
That is a mistake .
I believe that leadership is mostly an exercise in responsibility ; it is not just about playing to the gallery .
It would be easy for the Commission to present new ideas every day , knowing full well that they would have no chance of implementation .
We will not do that however , because in our capacity as the European Commission , representing European general interest , we consider our task to be more than merely taking the easy option or staging publicity stunts .
We want to propose real measures and guidelines that have a chance of bringing Europe together as a whole , with the other institutions , Parliament and Council , and rallying together the citizens of Europe .
If truth be told , it is the Commission that ultimately put forward the initial proposals for a European recovery plan , using all the instruments at its disposal .
As you know , most of these instruments fall within the scope of Member States , such as the national budgets .
The European budget is minimal in relation to the national budgets .
Perhaps some of those who are impatient and demand a lot of us can assist the Commission during the next financial perspectives , in convincing the Member States , particularly where the parties voted for a maximum of 1 % of their resources - the 1 % club who have put a limit on their financial resources .
Now there is something that would be worth achieving during the next parliamentary term .
I can confirm that we have a plan of action for 2009 ; we will submit guidelines for the financial review and for our future action plan .
However , there is no point asking the European institutions for what they cannot provide at this stage .
It would be better to ask us what we can do , and I mean this very sincerely , because I feel that certain criticisms which come from people who share the same European ideals as me , are fundamentally flawed in their constant criticism of what Europe has not yet done ; you know very well that if Europe has not yet done it , it is not the fault of Community institutions , but rather due to a lack of ambition at national level .
It is not fair to criticise in this way , nor does it make our job any easier , which is to move the European project forward .
The truth is that the Commission has put forward some ambitious proposals , that we constantly monitor the economic situation , and that we will present further proposals when they prove necessary .
Now , however , we believe that the important thing is to concentrate on the execution - as I have said - the execution and implementation of what we have decided on , and not just token gestures , because we also have some very serious concerns in relation to stability , with public debt reaching a truly alarming level throughout Europe .
The situation in a number of our Member States is very serious , and for this reason we must put forward proposals that can address these issues .
I also believe that we must support the work that Europe is doing .
I realise that there is a huge temptation to go against Europe at times in matters of immediate policy , and particularly in the context of the European elections , especially for those who are members of opposition parties in their own countries .
I ask you to think carefully , because tomorrow you will have power , tomorrow you can ask the citizens to vote for Europe , and they will not vote for a Europe that you have described as tribal .
The people will vote for a Europe that has the support of all the political forces on the right , the left , and in the centre , and which is reflected in the European project .
That , in my opinion , is a huge challenge .
I am in favour of a political Europe but I am opposed to politicking in relation to the European project .
I am also against improper political divides in partisan terms .
The truth is that we can only build Europe through large political families .
The Commission is made up of these families : the PPE , the socialists , the social democrats , the liberals , and other independents .
The Commission will continue to operate in this way .
I realise that , from the point of view of immediate policy , particularly in the European Parliament , and in the context of the European Parliament elections , we all want to highlight our own programme , and our own party .
I myself am a party man .
I was elected to the Portuguese Parliament at the age of 29 .
I have served as opposition leader and Prime Minister .
Hence , I am clearly a party man .
Bear in mind , though , that European politics needs party people who are also able to go beyond their own party , who can set up coalitions that go beyond the different party positions .
If we are supranational , we must also have a vision that goes beyond that of our own party .
That is what I wanted to warn you against , and I say this with all due respect , since I am aware that most of you are busy with an election campaign at the moment , which can be very demanding at times of major national challenges .
I think that is important for the future .
If we want to understand the huge challenges for Europe , we must unite all the Europeans on the left , the right , and the centre , all those who support the basics of the European project , and we must not succumb to this upsurge of partisan dramatisation , because in fact , most of the time it is artificial .
I can tell you that the proposals on hedge funds , which some of you have criticised , were the subject of a consensus within the Commission , between all the Commissioners , members of the socialist family , members of the liberal family and members of the PPE .
There was no division on this matter .
Therefore , although I understand that in terms of the political battle it makes sense to focus criticism on this or that Commissioner , I do not believe that it is fair from a political point of view , or from an intellectual point of view .
To finish , I would like to say that I admire the founding fathers more and more .
Let us be clear about the truth : the Czech Republic is facing a political problem .
The Deputy Prime Minister , Mr Vondra , has shown great honesty by clearly admitting it .
It is clearly very difficult for a country that holds the Presidency of the Union to have to deal with an internal political crisis , and to replace its own government .
The truth is that in spite of that we are on the way to achieving good results , thanks to you , the European Parliament .
I think I can allow myself to say that it is also thanks to us , the Commission , in a small way , for the proposals that we have put forward .
However , it is also thanks to the Czech Presidency .
We are in the process of finalising 50 codecision cases , some of which are extremely difficult .
We are able to do this whilst the country holding the Presidency is in full political crisis .
I think that we should pay tribute to the institutional capacity of Europe , by virtue of which , even in a situation such as this , the European Council is capable of delivering results .
This is why , when I just now paid tribute to the Czech Presidency , and in particular , to Deputy Prime Minister Vondra , I meant it with great sincerity , because I know that it is extremely difficult , as I have witnessed every day , to work under these conditions and still manage to come up with results .
This is why there is a choice to make here .
Whilst recognising that , for the most ambitious of us , including myself , we have not yet reached the objectives we set ourselves , we also need to emphasise what we have actually done , and what we have been able to do together .
Others , for their part , focus mainly on what it has not yet been possible to do .
The message that they are sending to the citizens of Europe is constantly negative .
As I have often said , the pessimism of the pro-Europeans is sometimes more worrying than the Euroscepticism of the anti-Europeans , because it does not convey a message of hope for those who believe in Europe .
I should now like to say , before the Deputy Prime Minister , Mr Vondra , whom I wish to thank for his speeches , before the Czech Presidency and before all of you , that I should like to thank you for what we have managed to accomplish together , despite all our differences of opinion , for Europe , which is a major project for peace , freedom , and solidarity .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Protectionism is hidden in MS showing less trust for each other and less enthusiasm to cooperate .
EU was established as an attempt not only to assure peace but also as a tool for cooperation .
It is in times like this , during economic and financial crisis , it 's important for MS not to build walls around its national borders but continuing to act together in a coordinated manner .
We must maintain European solidarity while adhering to rules and principles that stem from the EU treaty .
EU must make maximum use of the single market and stand up for open trade in the economic downturn .
Attempts to find a scape goat , such as the financial markets , will not solve the problems .
Abuse shall be stopped by new rules but not prevent access to capital and investments when we come out on the other side of the crisis .
It is not easy to overcome the problems .
Protectionism is for sure not the solution .
The solution after the fire alarm activities are passed is more trade , more harmonization , functioning internal market with goods and even more with services .
Cross border cooperation increases innovation and jobs , the only sustainable ways out of the crisis .
The EU is trying to ' hide the sun with a sieve ' , but it is clear how much responsibility it holds for the constant deterioration in living conditions of the general public and workers .
In the last 23 years , the EEC / EU has promoted the circulation of capital and the financialisation of the economy ; it has liberalised markets and promoted privatisation ; it has encouraged over-production ; it has relocated and destroyed productive capacity ; it has promoted the economic domination of some , at the expense of the dependence of others ; it has intensified worker exploitation ; it has centralised wealth , like never before ; and it has increased social inequalities and regional asymmetries , all under the control of the major powers and the large economic and financial groups .
The European Commission 's terrible ' spring ' predictions are no more than a depiction of the consequences of the EU 's neoliberal policies - decided and implemented by the right and the social democrats - for Portugal : over 600 000 unemployed , a loss of real income , two years of recession , increasing public debt , and a budget deficit which will once again exceed 6 % .
However , much worse than these predictions is the actual reality being faced by millions of Portuguese who are seeing their problems increase day by day .
On 7 June , the Portuguese will have another opportunity to say enough is enough , by voting for the CDU ( Portuguese Democratic Unity Coalition ) .
Preparation of the Employment Summit - European Globalisation Adjustment Fund - Renewed Social Agenda - Active inclusion of people excluded from the labour market ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Council and Commission statements on the Preparation of the Employment Summit ,
the report by Gabriele Stauner , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund - C6-0518 / 2008 - ,
the report by José Albino Silva Peneda , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Renewed Social Agenda , and
the report by Jean Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the active inclusion of persons excluded from the labour market .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , we are all aware that we are continuing to suffer from one of the most severe financial and economic crises for many years .
The Union and the Member States have taken a wide range of measures both to try to mitigate the effects of this crisis , and also to address some of its root causes , while also taking into account the pressing need to better prepare ourselves for the future in order to face the challenges of the global economy .
We are also aware that the current difficulties are not simply about figures on balance sheets , or amending economic forecasts .
They have a real impact on people : on their livelihoods , on their families , and on their standards of living .
Most directly affected are those who have already lost their jobs as a result , or the many more who risk losing their jobs over the months to come .
The Spring European Council agreed that an Employment Summit should be held in order to allow for an exchange of experiences on the extent to which the recovery measures taken have succeeded in supporting employment and creating new jobs and more jobs .
The Summit will take place in Prague this Thursday .
The mandate given to the Presidency was clear .
We need to examine issues such as maintaining employment levels through flexicurity and mobility , creating a favourable environment for investments and job creation by businesses , especially small and medium-sized ones , upgrading skills and anticipating labour market needs .
We must also look at strengthening and restructuring the labour market so as to prepare it for the future .
Our objective is to ensure that the Summit is not just an opportunity to talk , but that it produces concrete outcomes and recommendations which will benefit society as a whole .
The participants will include the social troika at the level of the prime ministers and employment ministers of the current Czech Presidency and of the forthcoming Swedish and Spanish Presidencies .
The social partners will be represented by the presidents and general secretaries of Business Europe and the European Trade Union Confederation , together with the representatives of small and medium-sized undertakings and public-sector employers .
The European Commission will be represented by President Barroso and Commissioner Špidla .
The chairs of the Employment Committee , the Social Protection Committee and the Economic Policy Committee will also be present .
Representatives of the European Parliament have , of course , been invited as well .
It is also my understanding that the President of the European Parliament , Mr Pöttering , is going to attend .
In order to help prepare for the Summit , three workshops have been organised in the countries of the three participating delegations : in Madrid , in Stockholm and in Prague .
These workshops have especially addressed the issues of upgrading skills , increasing access to employment , and how to maintain employment , create jobs and promote mobility .
These workshops have enabled us to focus , with the social partners , on the key areas of concern .
We were pleased that the representative of the European Parliament attended the preparatory workshops - namely Mr Andersson , chair of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The workshop on skills upgrading , which took place in Madrid , highlighted that skills are the key to preparing for the future .
In the short term , skills increase both productivity and mobility .
In the longer term , they pave the way to recovery , increase competitiveness and are crucial for reducing exclusion and promoting greater social equality .
The case for upgrading skills , which is endorsed by all stakeholders , is not just about formal qualifications , but also about promoting areas such as communication skills amongst young people .
The issue of financing the acquisition of higher skills cannot be overlooked , especially in a time of crisis .
It requires commitment not only from the public authorities , but also from employers and from workers and job-seekers themselves .
At EU level , there is a need to explore further the possibilities of using the European Social Fund .
As far as employers are concerned , their own interest in developing skills is self-evident , as firms which fail to invest in skills upgrading are two and a half times more likely to go out of business than those that do .
The workshop in Stockholm on increasing access to employment focused on how to get the newly unemployed and the inactive into - or back into - jobs as quickly as possible .
The newly-unemployed should not be allowed to become long-term unemployed .
It is particularly important to ensure that social protection systems serve as a springboard into new jobs , and not just as passive safety nets .
A need for incentives to actively seek employment cannot be overlooked .
A flexicurity approach should contribute to making transitions pay , not least by providing the necessary element of security .
During this workshop in Stockholm , it was also stressed that the short-term measures should not be allowed to prejudice the longer term .
Early retirement schemes are a poor solution to providing more jobs for the young , as they lower overall participation rates , and are inevitably accompanied by higher social security costs .
At EU level , the possible use of the European Social Fund for funding active inclusion measures was identified , as was the possibility of enabling older workers to stay in employment by reducing their social security contributions .
At the last workshop , which took place in Prague last week , the need to maintain employment and to improve an environment friendly to entrepreneurship and job creation was emphasised .
The temporary short-term working arrangements can be beneficial , but their financial sustainability needs to be ensured .
However , we must guard against the trend to protectionism , which can only harm the Union as a whole .
We also need to use active measures to promote mobility and again , in this context , the increased flexibility of our labour markets has a key role to play .
Despite the impact of the crisis , there are still a substantial number of vacancies in Europe , but there is a lack of coordination both within and between the Member States .
Often , people are in the wrong place , or lack the right skills , or a combination of both .
It is clear from these workshops that the present crisis is not just cyclical , but structural .
Profound changes are going to be needed to face stiff competition in a globalised economy and to safeguard long-term employment in the EU .
However , in many instances , these changes are actually about continuing initiatives or even accelerating the overdue reforms which have been pursued for many years in the context of the European employment strategy .
Apart from the efforts to maintain current jobs , we must also create a favourable environment for investors and businesses to invest and create new jobs .
We cannot keep all existing jobs : the crisis requires structural change and people will lose jobs .
But we must offer the unemployed a chance to improve their skills and employability , and to quickly find a new job which has been created somewhere else .
Let me also briefly touch upon some other topics which you will discuss here today during your Social agenda debate .
I congratulate Mr Silva Peneda , in particular , on his extensive and far-reaching report which covers a wide range of issues , and which calls specifically for an ambitious social policy agenda .
Mr Peneda 's report underlines the need for job creation and flexibility in the workplace as part of Europe 's broader social policy .
It also recognises the importance of developing new skills , of lifelong learning and of promoting university-business cooperation .
These are all key aspects which will also be taken up as part of our agenda for this week 's Summit .
This wide-ranging report is complemented by that of Ms Lambert on how to include people who are frequently excluded from the labour market .
This week 's summit will certainly need to take into account this important goal .
We cannot and will not seek to push job creation for a few .
Our objective - even more so in the current difficult climate - is to adopt an inclusive approach to employment policy .
The Czech Presidency supports the long-term employment targets of the European Union and has repeatedly emphasised the need to better motivate people to seek employment and to improve their employability .
We all probably agree that it is better if people earn their living themselves and are free instead of being dependent on the social protection system .
This is why we need to reduce the segmentation of our labour markets .
The Global Adjustment Fund provides support for workers made redundant as a result of globalisation .
I am pleased that there is agreement between Parliament and the Council on amending the Fund , and I am grateful to Ms Stauner for her work on this .
By introducing greater flexibility in how the Fund is used and by reducing the number of redundancies from 1 000 to 500 , it will become an ever more effective instrument for helping to tackle the effects of the economic down-turn .
Let me conclude by saying that the most urgent need now is to ensure that the many ideas which have emerged from preparatory workshops , and which will shape the debate at this week 's Employment Summit , are translated into action .
As I said at the outset , we are looking for a concrete outcome which will benefit society as a whole , as well as European citizens .
We cannot hope to resolve the effects of the current crisis in a single meeting , but we should focus on specific recommendations and initiatives which will together play a role in mitigating the effects of the crisis and help us emerge from it even stronger .
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sharp rise in unemployment is the most serious consequence of the world economic crisis .
It affects both families and individuals , who are plunged into real difficulties .
It affects society , depriving it of vitality , and it affects the economy , which loses skills and experience that will take years to rebuild .
It is here that the human and social cost of the crisis hits hardest .
Unemployment is a local , national , but also European phenomenon .
Within the European market , where more and more citizens are exercising their right to freedom of movement , employment has been a long-standing concern in both national and European politics .
That is why it is absolutely necessary to find answers from a European point of view .
Unemployment is the Commission 's main concern .
The Commission is working tirelessly to ensure that everyone with political responsibility in Europe hears this call , and devotes all of their energy to seeking an end to the crisis .
I know that there is no need for me to explain the importance and seriousness of unemployment to those within the European Parliament .
Every day one of your electorate loses his job , and three more worry that they will suffer the same fate .
In March , the European Council approved the initiative by the Commission and the Council 's Czech Presidency to devote a summit to the ' employment ' dimension of the current economic and financial crisis .
This issue has been our main concern since the start of the crisis , and led to our proposal for a European economic recovery plan last December .
Its implementation at national and European level is already playing a major part in keeping existing jobs and creating new ones .
However , we now urgently need to evaluate its impact on employment .
We must learn the necessary lessons in order to adjust our action in the coming months .
I still think that the issue of employment would have justified a full European summit , a summit that would bring together the 27 Heads of State or Government .
The March European Council decided on a more restrained format , to my great regret .
Nevertheless , that is no reason for the Commission to scale down its ambitions in relation to the content of this employment summit , and its monitoring during the Swedish and Spanish Presidencies to come .
The European dimension is absolutely vital for two main reasons .
Firstly , we must send a clear signal to citizens , letting them know that the European Union clearly understands the true nature of the crisis , that it is not just a matter for the economists and bankers , but that it is the well-being of citizens , workers and their families in the four corners of Europe that is at stake .
Our response to the crisis must not be limited to clinical technical measures to resolve regulatory problems .
It should draw its essence from our most fundamental values : social justice and solidarity .
Our response must be perceived in this way , as a response stemming from the importance we give to certain essential values .
I believe that every crisis also offers an opportunity to be seized , an opportunity to renew our European model of a social market economy , and an ecological economy also ; it offers an opportunity to show Europe 's strong desire to contribute to the well-being of its citizens .
Secondly , Europe really can change things and make a contribution .
Of course , while the majority of power is held at a national level , Europe can do a lot , and let us be absolutely sincere on this .
We can design the tools at our disposal for maximum efficiency .
The European Social Fund can help a considerable number of people ; it enables nine million Europeans to access training every year .
We can also act as a reception centre for ideas , as a laboratory .
The national governments , local authorities , social partners , and all the stakeholders in Europe , are all trying to find solutions to the consequences of unemployment .
They need ideas and projects .
The European Union is the ideal setting to gather ideas , to pick out those that will work best , and especially to help in their implementation .
We have worked on this process with the Czech Presidency , the upcoming Swedish and Spanish Presidencies , and the social partners .
Mr President , as you know , the summit has been prepared with an intensive consultation process , built around three preparatory workshops .
The input of this Parliament into that process has been most valuable .
I would particularly like to pay tribute to the personal commitment of the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and in particular Mr Andersson as chair .
The workshops organised in Madrid , Stockholm and Prague have proved an excellent focus for the phase of gathering ideas about what works best .
I welcome the active involvement of the social partners , as well as the input received from other stakeholders .
The European Economic and Social Committee has played an active role in gathering ideas from its national counterparts , which will enrich the debate - in fact , I will be meeting the Economic and Social Committee in Prague .
I would like to point to four key issues that have emerged from these events .
First , the top priority must be to keep people in jobs , to do everything possible to prevent a new hike in unemployment .
Those who lose their jobs must be helped to find another one .
This help must be offered immediately : it is no good waiting until people have been unemployed for several months , by which time their skills have decayed and their confidence is at rock bottom .
Long-term unemployment is a tragedy for those hit , and brings real damage to our social stability and long-term competitiveness .
Second , the crisis hits the most vulnerable people the hardest - people like the low-skilled , new entrants or disabled people , who find it difficult to find jobs at the best of times .
Now is the time for active inclusion , to step up efforts to give particular support to these groups - a very clear echo of the Lambert report on the agenda today .
Third , we must also work to boost opportunities for young people .
I know that this is a particular concern of this Parliament .
We must act to tackle the risk that many young people will finish their education and slide straight into unemployment .
Young people need our active support to find apprenticeships or further training so that they can find and keep jobs in the future .
Finally , upgrading skills and matching labour market needs .
In an economic downturn , it is all the more important for people to acquire those skills that will improve their employability during but also after the crisis .
We need to prepare people for the jobs of the future : green-collar jobs and jobs in other growth sectors , such as health and the social-care sector .
This debate also provides the moment to draw together this Parliament 's examination of the renewed social agenda .
I regard the issues covered in the Silva Peneda report as an important part of this Commission 's legacy : an approach of access , solidarity and opportunity to ensure that our policies fit both our enduring core values and the realities of society today .
I really want to congratulate Mr Silva Peneda on his great work and I think that our cooperation , namely with my colleague in the Commission , Vladimír Špidla , has been of great importance .
This agenda , an agenda of social inclusion and social innovation , seeks to empower and equip Europeans to deal with rapidly changing realities shaped by globalisation , technological progress and ageing societies and help those having difficulties coping with such changes .
We cannot separate our economic and our social agenda : there can be no economic recovery on the foundations of social collapse , just as there can be no social progress in an economic desert .
I am grateful for the detailed examination of these proposals by Parliament , on which Commissioner Špidla will respond in more detail later in the debate .
Allow me to focus on one issue for which I feel a particular paternity , and that is the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I would like to thank Parliament for treating the Commission 's proposals for revamping the Fund with such speed .
The new rules will improve the uptake of financial assistance for the redeployment and retraining of workers who are losing their jobs due to the current recession ; more firms will be eligible , and the Community budget will shoulder a larger part of the costs .
Your vote this week is excellent news ahead of the Prague Employment Summit .
The Employment Summit this week gives an opportunity to keep employment at the top of the European agenda where it belongs .
I want this Summit to yield concrete , tangible results . I am hopeful that it will .
And , rather than being a one-off event , I also hope that it will be another milestone in an ongoing process that started well before the crisis - a process of cooperation between the Commission , the Member States and the social partners - which will go on throughout the crisis and beyond .
As President of the Commission I will take this agenda to the European Council in June , for the attention of all 27 heads of state and government .
It deserves no less .
Europe is not only an economic and political project .
It has always been , and always will be , a social project as well .
Presidents , ladies and gentlemen , so much effort , so little effect !
This is how one might summarise the work to adapt the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) to the needs of the economic and financial crisis .
Little effect because , in view of the number of employees concerned and the depth of the crisis , the total funds allocated to this instrument - namely EUR 500 million - seems a meagre amount .
However , that would be the wrong conclusion altogether .
The achievements of the EGF , following restructuring in conjunction with the other solidarity and support instruments , which we have at European level , are there for all to see .
The EGF is the baby here .
It was first created in 2006 and was supposed to be a clear sign that globalisation does not just have positive effects on workers , but through mass redundancies , and especially through company relocations , can also have negative repercussions for workers .
Thus even the more frugal budget specialists laid aside their concerns and we opened another funding pot .
Now the effects of globalisation have been completely overwhelmed by the financial and economic crisis and our measured reaction is the adjustment of the funding criteria of the EGF .
At the same time , one problem for our deliberations on revision was that , because of the newness of the EFG , there was no great wealth of experience in the Commission and we still find it difficult to judge the efficiency of the present rules .
I would also like to note that , for the future , the coexistence of the EGF and the European Social Fund should not be overlooked .
The majority of the Committee on Employment came out in favour of temporary validity for the regulation which is to be amended , so that the provisions will now apply to all applications filed by 31 December 2011 and , as regards content , will affect those workers who have lost their jobs as a direct consequence of the global financial and economic crisis .
This means that from 2012 we must once again reflect on the continued validity of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
In terms of content it undoubtedly represents an alleviation , if the trigger figure for redundant workers in a given region is reduced from 1 000 to 500 , and , at the same time , the payment period is raised from 12 to 24 months .
This facilitates the application process and provides sustainable support for our workers until they have found a new job .
The level of the EU financing share and cofinancing from national budgets was a highly controversial issue .
We have found a compromise .
It remains basically at 50 % - so 50 : 50 - and only in special cases can the financing share from European funds be raised to 65 % .
I am very happy about this .
In committee we have therefore already put a stop to further wishful thinking , as a Member State which receives funds for its workers should already be aware of its responsibilities .
This is best achieved if it has a substantial financial contribution to make itself .
I am especially pleased that we were able to reach a consolidation - 20 % of the direct costs - in our talks with the Council and the Commission .
This is exactly what we agreed in committee a few days ago for the European Social Fund .
There is still enough room for future amendments and improvements .
I would like to thank you for your constructive cooperation at every stage , both in committee and with the Council and Commission , and ask you to support the amendment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few months while I have been preparing the report on the Renewed Social Agenda , the effects of the economic , financial and social crisis affecting Europe and the world have been getting worse .
Every day we are seeing more redundancies , more company closures and more families in terrible situations .
This is more than just an economic and financial crisis ; I believe that we are experiencing a crisis of confidence .
According to the latest Eurostat data , in February 2009 over 19 million men and women were unemployed in the European Union .
Given this scenario , if nothing is done , the rise in unemployment will definitely be followed by more poverty , more social exclusion , more insecurity , more crime and , in particular , more distrust .
We take the view that unemployment - the most visible face of this crisis - does not simply mean a loss of income for those who are unemployed and their families : unemployment discourages you and can lead to a loss of confidence in yourself and in those around you .
Even before the crisis that we are facing today , the Member States of the European Union were already being confronted with social problems stemming from weak economic growth , a complicated demographic situation and the difficulties of living in an increasingly globalised world economy .
In this report I have tried to reflect these concerns as clearly and as pragmatically as possible .
I know that a social agenda is a very broad concept and I have therefore tried to produce a balanced report and to clearly and concisely present the real priorities .
Firstly , the institutions of the European Union can play a vital role by reaffirming the importance of the social models and infrastructures of the Member States , thus helping to build consensus on the importance of universal access to these models and infrastructures , their high quality and particularly their sustainability .
Secondly , we have to mobilise all available instruments to ensure that more people are better integrated into the labour market .
The third priority stems from the conclusion that there is still much to do to ensure full mobility for citizens within the European Union .
I believe that the fourth priority is for the European Union to play a much more active role in promoting social and environmental standards in its external relations with emerging powers , such as Brazil , Russia , India and China .
This is particularly important when we are talking about trade agreements .
The fifth priority which the Commission has tried to implement , even today with the planned vote on the report on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , concerns making the European Structural Funds more flexible .
To ensure that European citizens can understand and deal with the changes brought about by the current context , social dialogue must be reinforced in order to increase transparency in decisions on social adaptation and economic restructuring .
I tend to say that you have to go through a period of turmoil in order to get to a period of cooperation in social dialogue relations .
The open method of coordination must also be reinforced , as this is an essential complement to the European Union 's legislation .
Social policies cannot be a patchwork of isolated actions and ideas ; we need to ensure a better link between economic , labour , social and environmental initiatives .
It is vital that social policy goes hand in hand with economic policy , to ensure a sustainable recovery not only of the economic fabric , but also of the social fabric .
There is one point on which I want to be very clear : the crisis that we are experiencing cannot be used as a pretext to cut social expenditure .
It must be said that , if this is not the time to make cuts in social expenditure , then this is in fact the time to firmly push forward with implementing the necessary structural reforms .
I therefore want to congratulate the Commission and President Barroso who , in such complex circumstances , have managed to drive Europe to deal with the problems of the crisis in a coordinated manner ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
rapporteur . - Mr President , I also have a couple of minutes later on to talk about some of the other issues on the floor this afternoon .
But the report I was dealing with particularly concerns the issue of active inclusion of people who are excluded from the labour market .
Firstly I want to thank all the colleagues who have been involved in this and the very many civil society organisations that have also contributed .
We have been hearing this afternoon about a time of recession increasing risks of exclusion unless we are very careful : the risks of people now losing their jobs and maybe not making it back to the labour market at some point in the near future ; those who are already in difficulty not even being able to access the labour market ; and then of course there are those who are not even part of the labour market .
They risk being forgotten and that is something we have to be very much aware of .
We have to look at some of the structural barriers that we as a society are also putting in place in terms of active inclusion .
One of the things we agreed in the committee was that active inclusion should not be replacing social inclusion , that wider field of feeling that you have a role to play in society .
We are generally in broad agreement with the Council and Commission in their recommendations on this , in terms of adequate income support , and this report uses that phrase .
We also talk about minimum income in places where we really mean that . That people need that income to give them dignity , to give them choice and the opportunity to actively participate in society .
It is important in terms of support for the more vulnerable , for carers , those needing care , those needing support for independent living , and indeed it is important for pension levels .
The report also says that it is important that Member States should be considering a minimum wage .
We have got a growing problem with the working poor within the European Union .
We have also talked in the report about difficulties with social security systems and their lack of responsiveness , particularly when you are trying to keep people in touch with work , and they might then be doing casual work , temporary work , fixed contract work .
Social security systems do not always respond to that very well .
But we also sound a warning on activation measures , particularly those that sometimes introduce penalties which can have an indirect effect , for example on the families of those affected , or indeed where you find people undergoing several training programmes for work that simply does not exist .
We also agree concerning the issues around the inclusive labour market .
That is why we have singled out the issues of anti-discrimination and that legislation being properly applied , questions relating to training and education to keep people in school rather than leaving early , and a more individualised approach that deals with an individual 's needs .
We have also agreed concerning the issue of access to quality services because those are extremely important for vulnerable individuals in difficulty .
And we have highlighted the role that local authorities have to play within this - and indeed the need for more of a framework around services of general interest - so that we can ensure that people are getting the services that they need .
But equally important for us is , I think , the question of voice within this : that those who find themselves excluded should also be included when we are looking at measures that are being put in place and considering whether they are really going to meet the needs of the long-term unemployed , of older people , of younger people trying to gain access to the labour market , or whatever .
That question of voice being structured through the open method of coordination is extremely important and should not be forgotten .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I should like to thank Mr Silva Peneda for having detailed in his report the fact that the Commission was not proposing concrete measures to offset the social and health consequences of the ecological and climate crises .
I should also like to thank him for having mentioned the social economy , although I regret that its role in relation to cohesion policy and the creation of quality and nonrelocatable employment has not been highlighted .
On the eve of the European elections , this report would have been more welcome if certain objectives were not suffering from a clear lack of ambition .
Can we be content with flexicurity , and with minimum standards in relation to labour law ?
No we cannot .
We should be worried however , that tomorrow , the right may reject these minimum standards , in the same way that for the last five years they have rejected a directive on services of general interest .
Will we finally approve a minimum wage tomorrow ?
The European citizens have been demanding a strong social Europe for years .
The next Parliament must be able to put into practice the various social advancements proposed in the report .
I hope that this will help to mobilise everyone on 7 June .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion , I would particularly like to say something about the amendments to the EGAF , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , and express my appreciation for the Commission 's proposal over the agreement reached with Parliament at first reading .
I am particularly encouraged by the following : one , that we have temporarily extended the possibility of using the EGAF , making it an instrument of the European recovery plan to respond to the world financial and economic crisis and support workers who have lost their jobs ; two , that we have reduced the minimum number of redundancies required to be eligible for support from the fund from 1 000 to 500 ; three , that we have raised the EU cofinancing rate in particular cases to 65 % for this stage .
Lastly , I hope , as stated in the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , that the Commission submits an assessment of the effects of the temporary measures by the end of 2011 and gives Parliament an opportunity to revise the legislation if necessary .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( NL ) Mr President , the importance of the renewed social agenda is clear , particularly in view of the current economic crisis .
The rapporteur , Mr Silva Peneda , has put great effort into this report .
We in the Committee on Culture and Education have contributed via this opinion .
Four issues are in the spotlight , namely education and business and the relationship between the two , lifelong learning , the importance of multilingualism , and sport .
First of all , I should like to discuss the relationship between education and business .
Greater dialogue between enterprises , training bodies , trade unions and the voluntary sector is needed , aimed at identifying new competences for the economy .
Adult education plays a role here in developing these skills .
The content of education must correspond to vocational and practical requirements .
There is also a need to promote university-business cooperation .
A bridge should be built between study programmes and business , and the business community should have the possibility to complement study programmes , offer internships and organise open days for students .
Lifelong learning is also very important .
It is crucial to strike a balance between family life , work and learning .
Public and private childcare also plays an important role here , and must be extended so that parents can participate throughout their lives .
Sport is another instrument , and I should just like to mention this from the perspective of the Committee on Culture and Education , which also promotes sport .
Sport promotes the development of values such as fairness , solidarity , respect for the rules and team spirit , and is also important for health .
It is important to encourage the Member States on these points .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( EL ) Mr President , I drafted the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality on the report by Mrs Lambert on the active inclusion of persons excluded from the labour market , whom I also congratulate on her willingness to include the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality as fully as possible .
Gender equality and respect for the principle of nondiscrimination in general are basic preconditions to active inclusion in the labour market and the social integration which must accompany it .
In particular , I consider it important that emphasis is placed on support for family members of all ages , intergenerational solidarity and the help which must be given to vulnerable groups of the population in the difficult times which a family may go through , so that it can be useful to society at all times , without difficult circumstances in its life leaving their mark .
That is why the transition from one situation to another is very important and must be supported using means supplied by the state , by social agencies , by the social partners and by the voluntary sector , so that society feels solidarity and mutual responsibility for all its members .
I hope that Mrs Lambert 's report will give momentum to the motion for a resolution , as also corrected by my political group , so that it does not only include income support , but also includes overall support for dignified living conditions which cover major and minor participants and non-participants in the labour market .
Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are now debating three reports .
The European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats have provided the rapporteur for two of these reports and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance for one of them .
I say this because it demonstrates clearly that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament does not have a monopoly on socio-political topics , but that these topics concern us all .
As vice-chairman of the PPE-DE Group , I would especially like to thank Mr Silva Peneda and Mrs Stauner for their work , because they are credible representatives of the European social and life model of the social market economy and are important champions within our group of a deepened social dialogue .
These reports should ensure that European Union policy can react effectively to the economic and social challenges .
They aim to give more people opportunities , to improve access to high-quality services and to show solidarity to those for whom the changes have negative consequences .
Everything we want from the Community must also appeal to a majority at home , because we do not have the authority to do everything that people expect of us .
Unfortunately , in social policy we cannot do everything yet .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon is a great step forwards .
Full employment will become a goal , the sustainable social market economy will become the European social and economic model and fundamental social rights will be enshrined in the treaty .
However , not only do we have too little authority , we have too little money .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to submit a proposal for a financial transaction tax by the end of the year and to put forward a concrete European initiative with two goals .
The first is to use the proceeds for the specific purpose of creating sustainable jobs , as anything which creates work , creates social stability and security .
The second is to put a clear European project on the table for the G20 Summit in the spring .
Now employees who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis can also be supported and we have increased the cofinancing to 65 % .
Although there is room for improvement , how would the future look without our European social model ?
We must strengthen it - as Mr Silva Peneda urges - by strengthening fundamental labour legislation through the establishment of minimum standards in employment rights , by fighting discrimination , by strengthening social cohesion , by modernising social insurance systems , by fighting poverty , by promoting the transition to self-employment and by strengthening the Structural Funds .
We are taking a step forwards , but we still have a lot to do .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I shall focus on what was intended to be a summit , but did not turn out to be one .
Jean-Claude Juncker said yesterday that we are now going over from a financial and economic crisis to a social crisis .
We are also heading for an employment crisis .
We shall have higher unemployment over the next few years , with perhaps 26 million inhabitants unemployed in the EU in a year or so .
This is the situation , and in these circumstances the Council and the governments of the centre and of the right have decided to downgrade the employment summit to a troika meeting .
Several of the leaders will not attend this meeting .
This indicates that the Council and the governments are not giving priority to the issue of employment .
I share the view of Commissioner Barroso .
The Commission wanted a summit .
Is this an unavoidable development ?
No , it is not .
More needs to be done and in a more coordinated way , and something needs to be done now .
It is a question of environmentally sound investments which are long term , but which also provide jobs in the short term .
It is a question of energy efficiency in homes , which provides jobs now , but which also makes homes better for the future .
It is a question of lifelong learning , which has never met the objectives of strengthening Europe for the future .
If we do this now , people will receive the necessary training and it will strengthen Europe for the future and reduce unemployment .
They can be replaced by young people who study and who get a foothold on the labour market instead of becoming unemployed .
We can invest in consumption aid for the groups that are worst off - pensioners , students and the unemployed .
This will create jobs and it will create consumption .
Mobility is important , as stated at the workshop in Prague .
It is important - extremely important - both in a professional sense and in a geographical sense , but if we do not ensure that there is equal treatment , equal terms and conditions and the right to strike for equal treatment on the European labour market , protectionism will increase .
Therefore , the Commission has a responsibility to amend the Posting of Workers Directive .
In summary , something can be done now , unemployment can be reduced , Europe can be strengthened for the future .
These two things go together , but far too little is being done at the moment .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would really like to congratulate everyone sincerely on a report , which we can indeed call a report for the people of Europe .
Europeans often ask what we do here in the European Parliament , what good we do for them .
I think that it is one of those reports which are designed to help people and I would therefore like to congratulate all of my colleagues , Mrs Stauner and the Commission , and the Council , for reaching an agreement at first reading .
This report will be adopted tomorrow , in a particularly speedy procedure , not just because it is important for people , but because this fund is now designed for the crisis , so that people who have lost jobs can receive support .
I have just one question .
Has this report really been prepared for the people and will the aid get through to them ?
As you will recall , Commissioner , during the great debate in our Committee , we , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , said we would support this aid for the people , as long as it does not simply go to bureaucrats or other structures .
Unfortunately , a year of experience has taught me that in my country , as I see it , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is used the same way as the European Social Fund , namely for retraining .
It is hardly used or not used at all for the other intended measures .
We need money to reach the people , so they can be supported , it is wrong that the administration , job and training centres take the money themselves , train people , but then the people fail to find work .
I would like to draw your attention to this , Commissioner , to check whether this regulation is working properly in the Member States .
Has this regulation been correctly transposed into national law ?
Often legislation does not allow the regulation to be implemented .
You will say that this is a matter for the Member States ' governments , but I say no !
We were elected by the people ; we are not representatives of our governments .
We were elected to defend the interests of European citizens , to defend our peoples ' interests and to ensure that money reaches the people , not the bureaucrats .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I thank the rapporteurs for the tremendous amount of work they have done on these reports , coming , as we said in an earlier debate , at a very important time when people are looking for answers and looking for ideas on how to move forward .
I suppose in many ways these can be divided up into four separate yet linked areas .
Firstly with regard to education and training , whether it is lifelong learning , the upskilling of existing skills or providing new skills to people .
Secondly , the whole area of innovation , and about looking to see where jobs are going to come from in the future and making sure people have the skills and the training for that .
Thirdly , the whole area of sustainability , with people who are already at work given protection and certain support now to make sure that they do not lose their jobs and then have to go through the cycle of retraining and upskilling in another year or two 's time to get another job ; to maintain the existing jobs that are there .
Fourthly , to try and anticipate , if that is possible , where we need to move in the future .
If colleagues think back to the early 1990s , when we had the whole Delors Plan with the white paper on the social package and so on , this was considered groundbreaking and innovative .
It contained many difficult dossiers and many difficult ideas which many people in industry , in particular , were opposed to but also , uniquely , which a lot of people involved in trade unions were against as well .
If our experience since 1994 can show us anything , it is that first of all we must ensure that all social policy is predicated on the basis of delivering results for people - not just merely massaging figures , but actually making people 's lives better .
Secondly , it shows that , no matter how good your training or education or skills may be , there are people who will be caught in unemployment , and they must be guaranteed a safety net and security to allow them to have a proper and decent standard of living .
As well as that , as President Barroso rightly mentioned himself , despite high employment participation levels in many countries in recent years , many people with disabilities , and 74 % in total , were unemployed , despite the fact that they had access to education and training , because of the psychological barriers and blockage that existed .
I am sorry for having gone on so long , but would like to sum up very briefly with the old saying ' give a man a fish and you feed him for a day ; teach a man to fish and you feed him for life ' .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I want to pick up on certain of the aspects from the employment side of things - and not least the context , given that the Spring Summit was at one time supposed to be the ' sustainable development summit ' - and to link that with the Commission document from late last year on new skills and new jobs .
That document mentioned how the transition to low-carbon economies would have an important impact on employment .
It is very important that we remember that and do not lose sight of it in the general discussion that we are having at the moment .
What I would like to see coming out of much of the concern about employment at the moment is a very coherent package as regards new industries and new investment .
We are not seeing this at the moment .
We have an excellent example downstairs at the moment of solar technology and how that is developing in a part of Germany , whereas at the same time we are seeing job losses in the solar sector in Spain and in the wind-turbine sector in the UK .
Just at the point we are looking for new skills in new technologies , we also run the risk of losing them through lack of a clear investment strategy and , indeed , a clear skills development strategy within that .
Therefore , when we talk about many of the issues around retraining and developing skills etc . , we should also be looking at the so-called Just Transition Programme , worked out with the ILO , the ITUC and the UN , because the skills we are looking for at the moment are beginning to change .
We need to develop the skills of those who still have problems with literacy and numeracy and , indeed , IT , but we are also looking for transversal skills - which is something else out of the Commission 's document .
We should also be considering what we do with sectors that have been orphan sectors in terms of skill developments - not least the care sector at the moment - and really look at how we can ensure equality there .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my colleagues from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have touched a raw nerve with their reports and have made it clear how essential joint action by the Member States and the European Union is to ensure that the consequences of the global economic and financial crisis are not borne by those who are worst affected by it , namely , those on the bottom rungs of society 's ladder .
I am therefore also extremely disappointed that the socalled Employment Summit on 7 May is actually nothing more than a farce and it should be extremely embarrassing to all of us who bear responsibility in the European Union that this summit is going under such a name .
In my opinion it shows clearly that current policies still do not reflect the fact that we can only fight the economic and financial crisis if at the same time we also fight poverty , social exclusion , job losses and the ubiquitous fall in labour standards .
The Commission recently presented dramatic figures for employment development and the employment situation both in the European Union and the euro zone .
It is time for consistent action here !
It must be about finally putting a stop to the privatisation of public services - security systems like old-age provisions .
I still do not understand why , at the March Summit , the Commission and the Council were still urging Member States to further privatise pension systems and create pension funds .
This is completely counterproductive - more and more people sink into poverty as a result and it exacerbates the problem of old-age poverty .
We need anti-poverty social security systems , we need a social pact for Europe , as European trade unions have demanded .
The fight against poverty could be a truly humanitarian way to start fighting the economic and financial crisis globally and the European Union is duty bound to do this .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , if globalisation causes redundancies , there will be a shortfall in revenue so the Globalisation Fund will not have the money it wants to spend .
Do not fight globalisation ; join it by encouraging competition within the EU and learn how to compete on world markets .
You want to renew the social agenda via the Working Time Directive , which has two aims .
Firstly , it was supposed to provide more jobs by limiting hours worked so that companies had to take on more staff , but extra staff means the extra cost of social taxes , so unit costs rise .
Small companies then become uncompetitive and lose orders , causing short time or even closure .
Workers then have no job at all .
How social is that ?
Secondly , it was meant to result in more time with the family , but what use is that if the take-home wage is then insufficient ?
How social is it if the family is deprived of some of the nice things in life ?
Let individuals work out their own salvation .
Many countries have a minimum wage structure and I support that .
We do not wish to see the social ills of people exploited , but the EU has now destroyed even that with one of its own institutions , the ECJ , where the rulings on Laval and other cases ruined Member States ' minimum wage policies .
How social is it to overturn the way national parliaments have tried to protect workers ?
These measures are nothing less than an attempt to establish a Soviet-style command economy , and we all know how well that worked .
( FR ) Mr President , ' to err is human , to persist is diabolical ' .
Hearing the debates today , all I can say is that actually , despite the huge economic , financial , social , and demographic impact of the crisis we are experiencing , neither the European institutions nor the Heads of State or Government have grasped the full extent of the tragedy , and of the consequences for us all .
A minute ago , I heard the President-in-Office of the Council telling us that the unemployed need to be able to improve their skills , and that we need to motivate people more in their search for jobs .
Do you really believe though , that the hundreds of thousands of unemployed victims of this crisis are in this situation because they are unfit to work ?
All of this is quite clearly the fruit of an ideological and doctrinal choice , of a kind of group thinking , of economic theory , which is the economic theory of the free market and free trade .
Finally , the European Union , which promotes the concept of freedom of movement of capital , goods , services and persons , would like to globalise this economic choice , this doctrine ; however this is economically and socially criminal .
We need to achieve global international competition .
If we are not capable of implementing a policy of social preference via economic preference , a policy of social security via economic security , if we are not capable of implementing a trade protection policy , well then , ladies and gentlemen , we are going to deliver what remains of our farmers , our craftsmen and our industries to the law of the globalisation jungle .
Within this House , there are the liberal globalists , the socio-globalists , and the alter-globalists .
I am proud to be amongst the anti-globalists , those who want to win back the internal market , those who want to apply the rule of national and Community preference , and the rule of national and Community protection , in order to serve our people .
( FR ) Mr President , I am happy to be here today to defend the revision of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , because I believe that due to the financial and economic crisis , and the ensuing social crisis that we are facing , it is important to defend jobs .
If we are to defend the future of our workers , we of course need to offer them professional mobility , so as to allow them to better adapt to the changing needs of business , both now and in the future .
Economic recovery , the future of employment , the competitiveness of our countries , all these depend on the development of employees ' skills , as it is they who set the standards for our businesses .
Of course , the first step required in the fight against social exclusion is integration into the labour market .
We must promote this social model , and work together to promote this ' human ' capital .
All workers have the right to work .
Our political efficiency will be measured by the speed with which we take action to ensure that mobility , adaptability , and the validation of acquired experience , can become strong levers for all the men and women of our European countries in the future , for all the men and women employed in our businesses .
This is what we care about , and it is these things that have guided the work of our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .

- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Commissioner Špidla was right to suggest that we on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs should review this European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , which came into being on 1 January 2007 .
Parliament should adopt this proposal unamended as it aims to extend the scope of the EGF to situations of economic and financial crisis .
Our committee chairman , Jan Andersson , was right to propose a text adopted by a large majority on the Committee on Employment in order to convey to all the committees , particularly the Committee on Budgets , that it was important to communicate with the Member States , so that every employee , every member of a trade union , and every member of the public can be informed in their own language of the existence of this European Fund .
Thanks to this trialogue , and because a large majority on the Committee on Employment rejected all the amendments , we can be proud of ourselves due to : cofinancing of 65 % by the EU and 35 % by the Member States ; the number of redundancies required to benefit from the European Fund reduced to 500 workers ; redundancies counted from the announcement of the company 's redundancy programme ; intervention by the European Fund due to the consequences of the economic crisis ; exceptional arrangements more favourable to the application of the Fund , which will continue until the end of 2011 ; and finally a period of 24 months for implementation of the EGF .
Our committee was right , but we must go further .
I would ask all the Member States to do everything in their power to ensure that all workers who find themselves in difficulty can benefit from these provisions as quickly as possible .
I would ask Commissioner Špidla if this amendment can apply from 1 May 2009 , provided that tomorrow we have the large majority needed to adopt this proposal at first reading .
Let us crown our legislative term with the adoption of this amendment to the European Fund , which will allow us to help our struggling workers .
What does a redundant worker want ?
He wants to know what his life will be like at the end of the month .
He wants to know what he will do with his life tomorrow .
He wants to know if he can utilise the knowledge that he acquired while he was in work .
Think about the fact that he might need further training in order to advance into the future .
At the end of this legislative term , I therefore address all those who are members of the Committee on Employment , whatever side they sit on : please make sure that this text can be applied immediately .
Mr President , as the shadow rapporteur on the active inclusion report , I shall concentrate mainly on that one .
I would like to congratulate Jean Lambert , the rapporteur on that report .
She has brought forward an excellent report .
I am delighted that most of my amendments got through the committee , particularly those on anti-discrimination .
As you know , it is something dear to my heart .
People are excluded from the labour market for many reasons , but it seems to me absolutely incredible that it is still happening on the grounds of disability , age , religion or belief , or sexual orientation - despite the Employment Directive of 2000 .
The problem is that it is not being properly implemented across all Member States and we must be even more vigilant in making sure that we are monitoring it properly .
I am also pleased that my amendment on mandatory retirement age was accepted .
It has always seemed wrong to me that someone reaches a certain age and is then thrown on the scrapheap .
However , even if people are not excluded from work but cannot get to work because they cannot get the access they need , that leads to exclusion as well .
That is why I am pleased that my amendment welcoming a new comprehensive anti-discrimination directive was also accepted by the committee .
I regret , however , that the PPE-DE Group has tabled an alternative resolution .
I believe this has been done mainly to remove any reference to a new directive on anti-discrimination , as I know most of them are opposed to it .
It seems amazing to me that anyone would wish to deny people their basic rights at EU level just because of their age , disability , religion or belief or sexual orientation .
The other areas I sought to address were the blurring of economic migration with asylum-seeking and of economic migration and asylum-seeking with illegal immigration - all distinct , separate issues which must be dealt with differently .
I believe that asylum-seekers , for instance , should be allowed to work while they are waiting for their asylum application to be processed .
This would take away from their reliance on benefits .
We also need to do more to integrate people with mental health problems and those who have alcohol or drug problems .
Finally , a quick word on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I am glad we have had a speedy conclusion on this .
It is important that the remit of this fund is widened to include workers who were made redundant through the economic downturn , not just globalisation , and that the number of redundancies needed would be 500 instead of 1 000 .
This is extremely important for people in my West Midlands constituency , as elsewhere in the UK .
( PL ) Madam President , 16 % of Europeans are at risk of poverty .
The crisis is producing a series of group redundancies .
Lack of work is the main cause of deep poverty .
Poverty promotes social exclusion and restricts access to education and health care .
In spite of the economic crisis , we want to preserve European social models which foster social cohesion and solidarity , and this includes tackling poverty .
Economic independence guarantees dignity .
This is why it is so important to protect jobs and incomes , and also to improve professional qualifications which increase mobility in the job market .
One thing which allows us to feel that we have real control over our lives is the ability to participate in decision making .
Therefore it is essential to respect the opinions of social partners , the process of social dialogue , group agreements and social settlements .
We should work together to ensure the existence of conditions which enable people to earn enough to participate in the life of society and to support their family , especially where they have many children .
We should also tackle discrimination in the job market , especially as it affects people with disabilities .
The fact that during the crisis barely 3 % of the funds available in the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund have been used is an indictment of politicians .
I congratulate the rapporteurs .
( DE ) Madam President , the Lisbon agenda provided for a European home built on three pillars : the economic , social and environmental pillars .
We have often criticised the fact that the economic pillar is overvalued compared to the other two .
The social agenda has significantly strengthened the social pillar .
Our thanks therefore to rapporteur Mr Silva Peneda and the majority in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We now have a document before us which is significantly better than the Commission 's original vague proposal .
In the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we Greens made more than 40 amendment proposals and so contributed to a more concrete improvement of the socio-political core statements .
Social policy involves more !
It must consist of more than just a few general demands for more jobs .
There needs to be more fairness in the distribution of goods , a committed fight against poverty , effective gender equality , social integration instead of exclusion , international solidarity , restructuring , respect for fundamental rights and human rights - including towards immigrants - concern for health and the environment , so that working and living conditions can be improved , and finally there needs to be clear EU directives , which cannot be undermined by the European Court of Justice .
Much is now contained in this report which will be passed during this Parliament 's final plenary sitting .
We can only hope that the Council and the Commission will also take these demands seriously .
Only then can a social and solidly united Europe be built , a Europe which the EU 's citizens expect and will happily accept .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will focus on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Our discussion of this fund is taking place in the midst of an extremely powerful and dramatic economic and social crisis , as other Members have already mentioned .
Although it is a good idea for the fund to be used more directly as part of measures to cushion the blow of unemployment , as we have been saying , we need to have a deeper discussion of its role and the context of the instruments required to tackle the crisis .
Firstly , we must take care to ensure that the emergency does not proliferate and therefore make it clear , for example , that whoever takes public money from Europe is obliged not to dismiss employees .
Then we also need European crisis intervention measures to guide structural choices at this particular juncture in the automotive sector ; this concerns Italy and our relationship with the United States and Germany .
Secondly , we need industrial and environmental policies , but also cohesion policies , that put an end to dumping within Europe .
Thirdly , the resources are woefully inadequate , especially when compared with those deployed by the US government , for example .
Buffers are no use : we need a radical change in policies .
Madam President , I welcome the changes to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Although reducing the number of redundancies needed to qualify for this Fund from 1 000 to 500 is an improvement , the large number still discriminates against small countries and against workers who lose their jobs in smaller numbers .
In my constituencies , those who have lost their jobs due to the closure of two companies - Waterford Crystal and Dell - could qualify .
That is very good , and I call on the Irish Government to immediately apply for funding on their behalf .
However , thousands have lost their jobs because of global economic conditions and it is unfair that they are disqualified because they do not work for big multinationals but for small and medium-sized businesses .
I suggest that we could make this scheme fairer by either abandoning the numerical criteria of 500 jobs or by looking at job loss by category or area , not company .
This way , we could extend this funding to 500 workers who have lost their jobs across a sector like farming , food processing or IT , or in a specific area , like Tipperary , Waterford , Limerick , Cork or Kerry .
A further obstacle for workers trying to access the Globalisation Fund is that it is only available to workers if their government is willing to apply for it and pay the national contribution .
What happens to workers whose governments will not apply ?
In this I am thinking of the Irish Government , which has not applied for the Fund so far .
The very countries whose economies are hardest hit and which have the highest unemployment rates may be the countries that can least afford to pay the necessary contribution to help their workers , and yet they are the countries that need it the most .

( ES ) Madam President , I am going to talk about the renewed social agenda .
Allow me to begin by sincerely thanking the rapporteur Mr Silva Peneda for his work ; given the contribution he has made to this House on matters of social policy and employment I think we could talk of the ' Silva Peneda legacy ' .
Madam President , mistrust and fear have taken root in our societies : unemployment is growing and in my country is doing so in dramatic fashion .
We have to turn this situation around and the social agenda should help achieve that .
Economic progress and social progress are not divergent paths ; quite the opposite : if we want to stimulate growth and provide more , better quality jobs then we need to and must implement the social agenda , starting with all that inspires the greatest consensus .
There is no time to lose ; we must not entrench ourselves in defensive positions but rather move beyond local , short-term interests and look to future generations .
Social Europe should be an area that unites us and not divides us , because we are talking about common European interests .
The social agenda cannot be separated from a renewed Lisbon Strategy , because economic success sustains social benefits and social benefits also contribute to economic success .
In the coming years , Europe is facing a period of stagnation and the progressive ageing of its population .
We cannot bury our heads in the sand ; we need to modernise our social model , precisely in order to improve it and make it fairer and more sustainable .
Madam President , there are structural weaknesses that are a heavy burden and prevent us from moving forward .
We must rid ourselves of that burden and implement the social agenda .
( RO ) The European Union has been admired for a long time for its social model .
However , we have been observing for a good number of years the undermining of the right to work and social rights .
A country containing all the poor in the EU would have the same number of inhabitants as Germany .
New social phenomena are appearing .
After the last enlargement , it seems that social Europe is developing at two rates , with both of them going backwards .
The Commission has put forward a modest social agenda in response to this .
At the moment , a financial crisis has been unleashed , with an economic impact that is anything but modest , while the danger has increased of a deterioration in the situation of those already at risk .
Against this backdrop , one main principle must be applied : social rights and objectives take priority over economic freedoms in the event of any conflict .
We must counter a long tradition which states that wars and crises are caused by the rich , but are paid for by the poor .
Let us reject the idea , cherished by some , that profits are divided privately , but losses are shared by society .
We need a European solidarity and cohesion policy , backed up with specific legislative , fiscal and financial measures .
However , to achieve this , we need political will , and this political will is expressed in the following key concepts : active inclusion , jobs , intelligent distribution of work , education , equal treatment and pay , as well as sustainable , green development .
Signing and implementing an agreement for social progress and employment would be proof of this political will .
We cannot wait for it !
Madam President , may I start by thanking the Presidency-in-Office for their opening comments - comments that were far-sighted , balanced and sensible , adjectives that we have come increasingly to associate with the Czech Presidency .
May I also thank Commission President Barroso for his remarks , particularly to remind us of the importance of jobs and especially of the need to focus on those unfortunate people who do not yet have one .
Finally , both of them referred quite rightly to the excellent work of all three rapporteurs , but I would just like to single out their reference to Mr Silva Peneda 's report , because they called it ' ambitious and far-reaching ' .
It is , and it needs to be because of the importance of this particular subject .
Mr Silva Peneda gave us various priorities for what we must do .
Can I just add a couple of things that , ideally , we should not do .
We need to avoid two things in particular : one is over-rigid labour markets which paralyse opportunity , promote unemployment and simply encourage the black economy .
We see this particularly at the moment in Spain and we have to learn the lessons of the Socialist failures there .
Secondly , we need to avoid exclusive concentration on protecting those still in work at the expense of those who seek it and those employers who seek to provide it .
These are the groups who really need our help .
Finally , can I say that all of us clearly have different views on all sides of this House , but one thing we have in common is that we all care about the issues , which is why so many of us have been overrunning our speaking time .
I am delighted we are having this key debate .
I personally am delighted that my final speech as coordinator , my final speech in this plenary , should be on such an important subject .
May I wish all those colleagues who are returning every good wish and may I particularly single out Stephen Hughes .
One day , Stephen , you will miss me and I shall certainly miss you , but even when I am not here I shall be watching you !
We will really miss you and be thinking of you .
Madam President , no doubt he will be lobbying us too !
It does not augur well that some Member States do not want the Employment Summit this Thursday .
Nor does it augur well for the future development of a social market economy that a minority of Member States blocked a compromise on a revised Working Time Directive last week .
If Europe 's commitment to a social market economy is real , we must integrate economic , social and environmental policies as equal elements of the whole package .
The multiple crises we face right now will not be resolved simply by fixing up the banks with massive amounts of taxpayers ' savings to the exclusion of our citizens ' needs as social beings .
It must go beyond the open method of coordination to coordinate policies on pensions , employment , education , health and , indeed , the caring services .
However , some of our Member States are clearly incapable of thinking outside the economic box , which considers social and environmental policy costly luxuries to be dropped as a restriction on the market .
That must change urgently if we are to ensure progress towards our objective of a better society .
( DE ) Madam President , the European social models face great challenges .
In particular against the backdrop of the current financial crisis , measures at European level must be coordinated .
I would therefore also like to thank the rapporteurs very much for their excellent work .
Not only must we take immediate measures to regulate the financial market , we must also coordinate sociopolitical measures and create a social framework .
Here we should also bear in mind the competences of the Member States .
I am in favour of giving priority to creating and boosting employment at this time of crisis and also of pressing ahead with the realisation of the flexicurity principle .
However , I refuse to accept the demand for the introduction of minimum wages in all Member States , as called for in paragraph 14 of the report by Mr Silva Peneda , whom I would otherwise like to thank for his work .
This demand , which relates to a decision that should be left to the sole discretion of Member States , infringes the principle of subsidiarity .
Labour market regulations and systems vary greatly from one Member State to another .
In my opinion , every person must be guaranteed sufficient income to be able to lead a decent life .
This can be achieved through a minimum income with the help of additional state social benefits .
What level would the minimum wage be pegged at ?
At the Romanian level perhaps ?
There it is around EUR 72 a month .
I particularly support the idea that we must secure a basic income for everyone , but I refer back to Member States ' competences for establishing appropriate limits .
I declare myself in favour of a social Europe .
Europe must create a social framework , but at the same time consider the powers of the Member States .
Madam President , we were originally promised a full-blown employment summit this week but , instead , what we have is a half-day troika .
What a dreadful message that sends to European citizens , who are joining unemployment queues at an alarming rate !
What a negative message it sends to the many more who are in fear of losing their jobs !
Projections show that by 2010 up to 27 million could be unemployed in the EU , and I fear it could be even worse .
I very much hope the June Summit will devote at least one full day to looking at how we respond to this challenge .
Instead of pretending that the answer lies only at national level , we need strong , coherent , European-wide responses , coordinating actions at the European , national and regional levels .
We need urgent action to retain viable jobs wherever possible .
Lay-offs should be a last resort : intelligent work-sharing and reskilling should be used instead .
We need to invest to create smart green jobs in the knowledge-driven , low-carbon economy .
We need to invest to give workers the skills to work in that new economy .
We need strong , active labour market policies to quickly reintegrate workers laid off and we need strong and viable social protection systems to support those who find themselves unemployed through no fault of their own .
That is more than enough to fill a full day at the June Summit .
This half-day troika is a pathetic response .
And finally , Philip , I will miss you - a bit like a toothache !
( Laughter )
( CS ) Madam President , along with the collapse of financial markets , the growth in unemployment is one of the two main problems arising from the current economic crisis .
I firmly believe that if the European Union wishes to tackle this growth , it must avoid any form of protectionism .
I also regard it as crucial to coordinate individual measures within the European Union .
There is a need for measures to motivate people who become unemployed to try to find new jobs .
In this context , I take a positive view of the proposal that people who have lost their jobs as a result of the current economic crisis should be able to draw funds rapidly from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The question , however , is whether we are going too far with the amendments to the rules of the Globalisation Fund .
In my opinion , the newly proposed 75 % cofinancing level is too high .
The cooperation of the Member States is needed here , and let us not forget the need to simplify the administration of the fund .
Ladies and gentlemen , we surely agree that maintaining employment and creating new job opportunities in the wake of the financial and economic crisis is one of the key tasks of the European Union .
In this context , the forthcoming EU summit on employment should clearly establish a common framework and specific proposals , and should also bring to a close the discussion on changes to the Globalisation Fund .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when the Commission 's social agenda was first discussed last year , I said I thought that the programme lacked ambition , that it was too little , too late .
I should like to thank Mr Silva Peneda for his cooperation in this field of late .
I think his report shows that , at all events , the European Parliament wants to see a great deal more ambition in this field .
At the start , when the idea of the European Union was born , it was clear that we wanted to base our social policy on a regulatory framework found in almost all Member States , namely sound labour law to guarantee that no one falls by the wayside and collective bargaining to safeguard workers ' position in the labour market .
We have now had to add to this the social protection of the vulnerable in our society .
Despite the growth there has been in Europe , we have seen a new phenomenon : that of the working poor .
I should also like to thank Mr Silva Peneda for including this in his report .
. - ( MT ) It is an honour for me to have worked in the two areas that we have discussed .
I would like to warmly thank the rapporteurs and all those who were involved who helped us reach the position we have today .
We must , before anything else , defend those workers who unfortunately were laid off as a result of this crisis , and I believe that today it is easier to help these people re-enter the labour market .
This evening we also agreed to do our utmost to create more jobs in Europe .
We can create more jobs , not , as the Socialists wish , by restricting overtime hours for workers .
On the contrary , we want the workers to decide for themselves .
We , as politicians , cannot dictate the amount of overtime hours one can work .
This decision has to be left up to the worker .
Therefore , yes , following Commissioner Almunia 's statement that that we will be facing a labour crisis in the euro zone , we must do everything in our power to create more jobs and better jobs for all European workers .
Madam President , I warmly welcome the revision of the criteria governing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
We are now at a time of deep economic crisis , the deepest since the end of the Second World War .
We therefore need innovative solutions to tackle the enormous economic problems we are faced with .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is one such example .
I was the first Irish Member of this House to identify the possibility to deploy these funds in the recent job crises in Limerick , Waterford and Tralee , three important locations in my own constituency .
I therefore welcome the work of the rapporteurs to make the criteria for application more flexible in the light of the economic crisis .
Special mention should be made of the new ratio of funding between the Commission and Member States , plus the temporary lowering of the threshold for unemployment from 1 000 to 500 .
I believe that these reforms will send a strong signal from the heart of Europe to those unfortunate enough to be buffeted by the gale-force winds of economic crisis that there is help available to them to help themselves retrain and upskill their way to future prosperity .
( ET ) I also support the reorganisation of the globalisation fund .
In my home country , Estonia , this fund has not been used , and when I inquired why that was , I was told that the conditions were very stringent and that the limit , which until now was 1 000 people , made it impossible .
We do not have any companies of that size , but smaller ones have indeed gone bankrupt .
Reducing the limit to 500 would thus also definitely give Estonia - where the unemployment rate is already very high - opportunities , and the changing of the percentage of financing required would also be very favourable .
Thus I once again welcome the changes that have been made regarding this fund .

( RO ) I too would like to welcome as being particularly useful - and I will be supporting them with my vote - the proposals for transforming the European Global Adjustment Fund into an effective instrument for combating the most painful impact of the economic crisis , namely , job losses .
It was not appropriate that this fund can currently be accessed only in situations where jobs were lost due to company relocation , a scenario regularly encountered in developed countries .
The proposed amendments will allow less developed Member States , which includes Romania , to qualify for this fund .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , first of all let me express my thanks for this useful debate here .
I think the debate was very important and constructive , just with regard to the merits of the issues .
I think we are benefiting simply from the fact that this debate is very timely , immediately before the meeting which will take place on Thursday in Prague .
So let me thank you for all your contributions .
I think nothing is going to be omitted or forgotten .
I think this debate will contribute to the outcome of the summit to the same extent as all the preparatory work that we carried out with the Commission and which materialised in the form of those three important workshops in Stockholm , Madrid and Prague .
To those who were talking about the size or the scope of the meeting : yes , originally we had intended to have a larger summit , but we have to be aware of the general situation in the area of employment .
It is an area where the national competences are very important and the Community contribution to this is not the only instrument which we have at stake .
I said this in my opening remarks in which I set out some of our hopes for this week 's summit .
We should not lose sight of the fact that , notwithstanding the European Employment Strategy , employment policy remains essentially a Member State responsibility .
A key element of the strategy in place since 1997 has been the role of mutual learning in the search for a solution to shared problems in the employment area .
This approach remains crucial today as we face one of the worst economic crises in recent times and also has its part to play in this week 's summit .
But , over and above measures taken at national level , the Union itself has a role to play and it is in this context that full use should be made of the available financial instruments , not least the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Fund , in the process of being amended at this moment , with of course Parliament 's agreement , to extend its scope to cover job losses resulting from the current crisis .
This is exactly what we want to achieve , and I think that we have reason to believe that the outcome of the meeting in Prague in the presence of the Commission , the Presidency , the upcoming presidencies and the social partners will be able to produce results in the form of recommendations and suggestions .
Then we will again have the opportunity to meet as 27 at the European Council in June to generate the decisions .
So it is our hope that , with the help of the European social partners and on the basis of the preparatory works in the form of these three workshops as well as this debate here , the European Employment Summit will succeed in identifying further steps which can be taken as a matter of urgency to respond to the serious situation which currently faces our citizens and to help us to create a Union which is stronger and also more competitive in future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , during my five years of work in the Commission I have had a number of opportunities to meet with rapporteurs , and the quality of their reports therefore comes as no surprise to me .
It is clear that we are meeting at a time when Europe and the whole world are facing a crisis .
This crisis is often compared to the crisis of the 1930s , and there are often fears that it will have similar consequences , and certainly it is a serious crisis .
However , a number of things have changed in comparison with the earlier crisis .
We have the European Union , and the continent of Europe is not filled with mutual tension and hatred .
There is the European social model , which has developed a very comprehensive system of social protection , and this is a substantial change .
I think there is also a progressive increase in the will and the ability to act jointly , because now , for the first time , Europe has responded to crisis in a coordinated way with its plan for economic renewal , by using the power to coordinate at Community level and at the level of individual Member States .
It is also clear that if we are talking about a crisis , we are thinking mainly about unemployment and its social consequences .
The Commission regards the issue of employment and unemployment as an agenda priority and proposes that it should be a priority on the agenda of the EU as a whole .
A number of Members have raised the criticism that the original aim of the summit of Heads of State or Government has changed to a different format .
The President of the Commission has clearly expressed the view backed by the Commission , and this represents the original idea .
However , I wish to say that the Prague summit is an exceptional event .
It is being prepared in an exceptional way .
It will include participants who have never taken part in such events before , and it is also a step on the way to the European Council .
This means that the issue of employment and unemployment will be addressed at the level of prime ministers and presidents .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have debated a number of individual issues within the scope of the social agenda and during the debate a number of questions have arisen in connection with changes to individual funds .
I would like to point out that the proposed agenda was mostly prepared before the onset of the crisis , but in spite of this I want to make it clear that it was and still is a good basis for facing the crisis .
It also provides a good basis for actions to be taken after the crisis .
I think the European social model is more than just a reaction to the crisis , however serious this may be .
It is a process and it is a very long-term political and social strategy , and it is precisely that long-term aspect that is built into the social agenda .
On the question of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the issue of changes to the European Social Fund , I would like to express my thanks for the excellent cooperation , because the dialogue has been so constructive that the achievement of our aims is within reach at this meeting , and I consider that to be extremely important .
We have a saying in Czech that ' he who gives quickly gives twice ' .
I do not know if our ancestors established this through precise calculations , but a quick response clearly counts for something , and is more helpful than hesitation .
Some specific questions were raised in the debate , which I would like to answer .
The first of these is the question put by Mr Cottigny , concerning 1 May this year , or the month of May this year and the use of the fund .
I would like to make it clear that all applications submitted after 1 May this year under the proposal which is in its closing stage will be processed according to the new rules .
Mrs Juknevičienwas concerned that money from the fund often fails to reach those who need it .
I think that effectiveness should always be monitored .
I have had the opportunity to visit East Karelia , where there was discussion about using the fund to help people who had lost their jobs through restructuring at Nokia , and I can say from this experience that discussions clearly showed that the great majority of those who had lost their jobs considered the assistance given to them by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to be necessary , rapid assistance which was useful to them .
At the time I was there , 60 % of them had already found new jobs .
Of course that was not everyone , but even so , it was clear that this mechanism was working .
Another question which was raised was that of cofinancing .
Of course , Mr Vlasák is right in saying that cofinancing plays a significant role ; nevertheless , I think an increase in the level of cofinancing in a time of crisis was the right proposal , because some states which are in a very difficult situation have serious problems in obtaining cofinancing .
In order to facilitate this , we proposed a level of 75 % .
Following the debate in Parliament , the proposal has been reduced to 65 % , and I think this is a substantial step which genuinely facilitates use of the fund .
I would also like to underline something that was not so explicitly emphasised in the debate , although the European Social Fund is a well-established institution which helps millions of people annually , and helps them very effectively .
In the case of this fund , too , we have jointly amended the rules in discussion with you , and I think this will facilitate its use and effectiveness .
Mrs Lambert emphasised the importance of social inclusion .
I think it should be stressed that our line is absolutely clear .
The European social model is a model of an active society , where activity in the labour market is the key element .
However , it is not a model that accepts only those who are participating in the labour market , because a large proportion of our citizens are , for various reasons , not participating in the labour market and yet it is very important that they should have the opportunity to participate actively in society and that they should play an active part .
Mr Silva Peneda emphasised social dialogue .
I can only agree with his view that social dialogue is , at this particular time , more important than ever .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that in my view , the social agenda and the employment agenda are gaining in importance and that this is a process which is progressively making itself felt in all EU strategies , as it is in all of the proposals for changes to the long-term plans and outlook of the European Union .
I would like to thank you and to end by expressing my deep conviction that the European social model is a model which calls for European integration ; it is not a model which could be developed and maintained within the borders of national states acting on their own , and I would therefore like to conclude by saying that in my view , Europe and European integration are an essential precondition for the further development of the European social model .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to add to the Commissioner 's remarks on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
The EGF is also part of the European social model .
He was right to say , ' a stitch in time saves nine ' .
We had intensive discussions with the Commission and I would like to stress that in this case our reaction is swift , but high calibre in terms of content and quality .
It is a compromise which I and my colleagues are very proud of .
I would like to summarise a few thoughts from the discussion : as far as the EGF is concerned , it turns out that thankfully there is broad consensus on revision .
I would like to direct a small appeal to the Commission : please do not only take residual funds out of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) for the EGF , but collect other residual funds from the budget .
To those of us interested in social policy , it would of course be ideal if the ESF funds were spent entirely on ESF objectives and the EGF funds came from other residual funds ; then we would be able to do twice as much good for workers .
To my fellow Members Mrs Lynne , Mrs Sinnott and Mr Burke I will say , by way of example , that the EGF can achieve a lot , but it certainly cannot solve all regional problems .
That is quite clear , and that is not its purpose .
Member States still have some responsibility .
I would like to make another appeal to the Commission : perhaps you can avoid exhausting the funds for technical assistance - 0.35 % - which are at your disposal in accordance with the regulation .
Workers would then benefit even more .
The comment by Mr Naranjo Escobar was very accurate and concerns a task for the future .
In view of the economic and financial crisis , we must also revise the Lisbon Strategy .
I would like to direct a comment to Mr Hughes : an employment summit would surely be a fine thing , but I say to you in all honesty , a troika meeting is also appropriate if it produces something rational .
We do not need to have a summit for the sake of it .
We need good and swift results !
At this stage of the debate , I want to make three comments .
Firstly , I want to say that social policy is not the monopoly of any one political force in this House .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the political force that I represent in this House , has contributed to social policy during this legislative term in what I regard as a very decisive way .
I played a very active part in various reports , on various subjects , in particular the review of the European Social Fund , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , flexicurity , the report on the European Social Model , the Working Time Directive , and now the European Social Agenda .
From my experience of this legislative term , I am convinced that we can achieve broad consensus on questions of social policy .
However , in addition to broad consensus on the design of policies - which I regard as having been achieved - we must also be more demanding in terms of achieving consensus on political action .
In this respect , the feeling that I have is that , in the Commission and in the European institutions , we should have developed many more incentives so that financial resources could be allocated at local and regional level , subject to there being convergence between the various bodies and actions so that social problems can actually be solved .
My third comment concerns the problem of trust .
Trust cannot be decreed or legislated for ; it depends to a large extent on the behaviour of the institutions .
I believe that a culture of cooperation in the design of policies will help to restore trust .
I believe that , during this legislative term , here in the European Parliament , we have set a good example of how to cooperate , and the result of this work on the Renewed Social Agenda is clearly based on this idea .
I agree with the Commissioner when he says that social dialogue has to be at the heart of the debate .
However , more than just social dialogue , I believe that we are now at a stage where social policy must be at the heart of the political debate .
I am therefore very much in favour of the words spoken here in this House regarding the summit on employment and social policies .
I feel that it is now absolutely appropriate for this matter to be discussed .
Finally , this is my last speech in this Parliament and I want to thank - on behalf of the President - all the Members , and the Commissioner and the Commission , for the way in which they have cooperated with me over these five years of intense and exciting activity in this European Parliament . Thank you very much .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I very much regret that some of our dearest colleagues are leaving us at the end of this mandate .
A number of points came up in the debate , not least in relation to anti-discrimination and how important such measures are , even in times of economic downturn .
The point was raised about the work we have done on this issue in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
The issue of mutual support was also raised .
I want to stress at this point that one of the dimensions we raised in the inclusion report was that of the local level , and certain local economy dimensions .
We talk a lot about national and international economies , but the local economy is crucially important : people 's access to banking , even if they are not very well off , to microcredit and to credit unions .
We need to beware of poorer people finding themselves being pushed more and more into debt at very high interest levels through loan sharks and the like .
We need to make sure that this does not happen , as it really eats away at people .
However , in terms of the local authority dimension and the services dimension we talked about as well in connection with the report , another area that the committee particularly wanted to stress was the subject of housing , because , again , in times of economic downturn , there is more and more pressure on people who maybe find themselves unable to afford the housing they are in .
There is therefore going to be a need to concentrate on that level ; we could perhaps use the open method of coordination to look at best practice across Member States .
Finally , I would like to mention the Social Fund .
We are very concerned that this does not get brought into a very narrow dimension about what constitutes employment and preparedness for employment , as we do not want to lose a lot of the imaginative and very productive and interesting schemes that have been helping people for so long find their way into employment from very difficult starting points .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 6 May 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - In a few days , European leaders and stakeholders will meet at the Employment Summit .
Rapidly rising unemployment has become the core problem of the current financial crisis .
It is a deeply human problem : in fact , the biggest social injustice Europe has .
What the Government leaders and politicians need is to address the situation with imagination and concrete measures .
2009 is the year of innovation and creativity .
Europe has to take this opportunity to reduce unemployment .
The best way is to stimulate the creation of new jobs .
The key issue is supporting small and medium-sized businesses .
One practical way is also to ease the bureaucratic rules for applying for European funds .
SMEs create jobs and will be a major instrument for reducing unemployment in the future , provided that we in the EU efficiently support them .
Moreover , Europe has to invest in education , especially in life-long learning .
Unemployment is a big shock to everyone .
First of all , the EU and Member States need to help people to overcome this shock and be prepared for alternative solutions , in order to re-enter the labour market again as soon as possible .
Investing in innovation , research and development and life-long learning is the best way to achieve this .
In spite of every effort we have made since our accession in 2004 , a situation of ' competitive ' poverty has gradually evolved in the EU .
The economic crisis has obviously exacerbated the situation both at Member State level and among ordinary citizens .
The social conflicts arising from this are threatening existing European frameworks .
After all , ordinary citizens rightly expect the European Union 's institutions not only to help the banks , but also to provide them with social security .
Competition on the market , which is contracting due to the crisis , is intensifying both among companies and employees .
The underlying social tensions in the EU are best illustrated by the excessive reactions provoked by the ECJ judgments in connection with the posted workers directive .
Familiarisation with the actual legal situation is crucial to dispelling the groundless fears .
The next Commission should assess the transposition of the Posting Directive in Member States .
Apart from the measures contained in the social package , other legal instruments are required for handling the crisis and resolving tensions .
It may be very difficult to guarantee social peace without a European minimum wage .
The definition of decent work and a decent living and cross-border collective agreements are just some of the issues where the Commission has further work to do .
In the long term , naturally , in order to achieve the social objectives , the Lisbon Treaty and Charter of Fundamental Rights already ratified by 25 Member States may guarantee a wider European remit by establishing equality of economic and social rights but , at the same time , without replacing in any way the package of rapid short-term measures .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGAF ) is an important instrument used by the European Commission to alleviate the economic crisis and provide assistance to the people directly affected .
There are industries or sectors of the economy , such as the financial sector , car industry and sales sector , which are feeling the impact of the crisis more severely as they have been obliged to curtail their activities and make staff redundant , something which we are also noticing in Romania .
According to one survey , during the first quarter of 2009 there were three times as many redundancies recorded as new jobs created across the European Union .
By implementing actions to counter the effects of the global economic crisis , we can also achieve the objective of social , economic and territorial cohesion .
I think that this may be better achieved if the EGAF is targeted at unemployed people who come from the same region or neighbouring regions and even from different Member States , if they share a common border .
On the one hand , we must show solidarity to those who are losing their jobs , while on the other hand , we must help them return to the labour market .
Professional retraining and specialisation according to the areas of development and the specific resources available in each region may help create new jobs .
in writing . - ( ET ) In the present era of global economic crisis ( i.e. the economic recession and increasing unemployment ) , there is a reality in the EU labour market that an increasing number of people will be made redundant , which will further increase the total number of people suffering from poverty and alienation in Europe .
Today it is very important that social involvement and related labour market policies should also be sought through an integrated and united approach within the recovery plan for the European economy .
In addition , Member States should not sacrifice social affairs , health and education in cuts made while reviewing their budgets , because these are precisely the areas that contribute to bringing people at risk of poverty back into society .
It must be recognised that it is often very complicated to connect Member States ' social assistance and active participation in the labour market , especially when the work that can be obtained is temporary , seasonal or parttime , and if the conditions for obtaining support and social assistance systems or minimum tax rates do not motivate individuals to take such jobs .
In these new conditions , we must make our social assistance system more flexible ; the present situation demands that we do so .
I believe that social assistance must guarantee a sufficient minimum income to guarantee a humane life that surpasses the poverty line and is sufficient to help a person out of poverty , and must not further exacerbate that poverty due to its inflexibility .
in writing . - ( FI ) It is amazing , in fact it is unforgivable , that the EU Social Summit and Dialogue with the Social Partners should be conducted at troika level , without the attendance of the Heads of State or Government .
It shows there is little interest on the part of EU leaders in developing the social dimension .
It shows that we are a long way from the objective of making the Union a Europe for Citizens .
Of course , the banks get rescued using state funds by nationalising their debts , but no one cares about people 's well-being .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0231 / 2009 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Subject : Competition and transparency of income taxation
Does the Commission consider the maintenance of non-transparent systems of income taxation within the European Union to be compatible with free competition and if not , what steps does it intend to take to put a stop to such systems in Member States or parts of Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - Let me first recall that Member States are , under Community law , largely free to design their direct tax systems in a way that best meets their domestic policy objectives and requirements . But in recent years they have reached common agreement on several measures proposed by the Commission that are designed to tackle the erosion of tax bases and investment allocation distortions .
In doing so , Member States have acknowledged that EU-wide cooperation and fair tax competition rules are vital to protect revenues .
On the question of transparency raised by an honourable Member of Parliament , I would like to recall that very recently , on 28 April 2009 , the European Commission adopted a communication identifying actions in order to promote good governance in the tax area , which means transparency , exchange of information and fair tax competition .
Firstly the communication identifies how good governance in the tax area could be improved within the European Union so as to reinforce the argument for other jurisdictions to follow .
It calls on Member States to swiftly adopt Commission proposals for directives on administrative cooperation and mutual assistance in the recovery of taxes and savings taxation .
Member States should also continue to give appropriate priority to eliminating harmful business tax regimes .
More specifically , the Commission 's proposal on administrative cooperation contains a provision according to which bank secrecy could no longer be invoked to deny a request for information from another Member State relating to persons non-resident in the requested Member State .
This is entirely in line with international consensus on tax information exchange .
Secondly , in order to enhance the promotion of good governance beyond the European Union , the communication suggests how to ensure better coherence between EU policies with a view to ensuring that the deepening of economic relations between the European Union and its partner jurisdictions would be accompanied by a commitment to good governance principles .
Particular emphasis is placed on ensuring support for developing countries which have committed to the good governance principles .
The communication also proposes ways of ensuring more coherence between Member States ' individual policy positions in the international tax area and agreed good governance principles .
This would notably include , where appropriate , a coordinated response to jurisdictions that refuse to apply good governance principles .
Today the Commission presented the communication to the EU ministers of finance at the Ecofin meeting , with a view to seeking their support on the proposed approach for the last Ecofin meeting of the Czech Presidency in June 2009 .
( ES ) Thank you very much for your answer , Commissioner .
You have addressed a number of aspects , such as transparency ; what I missed in your speech was a reference to recent agreements in the framework of the G20 , concerning the fight against tax havens and so-called ' non-cooperative jurisdictions ' .
Is the Commission contributing to the G20 proposal or has it remained entirely on the fringes of this type of negotiation ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is a full participant in the G20 and is participating fully in this process .
I have already mentioned some of the measures the Commission would like to encourage Member States to take .
It is fully involved in the G20 process .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , in principle I am against the introduction of new taxes .
They affect , above all , the middle class .
They affect wealth creation and do not stimulate investment .
However , we must consider taxes in conjunction with short-term stock profits .
Do you envisage that taxes on short-term stock profits gained from naked short selling will be earmarked for the creation of new jobs ?
Could the Commissioner please reassure the House that he is firmly committed to all direct taxation - income tax and corporation tax - being firmly left a Member State competence ?
Please confirm that is your view .
Member of the Commission . - Well , there is a Treaty and the Treaty is very clear .
We know that there will be a new Irish referendum perhaps on the Lisbon Treaty , but these Articles are very clear on how the competences are divided in text , and the Commission has no intention of writing a new treaty with different responsibilities .
This is also partly the answer on using tax policy for creating jobs .
As different countries are in different situations , a Europe-wide taxation instrument will not perhaps achieve the same goals as in a particular Member State .
Taxation instruments are sometimes good to really create incentives or develop the economy , but this is very much dependent on the situation in particular Member States .
Subject : EU earthquake policy : actions taken by the Commission in the wake of the recent catastrophic earthquake in Italy
In November 2007 Parliament adopted resolution ( P6 _ TA ( 2007 ) 0507 ) on an integrated approach to earthquakes by the EU ( prevention , response and repairing damage ) in which it called for the adoption of specific measures as regards a policy for protection , reinforcing buildings ( with special emphasis on buildings of historic and cultural significance ) , funding , research , public information , etc .
Furthermore , in my letters to the Environment Commissioner ( 10.1.2008 ) and the Commission President ( 22.5.2008 ) I have drawn attention to the urgent need to draw up a communication devoted specially and exclusively to the effective management of responses to earthquakes .
In the wake of the recent deadly earthquake in Italy , does the Commission take the view that it is covered by its written answer of 22.7.2008 and the answers furnished by Mr Barroso and Mr Dimas or does it intend to take further initiatives to protect European citizens from earthquakes ?
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , the Commission is fully committed to helping to protect people from earthquakes .
This protection must form part of an integrated approach to dealing with situations which may be caused by various dangers .
The Commission recently adopted a communication entitled ' A Community approach on the prevention of natural and manmade disasters ' which also covers earthquakes .
This communication follows on from the actions taken by the Commission over recent years , which are in line with many of the recommendations formulated by the European Parliament in its resolution in 2007 .
This specific action relates in particular to the dissemination of best practices , the development of joint approaches to risk evaluation , mapping and education and awareness-raising , while at the same time seeking to improve the cohesion of and synergies between financial and legislative means of prevention which already exist , thereby strengthening the added value of action by the European Union .
The Commission will make every possible effort to moderate the impact of earthquakes by encouraging the Member States to fully integrate the common European planning codes for buildings and public works , especially Eurocode 8 , into their national regulations .
The Commission awaits the response of the European Parliament to the approach proposed in its communication with particular interest .
( EL ) Madam President , I am sorry , but the question remains .
I honestly do not understand : why does the Commission refuse to do for earthquakes what it did for floods ? What is the difference ?
In fact , I am very surprised that this debate is being held after the recent disaster in Italy .
As regards the last communication to which you referred , it mentions earthquakes in passing at three points , to which you referred .
Do you honestly believe that a reference to earthquakes at three points in a communication suffices to counterbalance the huge need which we have in Europe for a communication specifically on earthquakes ?
I would honestly like to have an answer .
Μember of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , the communication which we released in February 2009 takes an integrated approach to the overall question , regardless of the source of the danger .
We consider that this approach is the best .
As far as floods are concerned , we have a communication on water scarcity and drought .
There are communications on specific dangers or specific problems which exist , but we consider that the integrated approach which we want to use is the most appropriate .
We await Parliament 's response and , if there are important reasons why we should abandon this approach , then we shall consider them .
However , I must say to you that the Commission communication will also help a little in preventing the consequences of earthquakes .
As such , it is addressed at the Member States , which jealously guard the principle of subsidiarity as regards competence for this matter , so that they will incorporate the provisions of the European Union on buildings into their national laws , be they the provisions of Eurocode 8 for new buildings , or the provisions on strengthening buildings for old buildings .
Let them do so , let them take certain other actions which are needed , such as strict compliance with planning regulations , in order to prevent most of the disasters .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , connected to the fault line through the Apennines , there is another fault line which crosses Slovenia .
As you perhaps know , the Krško nuclear power plant is situated on this fault line .
On our initiative several warning devices have been installed there .
What measures do you plan to take , following this devastating earthquake in Italy , to guarantee the security of the Krško nuclear power plant , which stands on a fault line connected to this .
Do you think that you might take precautionary measures , which might go so far as closing Krško ?
( EL ) Madam President , I too am surprised by the position expressed by the Commission here today because , of course , we respect the reply as regards the question of subsidiarity and I absolutely agree with the specific demands , but that does not resolve the question of a collective political proposal on the part of the European Commission which includes all aspects of disasters caused by earthquakes .
Mr Pirker added yet another and , of course , we shall find others .
The question therefore remains : why , over and beyond the principle of subsidiarity and the specific measures mentioned by the Commissioner , do we not have a global proposal on the part of the European Commission ?
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , as I said earlier , we await the response of the European Parliament to the communication we have issued on earthquake prevention .
Once we have a response , we shall examine if this approach or the other approach is better .
In particular , there are specific provisions for nuclear installations and there is the Seveso II directive for industry .
Subject : Solar thermal electricity and the Economic Recovery Plan
In a bid to tackle the serious energy and economic challenges facing the European Union , in its recovery package the Commission has proposed measures designed to contribute to both economic recovery and energy objectives .
However , solar thermal electricity ( STE ) - one of the most promising renewable energy sources - is not included in the list of sectors which stand to benefit .
Moreover , European industry is currently the world leader in this area , but it can only maintain this position if the domestic market expands and if further R & D is promoted .
Can the Commission please comment on why the STE sector has been excluded from the strong financial boosts provided in the recovery plan ?
What other sources of funding are available to the sector ?
Member of the Commission . - Solar-thermal electricity was never excluded from the European Economic Recovery Plan .
It was not included for the reason that we addressed the most urgent energy needs .
That means that we looked at the issues where the crisis has had the greatest impact and where projects could not materialise .
The first question was interconnection .
Any power production , especially from new energy sources , cannot function if there are grid issues .
So we addressed as a matter of urgency the electricity grids and interconnection between member countries .
On top of that we have had the gas crisis , which clearly showed that in some cases missing physical infrastructure has a huge impact as regards gas supply disruption .
This is the easiest way to respond to the security of gas supplies .
And we addressed two other issues which I think would definitely be postponed if they did not have support from the Community : firstly , offshore wind energy , which is rather a large project that needs to be connected to the mainland grid , and , secondly , carbon capture and storage , where we really need to encourage industry to come with a full-scale project as soon as possible .
For this reason we have not considered other eligible areas .
That is why it was not included , not because I do not believe in it .
I believe in solar thermal energy but we addressed the most urgent needs .
What sources are available to support the further evolution of solar thermal electricity ?
First there is the seventh framework programme .
We have EUR 2.35 billion for the years 2007-2013 .
Second , it is one area where you can provide the tool .
From next year we have an opportunity to provide 300 million emission allowances for new entrants .
Renewable energy projects , such as solar thermal electricity , are eligible .
So if the projects are there they are very welcome .
We can also use funds from the European Regional Development Fund .
We encourage more use of synergy energy sources ; in particular we increased the limits of how much renewable energy could be used in relation to housing and energy efficiency .
So overall eligibility for these measures has been increased .
On top of this , in the summer or early autumn , the Commission will table a new communication on financing low-carbon technologies .
We will try to elaborate on it so that these technologies get support , not only from the Community budget but also from industry and the Member States , so that this support is targeted and so that we get the new technological development very quickly to achieve our goal of 20 % renewable energy by 2020 , but perhaps we can be even more ambitious in this respect .
So we have not excluded it .
It is just that we have a lot of areas that we need to address and we have taken the most urgent areas where money needs to be invested now .
Thank you , Commissioner , for a very full reply .
I have noted carefully what you have said .
In the event that any of the projects which have been nominated specifically under the Recovery Plan are not in a position to draw down the funding by the deadline of 30 June 2010 , will you have what I will refer to as a reserve list of projects that are ready to go , so that the money will actually go into this sector , to energy efficiency and low energy ?
In the solar thermal area , for example , they have major projects ready to start construction at the end of 2009 and early 2010 ; they have several projects ready to go .
Could we have a reserve list so that all this money is used in the event of those who have been allocated at the moment not being in a position to draw it down ?
Member of the Commission . - In establishing the list we looked at the majority of the projects and we also involved the Member States , so at this stage I have no reason to believe that we will be unable to disburse or commit all the money .
If there should be some delays , or if some projects are not sufficiently prepared , we will have a report in March 2010 .
So , if there is a possibility that part of the money is available , I promised at trialogues that the Commission will consider , if appropriate , making a necessary proposal . But it is premature to promise it because it depends how well we can commit the money , as today there are a limited number of projects where we believe that they have advanced enough to use this money .
Subject : Nuclear power stations
According to the Institute of Energy of South East Europe , many EU countries and other countries from southern and eastern regions and eastern Mediterranean countries engaged in accession negotiations are examining schemes to extend or construct nuclear power stations to generate electricity .
Will the Commission say what actions and initiatives it intends to take to impose pre-conditions and restrictions in respect of these initiatives , bearing in mind the special geological characteristics , climatic conditions and the possibilities for funding these schemes and their viability ?
Member of the Commission . - Well , my colleague Stavros Dimas has already replied to a supplementary question on this issue .
Basically , nuclear energy is established in a way that means that each country has a nuclear safety regulator who has full responsibility for implementing nuclear safety measures .
At the same time , each Member State decides whether or not to use nuclear energy .
This is subject to the Euratom Treaty , and very clearly there are additional requirements .
The additional requirements are that each project that is submitted is also analysed by the Commission and we make a recommendation on the projects to be developed .
We did that in the case of Belene and also of Mochovce .
There is also a clear obligation that the requirements of the environmental impact assessment should be fulfilled , as laid down in Community law , and the additional requirements of the UN / ECE Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context will also be applicable .
So whatever project is being proposed , we are not discriminating between Member States .
There are clear requirements to be fulfilled and each project is analysed on its own merits , based on the Community acquis and on environmental legislation .
I can assure you that this process is so watertight that no permission has ever been given to build a nuclear power installation unless all the safety requirements can be guaranteed .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to ask , in connection with what the Commissioner said about the evaluation of every proposal , if an ex-ante study can be carried out for the area in question , including on the basis of EuroMediterranean cooperation and the particular character of the area , so that there are criteria which every country will have to take into account from the beginning and comply with in their planning .
Member of the Commission . - First of all , each and every country develops its own legislation that decides on the process of how the application should be made .
Later , the process very much relates to , and is based on , the national legislation and Euratom legislation .
As a result , we cannot take a regional approach .
We need to look at the specific situation in each and every Member State and , at the same time , each and every project .
We cannot just consider an average situation in the region and say that this region is not suitable for using nuclear power .
That would be untrue because you cannot develop a project that could be used in more or less every place .
It is a question of the costs , conditions and time needed .
So , we cannot go with a regional approach .
We really need to look at each and every concrete project because only in this way can we guarantee full safety in this project .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Commissioner , I would like to congratulate you on the nuclear package which you have just tabled and which , in particular , concerns new nuclear power plants , as well as the proposal that , in future , International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEO ) standards should be binding .
I would be interested to know whether you think you could prepare a proposal for an EU regulatory authority or the upgrading of WENRA to a body for issuing binding standards in the next legislative period , and whether we could also make IAEO standards compulsory for all Member States .
Member of the Commission . - On the second part , I believe that , with this high-level group of nuclear regulators , we can move forward with stronger standards .
This is just the point of departure ; it was the lowest common denominator we could have developed .
At the same time , because of the sensitivity of the issue - politically and also , sometimes , culturally - I strongly doubt that the European regulator could play the role required .
I would not say the European regulator could not be trusted , but that regulator needs to keep a distance from nuclear power installations .
I believe that full responsibility for safety should lie at all times with a national regulator , because that is the best way and that will always avoid the debate of whether the central regulator is pushing hard enough for nuclear energy etc .
It is good to establish a common framework , but responsibility must remain with all the regulators who , as is proposed in the nuclear safety directive , have full powers and all the necessary instruments to implement this policy .
We have very good nuclear safety regulators in the Union , so an organisational shake-up is not necessary .
We just need to increase the binding standards , starting from the level we have now , and working together , thus demonstrating to the world that standards can be increased in the nuclear industry .
Subject : Promoting sustainable energy in cities
In my own home city of Cork , local authorities and businesses are striving towards the creation of sustainable energy policies .
What is the Commission doing to support cities like Cork in their efforts to promote sustainable energy ?
Member of the Commission . - I am very glad that you put this question , because I am very proud of one of our achievements , and that is the Covenant of Mayors .
In 2008 we supported the initiative from cities to have a Covenant of Mayors .
This means that cities make a binding obligation to reduce CO2 by more than 20 % by 2020 .
They develop sustainable energy action plans for this .
They have also founded a Covenant of Mayors ' Office for coordination and promotion .
We support these actions through the Joint Research Centre , to provide scientific background and technical support for the preparation , implementation and evaluation of the sustainable energy action plans .
For smaller municipalities , the Commission negotiates with other national , regional and local administrations to ensure their support for the smaller cities .
An advanced system of good practice , the Benchmarks of Excellence , is also intended to be implemented this year .
We have also created a financial support facility through the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , in which we place the grants , and also use the EIB to target sustainable development in the cities .
The EIB has already been involved in specific projects , such as with Barcelona , on which negotiations are quite advanced .
I know that the City of Cork has not yet signed this Covenant , so it is still up to the City of Cork to use this opportunity .
It is a good way to really mobilise citizens behind these initiatives .
At the same time there are also other instruments for sustainable development , and the cohesion policy provides significant support to cities to implement sustainable energy policies and actions .
In total , for the period 2007-2013 , EUR 9 billion from cohesion policy funds will be directly invested in sustainable energy initiatives in the EU .
The Southern and Eastern Operational Programme , which includes the City of Cork , will invest EUR 669 million in the region and contribute to reaching Lisbon growth and jobs objectives .
These cohesion funds will directly support sustainable energy projects in the region , and will help to mobilise further national investment .
Funding may be used to stimulate energy efficiency and renewable energy production , the development of efficient energy management systems and the promotion of clean and sustainable public transport , particularly in urban areas .
The Operational Programme includes the ' Gateway Challenge Fund ' , which is based on an integrated sustainable development strategy for Cork .
Finally , the Regional Development Fund was recently changed to give all Member States the possibility to use regional funds for energy efficiency improvements and the integration of renewable energy into existing housing .
This can be as much as 4 % of the total Regional Fund allocation .
So , to summarise , I believe that we have created a framework for cities that share an ambition to develop sustainable models for their citizens , and that is the Covenant of Mayors .
The Covenant of Mayors includes sympathisers like New York and Rochester , and has participants from other non-EU countries , so it offers a lot of knowledge through the office we operate .
As concerns financial support , we do not at this stage have any programme dedicated to energy efficiency , but we have the Structural Funds , we have an Intelligent Energy Europe programme and we have also the European Investment Bank .
We are using all those instruments to support these initiatives .
The European Investment Bank is very active in this process .
However , at this stage it is not so much an issue of finance , but more about good projects and really dedicated policy from the cities .
That is my answer to your very important question .
I believe that cities have every opportunity to lead the way towards a sustainable energy future .
Thank you to Commissioner Piebalgs for his response .
Commissioner , you have already pointed out in your response that there is a saving in economic terms because of the efficiency in energy , but now we need to move on to the next step .
Rather than just promoting sustainability and energy efficiency , we need to utilise the funds to create new ways of creating energy to make cities even more self-sufficient , rather than importing fuel or building nuclear power stations , as we were saying previously .
We need to find cleverer and better ways , and maybe you might look in the future not just to the investment bank but to new ideas coming from the Commission as well .
Member of the Commission . - We are trying to respond to this request .
We are planning , by the end of this year , to develop a new energy efficiency action plan that will address this .
We are also drawing up a communication on the financing of low-carbon energy sources .
It is very important for stakeholders to take the initiative , and I expect cities to put forward proposals and put pressure on Members of the European Parliament and on Member States to create Europe-wide instruments in the areas concerned .
Without this bottom-up approach , we will fail to use the opportunities that exist .
European cities are so diverse , and there are so many good ideas , that we should not just try to apply a top-down approach to each and every city .
I believe that the Covenant of Mayors will provide much-needed intellectual input and experience to the policies we need to formulate to achieve sustainable cities .
It is not only about savings .
There are many issues involved .
It is also about smart grids , the integration of renewable energy and sustainable transport - hydrogen buses , electric vehicles .
There are plenty of opportunities .
Each and every city could make its own programme , because what the Covenant of Mayors has done is make an obligation to reduce CO2 by more than 20 % .
That does not necessarily mean through energy efficiency .
It could be a completely different policy area .
It very much depends on local circumstances .
In view of the time I am afraid I will not take the further supplementary question .
I am sorry , Mr Rübig , but you have had one question already and the Commissioner has given us some very full answers .
Subject : The economic crisis and avoiding protectionism
As our Trade Commissioner you have rightly said that we must avoid protectionism in our response to the current economic crisis , as it is widely acknowledged that we will not get out of this economic downturn through restricting trade .
In what ways is the Commission working to prevent the growth of protectionist tendencies in its international trade negotiations ?
Can any progress be reported with regards to completing the Doha Round ?
Additionally , how will the Commission ensure that the promotion of open trade is balanced with the EU 's development priorities , such as core labour standards and environmental sustainability ?
Member of the Commission . - Since the outbreak of the economic crisis , the European Union has taken a firm stance against straight protectionism , consistent with its commitment to fair and open trade .
The Commission is intensively monitoring protectionist measures put in place by its major trading partners with a view to appropriate action .
Furthermore , the EU has strongly supported the initiative of the World Trade Organisation to report on trade-related developments during the economic and financial crisis .
Since the beginning of the current crisis , more than ever the EU has been committed to multilateralism , to transparency and to open markets based on rules that benefit developed and developing countries alike .
The EU has consistently argued that an ambitious and balanced Doha Round outcome is among the most important instruments in preventing trade protectionism and in boosting the economy .
This is also the message put forward by the WTO in the recent trade policy review of the EU trade policy , which praised the role played by the EU in strengthening the multilateral trading system .
The key role the Doha Round could play in the current crisis was also recognised in the G20 global plan for recovery and reform issued on 2 April .
The G20 leaders expressed their renewed commitment to reaching a swift conclusion of the Doha Round .
Finally , the EU 's commitment to open trade goes hand in hand with its commitment to sustainable development , which is an overarching policy objective for the EU , including in the context of various trade policy initiatives .
Sustainable development and , in particular , environmental and social considerations are important components in our trade policy .
This is witnessed by the inclusion of sustainable development provisions focusing on labour and environmental standards in our bilateral trade agreements .
Thank you , Commissioner , and I am conscious that you are standing in for Commissioner Ashton .
I want to congratulate the Commission , and indeed Members in this House who are on the Committee on International Trade , for pushing the line of discouraging protectionist tendencies .
I should like to ask about the issue relating to developing countries and how we can ensure that we increase or facilitate trade both with and between developing countries , for example via increased trade-related assistance .
This is an important component that we should factor in .
Overall , I have seen very encouraging activity from the Commission and Parliament in relation to protectionist tendencies , which would be a retrograde step .
Member of the Commission . - Reports by the WTO and the Commission 's own monitoring show that there is no imminent risk of a generalised protectionist escalation .
None of the large trading nations has yet resorted to across-the-board restrictions on trade and investment .
Developments in certain countries - for instance , Russia , Indonesia and Argentina - need close monitoring as these countries have until now been the greatest users of border measures to restrict trade .
Overall , the most targeted sectors are agriculture and food products , iron and steel , metal , automobiles , textiles and toys .
Does the Commission accept that as well as lecturing others and monitoring others to avoid the risk of protectionism we should be careful ourselves and make sure that when we use our trade defence instruments they are for the purposes for which they are intended and not as protectionist measures ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is doing everything possible to ensure that this monitoring is strong in every aspect , especially on the issue that you raised .
I could convey the message to Commissioner Ashton in order to have a more specific view and a more specific answer . But so far there are no disturbing signals .
Subject : Internet piracy Canada
Canada has one of the world 's highest levels of Internet piracy .
This is exacerbated by serious legislative and enforcement deficiencies .
In fact , Canada 's Copyright Act is in urgent need of revision in order to bring it into line with current international standards of protection in the on-line environment , such as those laid down in the WIPO Internet Treaties of 1996 and the EU Copyright Directive ( 2001 / 29 / EC ) .
The longer this situation lasts , the longer European rights holders - in particular the creative sector ( authors , composers , performers , songwriters and phonogram producers ) - will be deprived of the legal tools they need to stop the large-scale online infringement of their rights in Canada .
Their losses to Internet piracy are huge .
The situation is such that legislative action needs to be taken now rather than after the upcoming EU-Canada Trade Summit in May and subsequent bilateral trade negotiations .
Given the urgency of this issue , what is the Commission doing to ensure that Canada amends its relevant legislation without any further delay ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is aware of the issues raised in relation to Canada 's intellectual property rights protection and enforcement .
We are extremely concerned that Canada 's proposed reform of its Copyright Act appears to be being given so little priority .
Reasonable protection of intellectual property rights is essential for the future survival of the creative industries .
While several Member States are now eagerly discussing how intellectual property rights can better be adapted to the online world , we must indeed still pay attention to the risks of internet piracy originating from third countries .
One of the key issues in play is how to strike a fair balance between the interests of rights holders and those of consumers , while respecting data protection rules .
You will remember that this was a key debating point of the Commission Creative Content Online initiative launched by the Communication of 3 January 2008 .
The Commission 's concerns have been put forcefully to the Canadian authorities for quite some time now .
The fact we will soon start negotiations for a free trade agreement with Canada will give us a new opportunity to bring about significant improvement of IPR protection in Canada .
In the mean time , the Commission will be taking the matter up with the Canadian authorities at the highest level .
It will also call for the revision of Canadian copyright law to be initiated as soon as possible and preferably during the Parliament 's present session .
( GA ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for that answer .
But I would like to ask a question - how hopeful is the Commission that the effort they are making in relation to Canada will succeed and what are the direct plans the Commission has to stop piracy on the Internet and this practice ?
If we are unable to stop it with a country like Canada , what chance do we have in other cases ?
Member of the Commission . - As I said before , a trade agreement will provide the legal framework with which to address some of the EU 's trade irritants and issues with Canada , such as its IPR enforcement standards and certain anti-competitive practices .
We are optimistic since we will have negotiations on an FTA .
Subject : Korea FTA
Following the recent discussions between the Commission and the South Korean Trade Ministry , can the Commission outline the state of play of the EU-Korea FTA negotiations ?
Member of the Commission . - The negotiations on a free trade agreement with Korea are the most advanced of the EU 's ongoing trade negotiations .
After two years of negotiations , we now have a comprehensive agreement within reach with the EU 's fourth-largest trading partner outside Europe .
The free trade agreement with Korea would create new market access in many areas of interest to EU exporters .
By way of illustration : the agreement would swiftly eliminate EUR 1.6 billion of customs duties to the benefit of EU exporters ; it would offer solid disciplines on non-tariff barriers in priority sectors such as the automotive , pharmaceutical , or consumer electrics sectors ; it would provide significant new market access in services of special interest to EU service providers ; it would offer the most ambitious package yet on intellectual property rights , government procurement , sustainable development and other rules issues ; and it would foresee novel ways of involving civil society in the monitoring of how the free trade agreement is implemented , and protect our sensitivities with appropriate arrangements .
The free trade agreement would also present a useful point of reference for other negotiations .
Moreover , concluding that agreement now would demonstrate the commitment of both sides to open markets as one response to the current economic environment .
At the end of the eighth round of negotiations in March 2009 , both sides made important technical progress at their level , but a certain number of difficult issues remained unresolved .
EU Trade Commissioner Ashton and Korean Trade Minister Kim subsequently met in London on 2 April 2009 .
Despite intensive discussions , it was not possible to bridge gaps on the remaining issues , such as duty drawback and rules of origin .
The Commission is currently consulting on the best way forward .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that response .
Firstly , I entirely agree that a free trade agreement with Korea would bring enormous benefits both to the European Union and to Korea , and would send a positive signal in terms of our determination to keep markets open .
However , failure to reach this agreement now looks like it lies more with the Member States than with our negotiating partner .
That being the case , if we cannot reach an agreement with Korea , would the Commission accept that DG Trade might as well pack up and go home as regards free trade agreements , because if we cannot agree with Korea we are not going to agree with India , ASEAN or on any other such agreements we are negotiating ?
Member of the Commission . - In contrast , the Member States have recently confirmed their interest in concluding an ambitious and balanced agreement with Korea .
As usual , the Commission will defend the principles on the basis of which we negotiate with all countries .
Thank you very much .
Maybe the Commissioner would comment on the situation of the German Government on this matter .
Like Mr Martin , I am a supporter of this free trade agreement with the Republic of Korea .
However , we do need to be careful about details and timing .
It is estimated that 650 000 Korean cars would sell in Europe per annum .
While there is already some production in eastern Europe , there will be a significant volume of new imports .
Most surveys indicate that these will substitute the sales of Japanese cars produced in Europe , like those produced by the Honda plant in my constituency in Swindon .
This plant is currently mothballed and the workers are on standby .
In order not to exacerbate the current situation here and elsewhere in Europe , will you ensure that there is a serious time lag before such imports are allowed ?
Member of the Commission . - I understand your concerns about the situation in the car industry .
From the start of negotiations with Korea , the Commission has invested considerable resources in obtaining a good result for the EU car industry .
European car exporters will benefit from a combination of the elimination of Korean duties on cars and the effective removal of technical barriers .
The most substantial barriers will be removed from day one of the agreement .
Subject : US-EU trade dispute concerning hormone-treated beef
Will the Commission provide information concerning the outcome of the negotiations it is conducting with the US authorities with a view to definitively preventing - following the decision for a temporary suspension - the activation of the so-called carousel retaliatory measures as part of the transatlantic trade dispute on hormone-treated beef and revoking the retaliatory measures already in place ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is currently still engaged in negotiations with the United States , and we are very optimistic that a mutually acceptable solution can emerge very soon .
In the last few weeks we had intensive transatlantic contacts on this issue .
The EU Trade Commissioner Catherine Ashton and US Trade Representative Ron Kirk agreed on 22 April to hold further talks in order to find a negotiated solution to the long-running dispute over hormone-treated beef .
They confirmed their wish to resolve this difficult issue that affects businesses and consumers in both the EU and the US and , in order to facilitate the negotiations for a solution , Commissioner Ashton and US Trade Representative Kirk agreed that the imposition of the so-called ' Carousel ' sanctions by the US on certain EU products would be postponed by a further two weeks beyond the original 23 April deadline .
The Commission is committed to doing its best to find a positive and lasting solution to this issue , and talks are currently being held by senior officials from both sides .
The Commission 's final objectives in these negotiations are to definitively prevent activation of the ' Carousel ' sanctions and to have the retaliatory measures currently in place revoked .
We are confident that an agreement is within reach that would fully safeguard our public health and consumer protection objectives in this issue .
( EL ) Madam President , in the absence of the competent Commissioner , Mrs Ashton , I should like to thank Commissioner Kuneva for her reply and to ask the Commissioner to convey my thanks to Mrs Ashton for mediating and consulting with the American side on the lifting of the carousel retaliatory measures being taken by the United States of America .
This is an action which , if nothing else , goes one step further , goes beyond the limits of the partnership between the United States of America and the European Union , which are two principal commercial players which also play a leading role in the framework of negotiations under the Doha round under the aegis of the World Trade Organization .
Member of the Commission . - Mr Papastamkos , I shall gladly convey your message to Commissioner Ashton and , without going too far in what I am saying , I think the results will be really quite satisfactory .
Subject : Non-compliance by airlines with Regulation No. 261 / 2004
The Court of Justice of the European Communities delivered a judgment on 22 December 2008 pursuant to which an airline may not refuse to compensate passengers following the cancellation of a flight because of technical problems affecting the aircraft .
A Swedish court before which a case was brought by the ombudsman has just given a similar ruling .
Could the Commission indicate to what extent it will take account of these rulings which once again demonstrate the reluctance on the part of the airlines , the overly vague wording of Regulation No. 261 / 2004 concerning the ' extraordinary circumstances ' justifying a cancellation and the passivity of the Commission in the face of numerous violations of this regulation to the detriment of passengers ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , honourable Members , I believe that first of all we need to emphasise that it is not the Commission 's job to interpret Court of Justice rulings .
These rulings referred to questions referred for preliminary rulings by national courts with the aim of ensuring uniform application of Community law .
Under the terms of Article 16 of Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 on passenger rights in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights , Member States are responsible for applying the regulation and are obliged to prosecute airlines that do not comply with the provisions .
When processing passenger claims that are sent to them , the competent national authorities , appointed by Member States in accordance with the regulation , must evidently take into account the instructions provided by the Court of Justice .
The Commission 's role is that of monitoring the correct implementation of the regulation by the competent authorities , particularly in the light of relevant Court of Justice rulings .
The last meeting between the Commission and the competent national authorities was held at the beginning of December last year , in other words a few weeks before the Court of Justice 's decision .
The Commission has planned another meeting for the 14th of this month .
During this meeting , the Court of Justice 's recent decision over case C-549 / 07 will be examined .
National authorities will have an opportunity to comment on the ruling and describe how they assess the behaviour of airlines to passengers in the event of cancellation in the light of this precedent and also the practical consequences of the ruling .
( IT ) Commissioner , thank you because I feel that due attention must be paid to this matter .
As far as I have understood , Member States must handle these matters , but you can also see if anything can be done .
Thank you , therefore , for your answer and we look forward to seeing what happens next .
Thank you for having spoken in Italian .
I know that you are of Italian origin , so once again , thank you .
The Commission will of course monitor what is happening because I believe that passenger rights are very important to all of us .
This is one of the aims of my work as Commissioner .
I said this at the time when my appointment was approved by Parliament .
I will therefore continue to ensure that monitoring is carried out in order to check whether Member States are respecting passenger rights .
We are all committed , even Mrs Kuneva , to trying to effectively defend the rights of citizens in all areas .
I will be brief , as I realise there is very little time .
Commissioner , I have to say that the implementation of the rights we have are , frankly , a joke at the moment .
I was recently in Amsterdam and watched KLM dealing with delayed passengers by rebooking them on a self check-in .
The staff systematically , without asking the passengers , declined the compensation and assistance which they were entitled to .
Can we have some monitoring by the Commission ?
Can we have some people actually at airports looking at what the airlines do ?
Because , frankly , it seems to me that it has become a joke .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , the Commission intends to report to Parliament and the Council on the functioning and results of Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 through a communication , which should be adopted in the second half of this year .
This document will analyse four years of the Regulation 's functioning and will propose any other actions to be taken in order to reduce the number of incidents and improve the protection of air passengers ' rights .
All airports will therefore be checked .
I hope that the Commission 's work will improve the situation and provide citizens with the answers they expect .
I can therefore assure you of my commitment as Commissioner .
I have started , and I will continue , and I can confirm my commitment .
Subject : Airline privatisations in the EU
Given the successful model used for privatising Olympic Airways and transferring it to a private investor , will the Commission say to what extent this model could be used for other airlines facing similar problems ?
How does the Commission assess the prospects for future privatisations of airlines in the EU ?
How much do airline mergers contribute to addressing the crisis , without creating monopolies and reducing competition ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , honourable Members , the Commission shares the opinion that you expressed in the text of your question , in other words that the Commission 's decisions have obviously led to the ordered sale of some Olympic Airlines and Olympic Airways Services businesses .
These have certainly been successful with regard to competition and transport policy .
Alitalia used the same model and it could be used by all airlines that find themselves in serious difficulties .
This decision has therefore led to the creation of a new airline model , what ought to be the airline of the future : no more state companies but fully privatised companies .
This is the work that the Commission has attempted to support .
I believe this aim of privatisation is also shared by other airlines , I am thinking of Austrian Airlines , Malev and Czech Airlines .
In accordance with the treaty , the Commission must nevertheless remain neutral with regard to the public or private ownership of companies .
The Commission is favourable to consolidation of the Community air sector , which it still considers to be too fragmented , particularly in view of the current crisis .
This consolidation should not , however , hinder competition to the extent of impairing the effective operation of the common market .
The Commission or the competent national authority is responsible for monitoring concentrations carried out for this purpose under the terms of the relevant Community regulation , depending on the magnitude of the relevant concentration operation .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for his comments and reply .
I should like to take advantage of the Commissioner 's presence to ask him if there have been any evaluations on the part of the Commission on the loss of jobs in European aviation companies over the last eight months since the economic crisis broke and , if there are , what measures do you believe could be used to reverse the situation ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not have any definite data on job losses due to the crisis , but I am certainly well aware of what is happening in the air transport sector .
All my efforts as Commissioner for Transport have been directed towards supporting this form of transport and it comes as no surprise that we are again discussing a question , the matter of slots , that aims to prevent the airline situation from worsening in this time of crisis : this also means seeking to reduce job losses , in other words to contain employment levels within the European Union in the air transport sector .
Subject : Rail artery for Europe and the Brenner base tunnel
Can the Commission provide detailed information on the precise timetable and financial plans concerning both the leg of the high speed rail link for Europe from Strasbourg to Vienna and the Brenner base tunnel as the centrepiece of the Berlin-Rome link ?
What further steps are planned and are any additional opportunities provided by the recovery plan ?
Madam President , Mr Posselt , as you know , the Berlin-Palermo rail axis is one of the 30 priority transEuropean transport network projects and the Brenner base tunnel project is the centrepiece of this priority project .
The Commission supports this key element of the priority project that will make it possible to connect rail networks at both sides of the Alps by means of a highcapacity , high-speed line , mainly designed for goods transport .
The project will therefore contribute both to the effective operation of the internal market and environmental targets and to economic recovery .
The Commission therefore wishes to meet citizens ' expectations in practice .
This is another reason why we accelerated the granting of finance at the end of last year once authorisation had been given for EUR 786 million of funding for priority project No 1 .
The coordinator Mrs van Miert has been monitoring the project since 2005 , I believe with positive results .
We have currently started a consultation process with the EU Member States in order to renew the mandate of the European coordinators and thus cover the period 2009-2013 .
In this way , we will be able to allow them to carry on with their work , particularly that of monitoring the priority projects .
On 22 March 2009 , the Austrian authorities submitted their multiannual programme for infrastructures , which includes financing of the Brenner base tunnel .
On 17 April 2009 , following the completion of the environmental impact assessment , they issued a construction permit for the project .
The Italian authorities , for their part , submitted their base tunnel project to their Inter-ministerial Economic Programming Committee ( CIPE ) so that the funding could be approved in May .
Minister Matteoli , with whom I have spoken , confirms the will of the Italian state to pursue the objective , in other words to finance the project , and I believe that the Austrian and Italian authorities are in absolute agreement on this matter .
Priority project 17 - the Strasbourg-Vienna high-speed link that forms part of the Paris-Strasbourg-Stuttgart-Vienna-Bratislava rail axis - is proceeding in a satisfactory manner in all the Member States involved : France , Germany , Austria and Slovakia .
Most of the 831 km stretch between Strasbourg and Vienna - more specifically the Strasbourg-Stuttgart and Linz-Vienna sections - will be complete by 2015 .
The Stuttgart-Ulm section , which represents the most significant bottleneck , will be complete by 2020 .
The relevant finance protocol will be signed on 2 April of this year .
At the moment , the most complicated section seems to be the cross-border section in Bavaria between Munich and Salzburg .
The German Government is currently conducting a review of its multiannual programming , and so we will have to wait until the end of this year before we can begin discussing this very important section .
The Strasbourg-Vienna section will cost EUR 10 billion and the priority project will cost EUR 13.5 billion in total .

I believe that this information may be of use and covers all of the requests made in Mr Posselt 's question .
( DE ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your very good and detailed answer and also for your excellent work on these two important projects which cross in Munich .
I have just two brief supplementary questions :
Firstly , there is a rumour regarding the Brenner Base Tunnel , that it might be reduced to passenger transport .
Can you rule this out ?
Secondly , in Austria and in Stuttgart a great deal is being done for the main route from Strasbourg to Vienna and Budapest .
However , we have the problem of the Munich bypass , the Munich airport link and the stretch from Munich to Mühldorf , Freilassing and Salzburg , so the Chemical Triangle and the stretch via Mühldorf .
I would like to draw your attention to this in particular , as progress here is still very slow .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , honourable Members , as far as the Berlin-Palermo link is concerned , I can reassure you that although there are bound to be concerns when rumours circulate , these rumours seem to be absolutely unfounded .
I wanted to give you some other news because you are particularly interested in the Strasburg-Vienna section .
On 31 March , the European Commission published two invitations to submit TEN-T proposals .
Within the framework of these proposals , the Strasburg-Vienna section could obtain backing under the 2009 annual programme - amounting to EUR 140 million for both studies and work projects - and the European Economic Recovery Plan , this provides EUR 500 million exclusively earmarked for work projects to be started by the end of 2010 at the latest .
It is naturally up to national governments to send in cofinancing proposals , which will be assessed competitively against proposals from other Member States .
This means that if Germany intends to submit a plan concerning this section of greatest interest to you , it can go ahead and do this and the plan for obtaining funding will be carefully evaluated by the Commission .
As regards the progress of Project 17 , the Commission has decided to grant significant funding to various projects along this axis , more specifically the three cross-border sections and the bottlenecks .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Rosé wines and permitted oenological practices ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the oral question by Astrid Lulling , Jean-Pierre Audy , Joseph Daul , Françoise Grossetête , Véronique Mathieu , Elisabeth Morin , Margie Sudre , Oldřich Vlasák and Dominique Vlasto , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Patrick Louis , on behalf of the IND / DEM Group , Jean Marie Beaupuy , Anne Laperrouze , Nathalie Griesbeck and Marielle De Sarnez , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Sergio Berlato , Cristiana Muscardini , Roberta Angelilli , Domenico Antonio Basile , Alessandro Foglietta , Antonio Mussa , Sebastiano ( Nello ) Musumeci , Giovanni Robusti , Umberto Pirilli and Salvatore Tatarella , on behalf of the UEN Group to the Commission : Rosé , wines and permitted oenological practices ( B6-0228 / 2009 ) and
the oral question by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , Katerina Batzeli , Vincent Peillon , Vincenzo Lavarra , Stéphane Le Foll and Alessandro Battilocchio , on behalf of the PSE Group to the Commission : Rosé wines and permitted oenological practices ( B6-0229 / 2009 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , producers of quality wines and informed consumers - the true connoisseurs of the products of our land - do not want to hear talk of blending .
It is understandable that wine-growers in numerous European regions fear the economic , social and environmental consequences of lifting the ban on the blending of red and white wine to produce rosé wine .
The inevitably unfair competition that will result from this risks penalising entire regions , which have specialised in the production of a quality rosé , tailored to a growing demand .
The Commission has already taken action on the first request in our oral question by postponing the decision initially scheduled for the end of April , for which it has my warm thanks .
However , will it use this period to satisfy our second request , namely to undertake a broadly-based consultation of those working in the industry on the basis of a thorough study of the possible economic , social and environmental consequences of lifting the ban on blending ?
Furthermore , what solutions does the Commission envisage , if it should not withdraw its proposal to lift the ban on blending , in order to prevent the collapse of this fragile market in rosé wine , which has a short shelf life , and the weakening of the economic fabric of a whole region , which offers a whole range of cultural and tourist activities based around the wine-growing industry ?
Is the Commission aware that the recommended labelling solutions have already been rejected by the traditional producing regions , because the term ' rosé ' will not be exclusively reserved for the wines which they produce from red grapes ?
Madam President , Commissioner , the reform of the common market organisation ( CMO ) imposed by the united forces of the lobbyists and Eurocrats will cause three serious problems .
It aims to eliminate the market regulation mechanisms , liberalise planting rights from 2015 and allow the cohabitation , under virtually identical labels , of very different categories of wine .
These three heresies will be fatal to European wine-growing , particularly in France .
Consumers will be misled in their choices , wine-growers will see their incomes collapse , and the industrialisation of the sector will lead to the loss of specialist know-how .
This systematic dismantling of the fundamental principles which define the specific nature of European wine-growing responds to a peculiar logic .
Trapped between its submission to the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) and the influence of the all-powerful European big business lobby , the CEEV , the Commission has since 2004 systematically devoted itself to opening the doors of the European henhouse to all the foxes roaming the planet .
It increasingly seems to be acting as the shoehorn of globalisation .
This incoherent logic becomes clearly apparent on examining two sets of figures .
In Europe , 170 000 hectares of vines have been uprooted , whereas in New Zealand the planted area has increased by 240 % , in Australia by 169 % and in China by 164 % .
In Europe , the reduction in supply to keep prices at a decent level is being undermined by the actions of large-scale wine manufacturers who are offloading their surplus products at low prices and thus grabbing the spare market .
This sums up the racket in the rosé market .
It reveals the contradictions that exist between the WTO principles and those needed to organise a sector in order to promote investment , quality and know-how .
Yesterday we successfully discovered that quality would in the future turn to quantity .
With the Commissioner 's reforms , it is becoming clear that today 's decisions will kill tomorrow 's know-how .
Commissioner , it is vital to prohibit blending before 7 June .
After that , the only weapon left to wine-growers in order to make their voices heard will be the vote .
Madam President , what are they trying to make us swallow ?
A mixture of red and white wine in the guise of rosé ?
Our citizens are reacting very negatively to this Commission initiative , which has the agreement of the Member States , including France .
I have noticed two types of reaction : firstly , our citizens are wondering why the European Union is meddling with rosé , when there are so many other issues to worry about , particularly the serious issue of the economic crisis .
Secondly , producers of traditional rosé wines , which are produced by rapid maceration and delicate pressing , see this as a serious attack against the ' rosé ' designation and against the image of quality , developed over so many years , of wines such as these rosés from Provence , which still retain the aroma of the land and which have ensured the success of rosé wines in general .
During the last meeting of the ' wine ' intergroup , we finally understood the motivation of the European Commission and Member States .
Consumption of rosé table wines is increasing throughout the world and accounts for nearly 30 % of wine consumption .
Third countries are producing blends .
The European Union market is starting to be targeted by these third-country blends .
The UK market is particularly dominated by wines from the United States .
It is well-known that traditional rosé has a short shelf life .
It is so much easier to produce rosé wine on demand by using stocks of red and white wines .
For the Member States , it is therefore a question of adapting the production of rosé table wines to the international market .
Unless other oenological practices for making rosé wine can be discovered , we might for example be inspired by Pierre Dac , who said : ' Graft roses onto vines to get natural rosé wine ! '
This cannot be .
Like many of my fellow Members , I think that the European Commission and the Member States must go back to the drawing board , work on the ' rosé wine ' designation , and ensure that the name ' rosé ' is exclusively reserved for wines produced using traditional methods , whether in the European Union or in third countries .
In the meantime , Commissioner , I invite you to discover one of these little rosés from Gaillac , with a thousand colours of the Tarn , to be enjoyed responsibly , of course .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , wine is not simply an agricultural product for us , but also represents culture and tradition .
We have often heard in this Chamber that we must guarantee the European wine market a certain future .
We can only ensure this if we focus on quality and we cannot achieve quality if we do not respect traditional production methods .
For this reason , Commissioner , we can only oppose the introduction of new wine production practices that have been dreamed up and have nothing to do with the science of winemaking , because we believe that they can lead to a deterioration in the image of wine and detract from the relationship of trust between consumer and products , with severe consequences for quality and perhaps even for health .
European quality products enjoy their status because they are based on a respect for ingredients , small-scale production methods , tradition and characteristic flavours achieved using specific products and production methods .
I am afraid that by making all these concessions , overturning our traditional winemaking practices , the Union will allow pieces of the wooden casks to be added to speed up the flavouring process , and this will lead to artificial flavouring , and before we know it , we will be adding water and making wine without grapes .
I do not think this is the right way , Commissioner , to relaunch and develop the internal and international market sector .
International demand for rosé wine is not falling but rising , and in this case the right approach is not to produce more using winemaking practices that owe more to a chemistry set than anything else , but to invest in quality , in specialisation and in the characterisation of European wines , in the marketing and promotion of real wine in general in order to extend the market and finally make it easier for young people to enter the winemaking business .
Madam President , Commissioner , as it happens , I am not in the middle of an election campaign because I will not be here in the next Parliament .
Commissioner , you can therefore do me the honour of not exaggerating .
However , I am from Bordeaux .
You have visited my region , which produces very little rosé wine , but which very much likes the rosé wine that it produces .
I wanted to say to you that I was particularly shocked when I learnt that the European Commission was intending to legalise the production of rosé by blending red and white .
In my opinion , this is a counterfeit product , at a time when we are being invited to fight counterfeiting in industry .
It would mean authorising or inventing a wine derivative , at a time when we are fighting financial derivatives .
In fact , all this stems from exactly the same aim , namely to find new products generating ever more profit .
As long as the profit and competitiveness of the European Union are assured , then that is OK .
Let me amuse myself by making a suggestion .
Here we have a rosé wine .
I have just produced this rosé wine , here in the European Parliament , by getting white wine and putting beetroot in it .
I can promise you that it has exactly the same colour and , what is more , you can have the whole chromatic range , if you want , and probably a certain taste range .
This would also allow us to solve the problems of the sugar industry and chaptalisation using a natural food product .
What this quite simply means is that , if we allow this first step , then there will be no end .
Other Members have said as much , that food counterfeiting will reign ever more .
We therefore say to you : ' look at what is already happening in some countries ' .
Today , one-fifth of rosé production involves blending .
I would maintain that the Commission does not have to systematically bleed the other four-fifths .
There are people who have strived to ensure that rosé exists , that it becomes a genuine wine , produced using genuine oenological methods .
We are now pulling the rug from under them on the pretext that it might be more lucrative to surf the rosé market using red and white .
I believe that this is profoundly amoral .
Personally , I feel that labelling will not suffice or , if labelling is used , this type of blended wine must not be called ' rosé ' .
Call it ' dishwater ' if you like , Commissioner , as that much better suits the quality of the product .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the world of rosé wine has a long , long history , but there is no definition of rosé wine within EU legislation or within the International Organisation of Vine and Wine ( OIV ) .
They all remain silent .
In certain regions , wine-makers have invested a lot of effort to develop a high-quality rosé wine based on a precise product specification , and have limited the wine-making practices for rosé wine to traditional methods .
However , other protected designations of origin ( PDOs ) do not impose restrictions on making rosé wine .
The product specification of Champagne allows the blending of red and white to produce rosé Champagne .
At EU level , the ban on blending red and white wine is today limited to the production of table wine .
The discussion on wine-making practices , including on blending , started back in 2006 during the negotiations on the wine reform .
With the reform , the Commission gained competence to authorise new oenological practices and shall base itself on the OIV 's recommendations .
Following wide-ranging discussions which took place last autumn with stakeholders and with all Member States , the Commission proposed the abolition of the ban on blending red and white wine .
This was subject to an indicative vote in the Wine Regulatory Committee in January when a majority of Member States , including France , voted in favour .
The draft regulation has been notified to the World Trade Organisation under the procedure in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade , and we have recently accepted further time for third countries to examine our proposal .
Therefore , the regulation will be formally voted by the Wine Regulatory Committee later in June , most probably on 19 June , because further delay would prevent us from implementing the new oenological practices from 1 August this year , as foreseen by the Council Regulation .
You also asked for a specific impact assessment before the removal of the blending prohibition .
In-depth impact assessments were carried out by the Commission 's services when drafting the wine reform and we do not therefore intend to restart the work undertaken in 2006 and 2007 to prepare the wine reform , nor to make an in-depth impact assessment of all different individual wine-making practices , so we base ourselves on the work that is taking place in the OIV .
Already now , economists in the wine sector stress that this reform will not weaken traditional rosés as these rosés with an appellation are not in competition with table wines .
It is clear that the traditional rosé is a quality product that is highly appreciated by consumers and associated with the place of origin of this product .
Allowing the blending of table wine will lead to fair competition between European countries and third countries since we have allowed third countries - as already mentioned here today - to do this blending .
I completely agree with Mrs Laperrouze .
Why should we put our wine producers in a worse competitive situation than those that can sell wine within the European Union ?
Some weeks ago , I had a meeting here in Strasbourg with rosé wine producers from Provence in France and we had a very open and frank discussion on the state of play .
Of course I understand their attempt to try to safeguard the traditional rosé and that is the reason why the Commission has been looking at various solutions on the labelling issue .
We actually proposed two different labelling options : ' traditional rosé ' and ' rosé by blending ' .
Member States can then decide whether they want to make either one or both of those labelling options compulsory for rosé wine produced in their territory .
In this way , we provide the possibility for producers to get a more exact idea of what they are buying .
I heard the argument from those wine producers that ' traditional rosé ' was a bit dusty and they consider rosé wine to be a modern way of producing wine .
I clearly indicated that if other ideas came up , I would of course be prepared to listen to them , but I have not yet heard any suggestions on an alternative to rosé wine .
As the Commissioner for agricultural products , I do care that we find the right solutions and give our wine producers a level playing field .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am delighted to see you here again today .
In all my years of political activity - both in Austria and in almost 15 years in the European Parliament - debates on wine have always been very emotional ones .
We can see that again here today .
In my opinion , wine is one of the most elegant products that agriculture can produce .
It is in the interests of quality production by European - and especially Austrian - wine-growers , that priority be given to the quality and the distinctiveness of wine from different regions .
We believe that mixing wines is not an oenological procedure .
Rosé wine is produced through a special , very traditional oenological procedure .
Therefore , Commissioner , I support all my fellow Members who , like I , reject this mixing or blending of white with red wine .
It is time there was a clear definition for the production of traditional rosé wines .
Commissioner , it must also be possible , as you have mentioned , for Member States to gain knowledge , so that they then see some decisions differently or amend them .
I urge you to do this for the sake of the quality of European wine production .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again we meet in this Chamber to defend a food , cultural and rural heritage handed down to us from an age-old tradition ; an estimable heritage that is the envy of the world , that represents incredible wealth for the economy and also for the identity of our Union .
Nowadays this heritage risks ending up in serious difficulty due to the intention of the Commission and the Council to overturn the ban on the production of rosé wine by blending .
This intention came about as a result of strong pressure and will be ratified without the possibility of intervention by Parliament , the body that officially represents millions of citizens , including manufacturers and consumers , who will be affected by this initiative .
The Commission proposes to allow the production of rosé wines by simply mixing red wines and white wines as is done by countries who do not possess our skill and professionalism , and under the simple pretext of responding to international competition .
As cosignatory of this question , I emphasise that lowering the quality of production - which is the outcome of centuries of tradition and research , huge investments , passion and attention to detail - is not the answer we need , particularly at this time of economic crisis , when the average consumer is certainly paying more attention to price than to what is written on the label .
This decision could be offset by simply finding a name for the new product and informing consumers of the existence of two different types of rosé wine , with different product qualities , and of the importance of recognising the work and efforts of sector professionals .
Who is going to pay for all this ?
Has the Commission allowed for some kind of support programme or will it be the manufacturers who pay for it , after asking them to fight the low-cost competition with unequal weapons in times that are already extremely tough ?
I hope that the Commission and the Council will be able to make the right choice and , if necessary , review this entire procedure .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , we have chocolate without cocoa and a ban on cheese made with milk straight from the cow .
Our Roquefort was subject to 300 % customs duties and we nearly had chickens washed in bleach and even a lactation hormone , somatotropin .
Now we are considering the idea of colouring white wine with red wine to make rosé wine .
If you will permit me , as we say in France , this has been the drop of water that has made the vase overflow , with this water having also been authorised for blending wine , just like the ' woodwork ' wines made with wood chips rather than in barrels were previously authorised , and the wines made with imported musts were nearly authorised .
Wine could even be made in Thailand .
The problem is the psychoanalytic reaction that this idea produces , as this is an attack on culture .
What is the definition of wine ?
If it is an industrial product , then it can be blended , like a wine Coca-Cola .
However , if it is an agricultural food product , then you cannot touch it , otherwise you cause a cultural shock .
' This is my blood ; drink it in remembrance of me ' .
If you blend blood , then you make contaminated blood .
Can you understand this disproportionate reaction ?
With this rosé idea , you have questioned 2 500 years of heritage dating from the Roman empire , which had to tackle the barbarians .
Madam President , this is what I wanted to say : ' It is a Freudian matter , not a wine-growing matter ' .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , when I arrived here I was extremely annoyed .
Having heard what you had to say , I am now angry .
It is not acceptable for you to authorise , in this election period moreover , the blending of white wine and red wine .
Very recently I went to Provence and Corsica to speak to the wine growers of my constituency , who had chosen the quality path , but who now feel abandoned .
I remember a speech by Mr Barroso , two years ago , when he said that wine growing is important and part of the economy .
He said we need to export more , and in order to export more , we need quality .
I remember that speech very clearly .
The European Commission therefore imposed grubbing up to achieve greater quality and less quantity .
The wine growers in the south of France went along with this , but look where it has got them today .
They have grubbed up to such an extent that soon they will have to import wine in order to satisfy local consumption .
With your policy , you have signed the death warrant of our wine growers .
Now you are authorising the blending of white wine and red wine with the designation of rosé wine .
This is an insult to our wine growers .
You are now going to ask them to include an additional phrase : ' traditional wine ' , for wine made in the conventional way , because our Spanish friends need to sell their surplus of white wine , since they have not been grubbing up .
Our wine growers , who opted for quality , should not have to justify the value of their wine .
That would be the last straw , in any case .
Blended wine is not rosé ; it is a mixed white .
Let us call a spade a spade .
We should no longer allow consumers to have the wool pulled over their eyes by wine merchants who have chosen to put profit before quality , a choice that you are supporting , Mrs Fischer Boel .
I call on my fellow Members , those of you who will be back in the next term of office : we are going to have to redouble our efforts to ensure that this Commission measure is ruled out once and for all and not just provisionally .
Watch out on 19 June .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , wine has been produced in my country for three thousand years .
I express my opposition , my regret and my concern about what we are going to do .
Rosé wine is an artificial product .
Wine is a fermented product , not a mixed product .
If this is applied , the result will be unfair competition for our producers who produce these wonderful wines .
Secondly and importantly , the reputation of European wine will be damaged yet again .
However , I can see that , if we take this slippery slope , there will be no end to it .
Some time ago we debated and adopted the addition of bits of wood to wine .
We cited as our grounds ageing and the economic cost .
We also adopted the addition of sugar to wine .
For reasons of economy , we said , and we did not have the courage to demand that these techniques be written on the label .
Nor shall we have the courage to do so now .
Europe can only assert itself with the very high quality wines which it has .
God help us if we believe that we can compete with cheap Australian or American wines - we must insist on this point .
I said as much when we adopted the practice of adding sugar to wine .
We , who take these decisions , shall go down in the history of European oenology as the people who undermined the foundations of excellent European wines .
I therefore implore that we get off the slippery slope of these decisions .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I agree with what has been said by Mrs Grossetête because I came here driven by the intention of bringing with me the pain , regret and discontent of the wine producing world in Italy and I found myself faced with indifference , like talking to a brick wall .
I had hoped it was a by-product of the impersonal translation process but from what I have heard , it seems that there are no openings , that there are no hopes , that there is a gulf .
Not long ago , very recently , in my region - I am from the Veneto - an event was held known as Vinitaly , which is one of the most important events in the world of wine and a hugely successful petition was drawn up there in defence of rosé wines .
It was signed by great Italian wineries , great wine producers , but signatures also came from other parts of Europe - signatures came from the public in Holland , France , Spain , Belgium , Luxembourg , Slovenia , Poland , Lithuania and Ukraine .
Passion for rosé wine , as you can see , is authentic and knows no borders except , so it seems , within the European Commission , even though we may talk about culture , local values and tradition .
Speaking as a woman , I would also like to give you something to think about : when we fight against the misuse of alcohol , do you think that we are giving new generations a good service by handing them a low quality drink that I will not even call wine , a cut-price alcoholic drink that has nothing whatsoever to do with any area , culture or quality ?
Will we succeed in educating them about the use of wine and alcohol as part of a general set of good habits and good practice ?
I wanted to leave you with my thoughts , because you are taking on big responsibilities in many senses .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , in recent years you have seen how sensitive a product wine is .
Here today we are mainly putting the case for the liberalisation of the wine market regulations .
You talk about opening up to the world market .
I sometimes wonder , who is guiding whom here ?
Traditionally our wine-making has evolved in Europe .
Our traditions and our regional identity are what characterises our wine , and that should also guide us in the deliberations we are now having on the wine market regulations .
I was struck by the fact that here things have been incorporated into the wine market regulations through Committee , things which we have not debated at all in Parliament !
The question , Commissioner , is what national and regional regulation options still exist ?
What restrictions or bans can Member States impose for their regions involved in making the lowest grade of wine ?
That is what this is about , we are not talking about wines of origin and home wines , but about the lowest grade of wines .
For example , would the ban on blending red and white wine be a regional or national ban ?
Would that be possible in future for these low-grade wines ?
Or a ban on the indication of grape variety and vintage : this also causes us problems , as we want to be able to differentiate our wines , the lower wines from those described as home wines or wines of origin .
So French Rosé or German Riesling , those are names which need a clear , unambiguous regulation .
They are linked to our traditional producers and we set great store by this for the future .
Therefore , we ask for your support .
Madam President , Mrs Fischer Boel , you gave a negative response to our second question , claiming that at the time of the wine CMO reform , you already carried out the assessment which we are asking for .
I am surprised at this : during this reform , there was never a question of permitting an oenological practice consisting of blending white and red wine to make rosé .
I ask you , why do you not follow up our request , which , incidentally , is perfectly reasonable , for consultation with the industry ?
You wish to take a decision on 19 June , but there is no rush .
Moreover , no one has ever asked you to authorise this oenological practice .
I do not know what put the idea to table this proposal into your head , when no one in Europe is asking for it .
I would add , with regard to labelling , that you should recognise that producers of traditional rosé wine will never agree to calling this concoction - including the one which Mr Savary prepared - ' rosé ' .
You therefore need to make an effort in this respect .
Commissioner , I truly urge you to give a positive response to our two requests .
Commissioner , earlier you said that you had not received any suggestions and that you were waiting for proposals , and so on .
On the contrary , suggestions have been put to you .
You met our wine growers .
They told you that they did not want this .
They told you that they personally did not want to be forced to specify the designation ' traditional rosé wine ' in order to distinguish it from the rosé wine which naturally will not state ' blended ' .
Therefore you cannot say that no one has suggested anything to you .
Above all , with regard to rosé Champagne , we are well aware that it is an oenological product which has nothing to do with the blending as proposed here : white wine and red wine .
We are asking you to find the courage , Mrs Fischer Boel , not to call blended white and red wine ' rosé wine ' .
This is what we are asking you .
This is our suggestion to you .
Do not penalise real wine growers .
How do you expect our fellow citizens to understand such a stance on the part of the European Commission ?
You turn a deaf ear to all our arguments : this is absolutely incomprehensible .
Commissioner , allow me to take the floor once more to tell you that I have heard your arguments and I am sure that you did not come up with this idea yourself : it must have come from a number of lobbyists .
However , I do not think that it is in Europe 's interest to constantly aim low , particularly when it comes to food .
Countries which did not aim low on an industrial level are now among the global leaders when it comes to trade .
The Germans , in particular , have always fought the temptation to level down .
Well I believe that , with regard to the food sector , Europe should fight this constant temptation to level down , because this will take it far .
Therefore , what we are proposing is to avoid at all costs having two forms of designation for ' rosé ' : traditional or blended .
There is rosé wine , and there is something else .
Organise a European competition to name this something else if you think it should be legalised .
Personally , I think that Europe would do well to fight the WTO on this type of product .
You are always telling us that we ' capitulate ' with respect to everything that comes from elsewhere .
Commissioner , indicating ' rosé wine ' on the bottle is pointless , since good rosé wines , such as the Bandol that I have brought you , do not specify the word ' rosé ' .
Moreover , indicating ' traditional rosé ' on the label is stupid .
Rosé is a wine which the young drink ; it is a modern wine , even if its production requires traditional know-how .
Therefore , there is too much ambiguity .
There are not 36 different solutions , there is only one , since , as was explained very well earlier , rosé is a cultural wine , it is a product made by experts .
We are not dealing with any old business here .
What we need is a pure and simple ban on all blending and mixing in Europe , and in France in particular .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it has been great to listen to you here tonight , because I still feel that you have got all the passion , you have got all the energy and you have got all the emotion that I experienced about the wine sector when we had our discussions on the wine reform .
The cultural heritage and the traditions that are linked to wine are still alive here in the European Parliament .
However , some of the questions raised here tonight totally reopen the political compromise that we made on the wine reform , so I am not going into these issues but will just concentrate on the main problem discussed here tonight .
I completely agree with those of you who have said that quality must be the future for our European agricultural products .
That was precisely the reason why during the wine reform - as I am sure you still remember - we reserved a huge amount of money for promoting our European wine on the Third World market : EUR 125 million every year was the figure mentioned when we had these discussions .
This was because we know that we have a high-quality product that will be in demand in the new emerging developing countries .
So we are on exactly the same wavelength here .
However , I have a certain sympathy as well for wine producers in Europe who have to compete with wine produced by other oenological practices that are allowed in Third World countries .
An example is the blending of red and white wine to make a rosé .
It is allowed , it is part of the OIV oenological practices , so the European Union today imports rosé wine produced in exactly this way .
Why should we prevent our own wine producers from competing with imported wine within the European Union ?
I therefore think we have taken a balanced approach on this issue .
It was important that we found a way to label our wines to make sure that consumers knew what they bought , and with the PDOs you have the possibility today of putting information on the label to inform the consumer that this is a wine produced by the traditional method .
I said in my first speech that I met some wine producers from Provence .
They did not like ' traditional rosé ' exactly for the reason you said - that it was a bit old fashioned .
I then asked for new ideas on another way of labelling that it was the traditional method , but I have had no suggestions on this issue .
The idea is to make it optional for Member States whether they make it compulsory within their territory for producers to put on the label whether it is a coupage or a traditional product .
We will have this discussion again in the Regulatory Committee .
As I said , a vote will probably take place on 19 June 2009 and then we will look into the outcome of this vote , in which Member States will represent the opinions of their governments .
That will be interesting , but I am still quite convinced that what we have proposed , which is in compliance with the OIV oenological practices , will be the way forward for our wine producers to stay competitive on the global market .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
European rosé wine producers are today worried by the Commission 's application project regarding lifting the ban on blending white and red table wine in order to make rosé wine .
This new practice undermines quality production and ignores the hard work that producers have put in over many years to create a rosé product which , having been discredited for a long time , has now found its true place on the market and on the tables of countless consumers .
This is all the more true given that this practice could mislead consumers .
If the Commission 's plan for blending is confirmed by the Member States over the coming weeks , we , together with my colleague Mr Savary , hope that compulsory labelling will be introduced , enabling true rosé wine to be distinguished from a new product made by blending , which consequently could not be called rosé .
Faced with the angry reaction of European wine growers , the European Commission has decided to postpone until 19 June its hasty decision to authorise the production of rosé wine by blending red and white wine .
For all that , this postponement cannot be considered satisfactory by any means .
Nor can the decision to propose a distinction between ' traditional rosé ' and ' blended rosé ' on the label of marketed products , which would not go far enough to effectively counter the unfair competition which the producers will face should this decision be taken .
While for countless years the wine growers of the European Union have put in considerable effort and investment to produce high-quality rosé wine , the Commission 's decision will undo these enormous efforts , which have nevertheless had a very positive effect on the economy and the regional development of our territories .
The question which my fellow Members and I asked the Commission today calls for the Commission to clarify its intentions and to ensure that the decision it takes will be based on full consultation with European producers of rosé wine .
Commissioner ,
I will not hide from you my deep dissatisfaction faced with your attempts to explain away the blending of ' rosé ' wine .
You offer no answers whatsoever to the wine producers with whom I have had the opportunity to talk at length in Provence , and who have depended upon the quality of their products .
They dread seeing 30 years of efforts to establish a reputation for rosé - efforts crowned with real commercial success - completely undone today .
You offer no answers whatsoever to all those who regard the authorisation of blending as a major contradiction of the painful mass grubbing-up policies .
It is not by seeking to lower our production costs to any old amount that we will emerge the victors of international competition .
Rather , we will achieve this by further improving the reputation of our wines .
You offer no answers whatsoever to all those who tell you that labelling will not suffice , since it will have no effect on bottles of wine referred to as ' rosé by blending ' .
By postponing the decision on authorisation until after the elections of 7 June , you are ultimately playing the Euroscepticism card .
That is why I solemnly ask you to withdraw this harmful draft , which threatens an economy and a culture alike .
Under the pretext of revising authorised oenological practices , the European Commission may be about to authorise the blending of red and white wine under the designation of ' rosé wine ' .
I question calling a blend of different wines ' rosé wine ' .
It is not just the colour of the wine which should give it its name : it is the variety of grape , the soil and the wine growers ' expertise which create a wine , not the final colour of this or that liquid .
In order to produce a blended rosé , the base - more than 95 % - must be a white wine , which is tinted with red wine .
The fact is , rosé wine is produced from the fermentation of predominantly red grapes or must .
Therefore , by authorising the blending of wines , the European Commission would be authorising the outand-out counterfeiting of rosé wine : it would amount to consumer deception .
Besides the insult to wine growers who are pursuing a policy of quality , in particular in Provence , it would be unacceptable to legitimise a by-product resulting from the mixing of finished products and to permit misleading references to the rosé colour .
If another solution is not found , these drinks ' labels should be required at least to reflect their true content : ' blended wine ' or ' mixture of wines ' .
Democratic process in Turkey ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on democratic process in Turkey .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am afraid we may have the same passion in this discussion on democracy in Turkey as we had on the wine reform during the second half of Arsenal v Manchester United , which is a snapshot of Europe in 2009 .
This is more serious , because this is a very serious matter and indeed a very substantive issue concerning democratic development in Turkey .
First of all I am deeply saddened and shocked by the massacre that took place in Bilge in Turkey last night , killing 44 people .
I offer my sincere condolences to the families and friends of the victims and I trust that the murderers will be brought to justice as soon as possible .
There is no moral or ethical justification of this kind of horrible attack .
Let me also express my personal , and the Commission 's , sorrow on the death of nine Turkish soldiers and a gendarme as a consequence of the terrorist attacks last week .
Our thoughts are with the families of those who lost their lives .
We condemn terrorism and support Turkey in its fight against terrorism .
The PKK is on the EU list of terrorist organisations .
Between 14 and 18 April more than 200 officials and members of the Democratic Society Party have been arrested in a police operation throughout Turkey , and in particular in its south-eastern region .
We understand that charges brought against them include being a member of a terrorist organisation , although a formal indictment is still pending .
We expect to see the indictment finalised as part of a transparent and objective judicial process .
The Commission cannot interfere in ongoing legal cases .
However , our approach is clear : while we support the fight against terrorism , we have consistently stressed that it must be conducted by respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms , in particular as regards the freedom of expression and association .
Political pluralism is an integral part of any democracy .
The Turkish Grand National Assembly is today largely representative of the country 's political diversity .
The Democratic Society Party has been contributing to pluralism in Turkey , and its political legitimacy was confirmed by the results of the recent local elections in March .
At the same time , the people of south-east Turkey need peace , they need stability and prosperity rather than further violence or confrontation .
Condemning the use of force and violence is a duty for all parties involved .
All must exercise restraint and be committed to peaceful means and peaceful means only .
This is also an integral part of any democracy .
We will continue to follow up closely the developments of this case .
It is essential that the principles of democracy and the rule of law , including the rights of defendants , will prevail .
The Commission also continues to follow closely the closure case against the DTP currently pending in the Constitutional Court .
In this context , the current rules governing the closure of political parties in Turkey are not in line with the European Convention of Human Rights and with European practices , as was recently stated in an opinion of the Venice Commission .
We have requested Turkey to take such an opinion fully into account and to reflect it in the Turkish constitutional and legislative framework in the form of revisions to this effect .
To conclude , we continue to encourage the Turkish authorities to address the problems of the south-east of the country and its people , in order to enhance the economic , social and cultural opportunities of all Turkish citizens irrespective of their ethnic , religious or linguistic origins .
Under the Copenhagen political criteria , Turkey is expected to ensure cultural diversity and promote cultural rights of all its citizens , as set out in our Accession Partnership .
In this context , the establishment of a new TRT channel broadcasting in the Kurdish language is a step forward .
It shows a change of mentality and I want to encourage the Turkish authorities to take further steps in this direction .
We will continue to monitor the situation in the south-east and will report in our upcoming progress report .
That is an essential part of the process of democratisation of Turkey .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , following the local elections on 29 March , in which the Kurdish Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) achieved a sensational victory - almost doubling their number of mayors from 52 to 98 - it is clear that the Kurdish question can no longer be reduced to a socioeconomic issue , as Mr Erdoğan and his Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) have been doing up to now .
There is a clear need for a political solution , and the DTP must also be accepted as a full partner in discussions .
In this situation , one would think that a repressive approach was outmoded , yet the Turkish authorities have once again embarked on a widespread wave of arrests .
More than 400 leading DTP personnel have been arrested for requesting a solution to the Kurdish question .
My question to the Commission is as follows , therefore .
This is now the fifth or sixth party set up by the Kurds - currently bearing the name DTP .
It has 21 members of parliament and 98 mayors , and still the Kurds continue to be sidelined .
Commissioner , has not the time come for the European Union to initiate mediation between the Turkish Government and the DTP ?
If it does not , this situation will remain at a complete standstill .
In other words , the causes of a number of supposed terrorist activities must be tackled .
I think that the election victory a few weeks ago also proves that the Kurdish sense of nationality is alive and well , and that structural reforms promoting increased autonomy for the Kurds must also be carried out quickly .
I should also like to call attention to another urgent problem on the fringe of this debate , which is that more than 1 500 minors have been locked up in prison and are being tried by the same court as adults , totally contrary to the International Convention on the Rights of the Child .
What does the Commission intend to do about this ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Rehn , during this sixth legislative period Turkey has been a priority on our EU agenda .
Before the start of accession negotiations , Turkey had made huge steps towards reform and the EU recognised this accordingly .
Today the mood has changed somewhat .
We are growing increasingly concerned about the progress of the democratisation process in Turkey .
Freedom of the press , the protection of minorities , but also reform of the judiciary must be monitored constantly .
As for the Ergenekon trial which is taking place in Turkey , I would like to say that this must not become politicised .
The fact is that arrests and searches are taking place .
Hasty comments should be avoided .
Careful reporting has an important role to play here .
Important progress has been made on the Kurdish question .
The solution of the Kurdish problem is central to the process of democratisation and the protection of minorities .
However , I also have concerns about the current position of some EU heads of government .
Ambiguous signals from the EU also mean that from time to time the democratic process in Turkey faces a bumpy ride .
In this respect I would like to recall that a clear commitment on behalf of the EU to Turkey 's full membership would give the reform process a huge boost .
Otherwise , there will always be new breeding grounds for fundamentalism and nationalism , and the Kurdish problem will get worse .
After all , the common goal is to turn Turkey into a more modern , stable and prosperous democracy , based on a secular state and a pluralistic society .
This is not only in Turkey 's interest , it is also an important strategic interest of the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the last plenary sitting of this legislative period .
My fellow Member Mr Öger has just said that Turkey is a priority .
In recent years , as rapporteur for my group , I have been able to deal with this issue and I must say I am very happy that in this last session we are once more getting to the heart of the matter , namely the question of democracy in Turkey .
It is the first Copenhagen criterion that is in question .
There are varying opinions as to how Turkey has developed .
However , I believe that in one respect there is consensus : the pace of reform in Turkey seems to have slackened ; the impression at the end of this legislative period is that Turkey now has further to go before it will be ready for accession than it had at the beginning both of the mandate of the Commission and of the legislature of this Parliament .
For the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe the problems of freedom of the press and of opinion are particularly important in this context .
You know that you cannot watch YouTube in Turkey .
The rights of journalists , publishers , publicists , columnists and authors are restricted by certain legal regulations .
The Commission has thankfully indicated in its progress report that this is a problem .
In the opinion of many observers , these problems have increased .
I would be grateful if the Commission would say something about this - whether it believes the problems have got worse or whether things have got better .
That would be really surprising .
In addition , there are important subjects like the protection of religious minorities and the safeguarding of women 's rights .
However , the key issue at the moment is the question of freedom of the press , the revoking of the press accreditations of critical journalists by the Prime Minister , the largely unjustified arrests of critical journalists and publishers in the course of investigations into the clearly criminal Ergenekon network , the takeover of the ATV-Sabah media group by the Scharlach-Holding , which is owned or controlled by the Prime Minister 's son-in-law , the Prime Minister 's public calls to boycott media and the judgement against the Doğan media group and fine of EUR 380 million with the aim of forcing it out of business because it reported the lighthouse donation scandal , and his preferential treatment of the AKP .
This is not only a question of press freedom , it also scares off investors , who doubt the certainty of the law in Turkey .
Turkey is an important neighbour , an important , respected NATO partner .
We want to continue supporting Turkey ; that is the opinion of my group .
However , we believe that a great deal has to be done here , that the Turkish Government must demonstrate its will to no longer ride roughshod over fundamental European rights , as it is doing at the moment .
We would be grateful if this could be documented persuasively in the next legislative period .
Moreover , I believe that we should have this debate not in Strasbourg , but in Brussels .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , where democratisation in Turkey is concerned , the picture is mixed , in my opinion , with progress on some points and stagnation and deterioration on others .
It is progress that there were no riots on 1 May on Taksim Square in Istanbul , only trade union leaders commemorating the 1977 tragedy .
It is progress that Turkey and Armenia have agreed to improve mutual relations .
My call to the Turkish Government would be to continue on this path and not let itself be stopped or sidetracked by nationalists in Ankara or Baku .
It is progress that there have been arrests of people suspected of planning a coup or of involvement in political assassinations : the Ergenekon affair .
My warning to the Turkish authorities would be to continue to keep their actions within the law , as any contravention will be used to draw attention away from the substance and will be seized on by those who do not want to see a solution to this matter , do not want to get to the bottom of things .
Then there are the negative developments , however .
It is a bad thing that the prime minister has called on the population to stop buying certain newspapers .
It is a very bad thing that many of the leading members of a party that was democratically elected to the Turkish Parliament have been arrested .
The mass arrest of prominent members of the Kurdish Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) is just as unacceptable as a formal ban on the party , as the result is the same .
The scope for finding a political solution to the Kurdish issue has been drastically curtailed .
This is very good news for the extremists on both sides , but very bad news for the majority of Turks and Kurds , who have been longing for a peaceful solution to this problem for so long .
The situation of progress on the one hand and stagnation on the other will only be ended , in my opinion , if the government unambiguously opts for deeper reforms , if the opposition supports these in both word and deed and also , ladies and gentlemen , if the EU keeps its promise that Turkey can become a full member of the European Union provided it meets our democratic standards .
This brings me to my final comment , Madam President .
Whilst I am very pleased about the party-wide anxiety about Turkey 's democratisation , I have no sympathy at all with MEPs who are critical of Turkey but who are not prepared to allow it to become a full member if these problems are solved .
Even after my term of office has come to an end , I shall continue to argue for the reforms that are needed for Turkey to become a full member of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a 14-year-old boy in Hakkari was beaten into a coma by a SWAT team policeman .
Another 14 year old , who was fleeing a police gas attack , drowned after falling into a river .
On 4 April two people died at a demonstration near Urfa as a consequence of a police operation .
At present in Diyarbakir there are more than 185 minors in prison .
Hundreds of democratically elected politicians and activists of the DTP have been imprisoned , including three party leaders .
There are more than 207 proceedings against DTP MPs .
Such is my reading of the present democratic process in Turkey .
The list goes on .
This repression began shortly after 29 March , when the DTP enjoyed major successes in local government elections in the south-east of the country and the number of their mayoral appointments almost doubled , while by contrast the ruling AKP experienced bitter losses in its much sought after Kurdish region .
In my opinion there is a link between the election success of the DTP and the wave of repression against it .
It was then heard from government circles that the extension of the DTP 's election success right up to the border with Armenia was regarded as a security risk .
Instead of trying to understand this clear vote for what it is , namely an unambiguous message by the Kurds that a solution must be found within the system , an attempt is being made to repress this political success , and with police brutality , if necessary .
Unfortunately , I do not think that even the highly praised AKP has either the will or the determination to develop and push through a comprehensive strategy for the resolution of this conflict , which has lasted for decades .
As you all know , since the last progress report there has been no significant progress in the area of freedom of the press and of expression , recognition of the Kurdish reality , rights for religious minorities or civilising the military .
The ruling AKP must finally implement genuine constitutional reform and bring a new dynamism , which can regenerate the country constitutionally and democratically and accept its pluralistic , multi-ethnic and multi-cultural social reality .
Otherwise there can be no real democratisation in Turkey .
That should be clear to all of us here .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the European Union has made two cardinal errors in its relations with Turkey .
In 1999 , it press-ganged Turkey into becoming a candidate country , and continued on this wrong track by opening accession negotiations with Ankara in 2005 .
The Council and the Commission think that , in doing so , they can disregard the historical legacy of the Republic of Turkey .
Nowadays , this historical legacy - or rather burden - manifests itself in a veritable cultural battle between the secular Kemalist camp and the conservative / religious front surrounding the governing Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) as to the direction the Republic of Turkey should be taking .
A noxious consequence of this is the sensational Ergenekon trial of numerous prominent Kemalists .
When it comes to nationalistic attitudes towards the country 's religious and ethnic minorities , there is now precious little to choose between the Kemalists and Prime Minister Erdoğan .
The constant disenfranchisement of these minorities - which is part of the history of the Republic of Turkey - is , of course , at variance with the EU 's political conditions for accession .
I would refer the Council and the Commission to a wellknown Dutch saying : it is better to stop half way than to persevere in an error .
The European institutions and the Turkish authorities should learn from this wisdom at long last .
This is the only way to pave the way towards better , more realistic relations in the interests of both parties .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from what I have heard , it is clear that Turkey is a country with very big problems when it comes to democracy .
We have seen and we have heard of 15 000 minors in prisons , we have heard of hundreds of arrests on dubious charges , we are aware that the Kurdish problem is still continuing and above all the Armenian problem , the ageold problem that is absolutely still alive to this day .
We have seen the murders of priests or missionaries in the past two years , we have infinite problems .
If we compare this situation to that of another country , let us say Belarus , which is still is considered a pariah country in Europe , a country that apparently actually forms part of an axis of evil , it is hard to understand how we can continue to talk about Turkey joining Europe .
There are evidently strong lobbies that promote and desire at all costs Turkey 's entry to form part of Europe .
Apart from anything else , we cannot overlook the fact that there is a problem , Cyprus , that is actually unique in its essence : in other words a country that is a candidate for EU accession that occupies the land of another country and continues to occupy it by extending its domain over this island and exercising absolute nonliberal power over the people of the island .
I believe that Europeans are looking into their consciences and increasingly realising the inevitability of a decision against Turkey 's admission into Europe .
I will remind you of some facts : Turkey has 90 million inhabitants , strong demographic growth and above all we must not forget the fact that the Turkish speaking countries of Central Asia are demanding Turkish citizenship and the Turkish State seems intent on giving it to them .
This means that the entrance of Turkey would not mean simply Turkey joining Europe but also other peoples , other states in Europe .
Let us also not forget that , in historical terms , Turkey was against Europe and now it acts as a significant look-out for two powers that are certainly not European , in other words the United States and Israel .
Lastly , we must not overlook the factor of religion : millions of Turks entering Europe would mean the opening of thousands and thousands of mosques and therefore certainly a reduction in Christian identity and civil identity in Europe .
We must also not forget that mosques are often willing accomplices in allowing in ideas that are strongly anti-libertarian , anti-women and anti the European public .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , like the Commissioner , I would also like to send my condolences to the families of the victims of this savage attack .
I would also like to say in advance that I support all of Turkey 's efforts and endeavours in the direction of democratisation .
They are certainly intended to bring Turkey closer to the European Union - not ' into ' , but ' closer ' to the European Union .
I also believe that we must proceed with a policy of zero tolerance in the area of human rights and democratisation and must expect extremely high standards .
The examples which our colleagues have given speak for themselves and we can see that Turkey still has a very , very long road ahead of it before it reaches EU standards .
They also prove that so far Turkey has neglected to address and implement these fundamental constitutional reforms .
The system in Turkey is still characterised by the fact that there is no clear cut division of power between the various state authorities , and this is the root of many of the problems we find in Turkey 's political life today .
Unfortunately , it must also be said that the list of unsolved problems is getting longer rather than shorter .
For example , I will pinpoint parliamentary rights : there are particularly large deficits in the area of parliamentary budgetary control of military spending .
The parliament has hardly any say in this and , what is more , there are special funds over which the parliament has no control whatsoever .
In addition , the immunity of individual members of parliament is regulated in an extremely ambiguous way .
In this respect , there is a massive need for reform in Turkey .
Unfortunately , Turkey has also failed to sign various European and international agreements - the Convention against Torture , for example .
I believe it is really up to Turkey to set a good example here and meet European and international standards .
I could recite even more points , but I will leave it there and call upon the Commission to pay strict attention to progress in these areas .
( BG ) I share the concern for the democratic process in Turkey in light of the recent arrests which were made after the local elections .
Regardless of this , I do not think that politicians who have close links to organisations resorting to violent methods to achieve their aims should be supported .
Violence has never been an acceptable and justified means of protecting rights and freedoms .
I believe that Kurds must enjoy more cultural and educational rights and I greatly respect the continuing reforms , including the launch of a 24-hour Kurdishlanguage TV channel .
However , rights and freedoms , fellow Members , are not won through violence , but by using peaceful , political means , through dialogue and mutual respect .
This is why our sincere support for the reforms in Turkey will also encourage the EU 's fundamental values to be upheld , with one of the most important of these being respect for ethnic and religious differences and diversity .
I am sure that the bright prospect of accession to the European Union will speed up the respect for human rights and the reforms in Turkey .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , President , first of all I would like to greet the president of the DTP Party , Mr Ahmet Türk , who is a VIP guest here to follow the debate .
Dear Ahmet , you know that we are with you , that we support the democratic struggle your party is conducting in Turkey for the recognition of the fundamental rights of the Kurdish people .
We acknowledge that the DTP is an essential tool for fostering democracy in Turkey , and for this reason we firmly condemn the police operations that Prime Minister Erdoğan has ordered against you , imprisoning all three vice presidents of the DTP together with more than 300 militants and sympathisers .
The DTP 's victory in the last administrative elections shows that the DTP is a party that enjoys strong popular democratic support .
The European Parliament resolved to ask Prime Minister Erdoğan to table direct discussions with the DTP and instead his response was more oppression , more police , more authoritarianism and more imprisonment .
Everybody knows that my parliamentary group and the European Left have up to now supported Turkey 's application for membership of the European Union , at the same time supporting the process of reform in that country .
I believe , however , that over the last two years , and particularly during the last few months , Mr Erdoğan has showed his other side , that of a leader who is hand in glove with the worst part of the Turkish army that simply wishes to massacre the Kurds .
The process of reform is practically dead in the water , the prisons are filling with Kurds ; Mr Erdoğan himself is cutting off any prospect of Turkey 's membership .
The responsibility for what is happening in Euro-Turkish relations and the growing bewilderment of European public opinion with regard to Turkey lies with him and him alone .
I would like to send a very strong political message to Mr Erdoğan : either seek a negotiated political solution to the Kurdish question which , let us be very clear about this , is a process that will involve direct negotiations with the DTP , or we will ask you to suspend your negotiations for membership of the European Union .
The road to Turkey 's membership of the Union is via Diyarkabir and the DTP , otherwise it will be us , in other words the people who most supported your accession process , who ask for a pause for reflection , which could well become permanent .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today Turkey seems to function as a democracy , but it is not for the European Union to give endless lessons on good conduct , when the EU itself cheerfully and unscrupulously bypasses the sovereign will of its constituent peoples when they vote in referenda .
Basically , Turkey is still a long way from respecting the values of the European nations , as demonstrated by the situation of the countless ethnic and religious minorities which make up the country .
The situation of millions of Kurds is slow to improve .
Relations with the Armenians or even their Greek neighbours are under constant diplomatic or military pressure .
Cyprus is still under Turkish military occupation , in defiance of international law .
This has gone on for 35 years .
Religious minorities scarcely fare better .
The rights of the communities not listed in the treaties are regularly trampled on , under the blind eye of the European Commission , which continues , as does Parliament , to support the accession of this country to the European Union .
Therefore , let us be consistent .
While cooperation with Turkey is essential , any accession plans for Turkey must be made in accordance with the European democracies , namely through referenda .
Mr President , we have founded a lot of our efforts and based many of our policies on the hope that by being nice to Turkey this country will change its Kemalic fascism into democratic-like behaviour that is just about acceptable .
We were absolutely wrong and have rapidly become desperately disappointed and frustrated .
The democratic reform process in Turkey has been moving with the pace of a three-legged turtle .
Commissioner , we and the vast majority of the European citizens we represent have run out of patience .
We have had enough .
The governing regime in Turkey has proven itself totally incapable and unwilling to get its country into the state of a 21st-century civilisation .
Commissioner , the carrot technique has failed gloriously and you have to admit it .
The time has now come to use the stick .
Mr President , Parliament , I am afraid , is proving itself again to be rather fickle on the issue of Turkey .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could give us his frank appraisal of the Ergenekon affair .
Does he agree that it is a welcome sign of the cleansing of the stables and a signal that the judicial process is finally starting to attack deep corruption inside parts of the Turkish State ?
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to respond to what Mr Lagendijk has said .
We too of course see the positive diplomatic role Turkey can play in relation to Armenia and in relation to the Middle East .
However , diplomacy and democracy are two different things .
We are particularly concerned by Prime Minister Erdoğan 's action against Ahmed Doğan 's publishing group .
Even Der Spiegel , which has nothing to do with either Doğan or Springer , writes of Erdoğan 's private vendetta against Doğan .
I have already mentioned the Commission 's progress report .
Once again I would like to ask the Commission a specific question .
Is the Commission more or less concerned about freedom of opinion and of the press in Turkey than it was at the time the progress report was published ?
If no , why is it no longer concerned ?
If yes , what specific measures does the Commission intend to take ?
How important is the subject of freedom of the press and of opinion in relation to the ongoing accession negotiations ?
As I said , this is after all about the first Copenhagen criterion , the political criterion .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I want to thank honourable Members , first of all , for a very serious and substantive debate on the democratic process in Turkey , and I also want this evening to thank the European Parliament for its contribution to the EU 's policy in relation to Turkey .
There has been critical but constructive support for our engagement with Turkey in a very critical period .
I think Parliament 's approach - like , I trust , the Commission 's approach - can be described as fair and firm in relation to Turkey and its EU accession process .
Indeed , in my view , we have to be fair and firm and only by being both at the same time can we achieve results .
What I mean is that we have to be fair in the sense of maintaining the EU perspective as the critical driver of reforms in the country , keeping our word concerning Turkey 's chance to show that it will be able to meet EU accession criteria .
At the same time , we have to be firm by applying rigorous conditionality , especially as regards fundamental freedoms and democratic principles .
These two key elements - fairness and firmness - only work together and they cannot be separated from each other .
I think that is clearly the best way of supporting a democratic transformation in Turkey , which is our objective , because it makes Turkey a better partner and a prospective possible Member State of the European Union , in line with the negotiating framework adopted in the early hours of 4 October 2005 .
The current state of affairs is pretty much a mixed picture , as Joost Lagendijk , the chair of the European Parliament Delegation to the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , described it .
Sometimes it feels like two steps forward and one step backward , but better that way than vice versa .
As Mr Duff raised the issue , I think that the Ergenekon investigation is a case in point .
In view of the investigation so far , it seems that it was essential that this network behind potential political or other attacks against democracy in Turkey was revealed and will continue to be revealed in the spirit of the rule of law and democratic secularism .
On the other hand , in the recent stages of the Ergenekon investigation , one may question whether all the principles of the rule of law have been truly applied or whether there are some other political purposes behind these arrests .
The jury is still out .
We are following this very closely and we shall certainly report on this in our forthcoming progress report in the coming autumn .
In my view , three principles are particularly important .
First of all , the democratic principles : pursuing constitutional reform , where reform of the rules governing political parties is essential in view of the experiences of last year , this year and previous years , when we have seen the pitfalls of the constitutional framework of Turkey in this regard , as pointed out by the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe .
Second , freedom of expression , which Graf Lambsdorff referred to , is the bedrock of democracy .
This was discussed quite recently at the meeting of Parliament 's Joint Parliamentary Committee with the Turkish Grand National Assembly .
I am concerned about media freedom and its development in Turkey and we will certainly come back to this as a special section in our progress report in the coming autumn .
Yes , there has been positive progress concerning the consequences of the reform of the infamous Article 301 some one or two years ago .
On the other hand , relative progress concerning Article 301 does not justify attacks on media freedom elsewhere , as has been referred to in several statements this evening .
Finally , the rule of law , which is underpinning the functioning of all society and the economy and which is the key value of the European Union : that is illustrated in the fight against terrorism , which we support , as long as it is conducted in line with the rule of law and principles of justice in the best European tradition .
So , the pace of negotiations with Turkey will essentially depend on the progress and intensity of the reforms enhancing fundamental freedoms and the rule of law in the country , in all walks of life and all corners of the country .
That is the foundation of the negotiation process .
Progress in the technical negotiations will depend on whether there is serious progress in , and intensity and implementation of , these reforms enhancing fundamental freedoms and human rights and democratic secularism .
These are enshrined in the Treaty on European Union and in our common European values .
That is the critical yardstick of Turkish progress towards the European Union .
The debate is closed .
Protection of animals at the time of killing ( debate )
- The next item is the report by Mr Wojciechowski , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council directive on the protection of animals at the time of killing - C6-0451 / 2008 - .
Mr President , our civilisation is a civilisation which uses animals .
We kill billions of animals for meat , for skins and for a variety of economic needs .
Sometimes we also kill them where there is no economic reason - for sport , such as hunting , or for entertainment , such as in bullfighting .
For me killing animals is neither sport , nor entertainment , nor culture , but we will not go into that here , because the subject of our debate is the killing of animals for economic reasons .
Protection of animals at the time of killing .
Is it possible ?
Is it possible to protect an animal which we are going to kill ?
Yes , it is possible , mainly by sparing it unnecessary suffering .
By protecting animals from inhuman treatment we protect our own humanity .
The proposed regulation improves standards of protecting animals at the time of killing , and introduces higher , better technical norms and fosters better monitoring of their use .
It introduces greater personal responsibility for the proper handling of animals , and also introduces a requirement to appoint a special officer responsible for animal protection in facilities which carry out slaughter .
The new regulation , in place of the old 1993 directive , means obvious progress in realisation of the idea of animal protection , and therefore as rapporteur I endorse the regulation .
There were several areas of controversy .
A conspicuous example is the question of ritual slaughter .
The basic principle is to kill animals after they have been stunned and rendered unconscious , but an exception is allowed for religious reasons - killing without prior stunning , if this is required for religious reasons .
This concerns adherents of Islam and Judaism , who kill animals without stunning them first .
Amendments which were aimed at introducing a comprehensive ban on ritual slaughter in the European Union have been rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The Committee members were of the opinion that such a ban would be unworkable .
The Committee has also rejected a proposal that would have given each Member State the right to ban ritual slaughter through its own legislation .
This is contained in Amendment 28 .
I would like to point out that a vote in favour of this amendment means that Member States will not be able to ban ritual slaughter on their territory .
A vote against the amendment means a return to the position of the European Commission , which allows imposition of a ban on ritual slaughter under domestic law .
Another controversial matter is the appointment of national reference centres , which were to be appointed by each Member State .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development rejected this idea in Amendment 64 .
Personally , I think that such reference centres should be established , and that they could also play a role in monitoring the handling of animals at the time of killing .
I would like to draw attention to the suggestions of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development which are contained in my report .
Firstly , measures to introduce higher standards of animal protection at the time of killing should obtain financial support from the European Union .
The noble ends of animal protection cannot be achieved without financial layout and without creating material incentives to introduce increased standards .
Secondly , the report proposes that the improved standards should apply not only to producers within the European Union , but also to importers of meat products to Europe .
We want to be sure that the EU market will be supplied only with animal products which come from animals killed in the way required by EU law .
Ladies and gentlemen , the last sitting of the European Parliament is largely devoted to the protection of animals .
Today we have resolved to ban the import of products from seals which have been killed with cruelty , we have resolved to impose higher standards for the protection of experimental animals , and now we are debating higher standards of animal protection at the time of killing .
I am glad that Parliament is doing so much for animal protection , and I am glad that I can be part of it .
The spirit of Saint Francis of Assisi is present in this Chamber .
May he also be present in the next parliamentary term .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Wojciechowski , for having supported the main elements of the Commission proposal on the protection of animals at the time of killing .
In particular , I am pleased that the European Parliament accepted the general approach of the proposal , which is to ensure the animal welfare legislation applicable to slaughterhouses is in line with the hygiene package which was adopted back in 2004 .
The current legislation on the protection of animals at slaughter dates back to 1993 and is clearly not in line with the latest developments in the areas of food safety , animal health and animal welfare .
Under the current proposal , slaughterhouse operators will have to establish standard operating procedures , rely on welfare indicators for stunning , and personnel will have to receive training on animal welfare .
On the issue of religious slaughter , I would like to stress that the Commission fully shares the attachment of the European Parliament to freedom of religion and to underline that the Commission 's intention is to maintain the status quo on this sensitive matter .
The Treaty clearly states the need to take into account practices related to religion in the formulation of Community policy .
It is clear that there are many different practices regarding religious slaughter across the Member States of the Union .
The Commission suggests that subsidiarity should be maintained in this area .
It has worked well for the past 15 years and should continue to work well in the future .
In this respect , we can accept in principle , subject to rewording , amendments that reflect the approach of the current legislation , which preserves the right of freedom of religion while allowing Member States to adopt or maintain stricter rules .
In this regard , I would note that there seems to be agreement in Council along these lines .
I would now like to say a few words on the practice of backyard slaughter .
Today , the slaughter of animals for private consumption is permitted outside slaughterhouses ( except cattle ) , but pigs , sheep and goats must have previously been stunned .
Some citizens in the Member States traditionally slaughter pigs for Christmas and lambs for Easter .
The preservation of these traditions is important to the Commission but there is no need to derogate from the stunning of animals , thereby undermining the welfare of the animals .
Therefore the Commission believes that prior stunning should always be performed when pigs or lambs are slaughtered outside slaughterhouses .
Another point of the proposal is related to the establishment of a national centre of reference .
We believe that this element is essential to guarantee proper enforcement of the proposed measures .
In slaughterhouses , official inspectors perform food safety controls , mainly on carcasses .
They have little time and limited competences to assess animal welfare parameters .
These days , stunning equipment is complex and difficult to evaluate in relation to their welfare efficiency .
National reference centres would meet the need for technical and scientific information on the welfare of animals at slaughter and the Commission considers that this requirement should be maintained in the proposal .
The Commission also believes that certificates of competence required for the personnel in slaughterhouses should be issued following an independent examination .
This system has been developed in other areas of animal welfare , both in the public and the private sector .
Where this has been properly implemented , it has provided good results .
This should therefore be extended to all EU slaughterhouses .
Animals are also killed in huge numbers outside slaughterhouses in order to control the spread of disease .
It is true that requirements already exist for animal health purposes , but today 's requirements do not relate to animal welfare .
People consider that mass culling for disease-control purposes should be performed in the most humane way possible .
Transparency , which means proper reporting , is therefore essential .
Furthermore , previous experience in these emergency situations has shown that it is crucial to collect information on good practices and on mistakes that might have occurred .
Proper monitoring and reporting on animal welfare should therefore be required in cases of mass culling .
I would very much welcome your support of the Commission proposal .
If successfully adopted , the European Union would have the potential to lead and innovate globally on animal welfare .
Every year hundreds of millions of animals - pigs , cows , sheep , hens , horses and other animals - are slaughtered and transported throughout Europe .
In addition to that , 25 million fur-bearing animals are slaughtered .
This involves an enormous amount of suffering for the animals .
Of course , the best solution would be for us not to eat them at all and for us not to wear animals in the form of furs .
However , this regulation is not really about that , but about how we can reduce the suffering of animals at slaughterhouses .
The Commission 's proposal is a step forward , but it must be made more stringent on a number of points .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety we voted through my opinion , in which we demand , among other things , shorter transport times and waiting times at slaughterhouses , investments in mobile slaughterhouses , that fur-bearing animals be included under this regulation , that Member States be able to go further and have more stringent provisions and that animal welfare inspectors and the proposed national reference centres for animal welfare be independent and be given greater powers .
It is gratifying that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development supports our proposal on mobile slaughterhouses and to include fur-bearing animals .
However , I am deeply concerned about several other amendments put forward by this committee and by individual Members .
It is unfortunate that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has completely deleted the proposed time limits for transport to the slaughterhouse and the waiting time inside the slaughterhouse .
Please vote in favour of Amendment 125 put forward by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left so that we regain these requirements .
I also do not understand why the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wants to delete the proposal on national reference centres for animal welfare .
It is also incredibly important to allow Member States to go further and have more ambitious provisions than those laid down here .
I urge you to vote in favour of Amendment 124 .
Finally , I am deeply concerned about the fact that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development does not want to allow the Member States which currently have a complete ban on slaughter without stunning to retain that ban .
This is the case , for example , in my country , Sweden .
We have found a balance between religious tradition and animal welfare that most people are happy with .
Please vote against Amendment 28 , as proposed by the rapporteur .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by happy coincidence it falls on me to speak this evening for the last time , at least during this term , under your presidency , which I believe is your final presidency , because you have decided not to stand for re-election .
I am delighted to express my satisfaction , Mr Cocilovo , for what you have done in this Parliament and for the esteem in which you are held by all the MEPs and not merely by the Italian delegation .
I was elected to the same constituency as you ; we are political opponents , but I feel as if I owe it to you to wish you a profitable political future acting in the interests of our country , but also of Europe .
Now I will get to the point .
I believe that we in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have done an excellent job .
After listening to consultants and after listening to different professional groups , we have tried to improve on the text that was given to us by the Council and the Commission , making it more applicable and more consistent , safeguarding what amounts to the expression of and the right to religious practices , in all their facets .
There were some contradictions , because the Commission and the Council stated and asserted that they would safeguard ritual butchery , but certain obligations made it impossible in practice - I refer to hanging upside down and the much debated topic of stunning .
From a dialectical viewpoint , this seems like cruelty , but what does it actually involve : a decisive cut is associated with the same pain level as stunning , which is effected by means of a captive bolt to the forehead , after which there is no more pain , after which it would be further cruelty to stun the animals once their throats have been cut .
I do not therefore believe that animals are being treated cruelly if they are not stunned after their throats are cut .
The Charter of Human Rights states that whenever there is a conflict with animal rights , human rights take precedence , in other words the right to religious practices , and not only Muslim , not only Jewish but also Christian practices - as we have discussed at length in the committee - should be protected and protected to the full .
Not least because , since we have reciprocal relations with non-member countries , people who practice certain types of religions could otherwise not eat meat in Europe because it cannot be produced in Europe and cannot be imported .
I do not believe this is fair .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we have already heard , the proposal we are debating today replaces a directive which has become obsolete due to technological advances , and brings in a new regulation that is going to allow for Community requirements on animal welfare to be applied uniformly across the European Union .
In the context of the internal market , and given that observing regulations can damage competition , it is going to enable similar competition standards for all Community operators .
In fact , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which has opted to make small-scale operators exempt from some requirements , has increased responsibility for the remaining large operators - that is the text we are debating today - and , in addition , has created the post of animal welfare officer in large companies .
The report we are debating improves the Commission proposal on fundamental issues .
One example is that it no longer attempts to amend through this proposal current animal transport provisions relating to total transport times - something we considered absolutely outrageous - and it maintains the current ban on transporting animals whose particular characteristics mean they are not fit for transportation .
In addition , it corrects and clarifies companies ' responsibilities as regards complying with welfare regulations : operators , rather than workers , are responsible for ensuring the rules are applied .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like you to bear in mind that in the European Union no two legal systems in the different regions and countries are the same ; each one is different .
The national reference centres you are proposing and to which you have just referred in your speech , were they to be implemented as the Commission suggests in its proposal , would entail the creation of 17 national reference centres in Spain , and not just one national reference centre .
In Spain central government powers are decentralised to the autonomous communities and we would therefore be forced to establish 17 of these national centres you believe to be possible .
That would be ridiculous : one centre for every region .
That is why we propose that the relevant authority be responsible for ensuring the rules are correctly applied .
Mr President , the Wojciechowski report on the proposal for a Council regulation on the protection of animals at the time of killing raises the very important subject of animal welfare .
It indirectly poses the question as to whether contemporary humanity is able to break with cruelty and create a new world of values , where there is sensitivity to pain , suffering , fear and anxiety about losing life , and not only in relation to people , but also to animals .
Unfortunately , despite the development of civilisation and technology , every year billions of animals and birds are still killed , often with cruelty and even without stunning .
This gives rise to further questions , as to why the behaviour of intelligent and educated people towards animals is often like that of primitive tribes , condemned to fight for their existence .
What should we do to change this ?
These questions are in large measure answered by the report , which still does not resolve many fundamental problems connected , for example , with legislation , ritual slaughter and forming the conscience of society .
These problems , therefore , remain to be resolved by the Council , the Commission and by the new Parliament .
I hope that further work on improving the welfare of animals will be accompanied by the realisation that animals are living beings , which can feel pain and suffering ; that they are not things , and that people owe them respect , protection and care .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to add my own congratulations to our rapporteur , Janusz Wojciechowski , for tackling a very complex and emotional dossier with some aplomb and dealing with a lot of conflicting viewpoints .
In this speech , which is probably my last speech in this mandate , it is worth remarking to colleagues that this is what I call a classic European Parliament European dossier .
It is technical , it is complex , it is a little bit distant from our citizens , but it is worth remembering that animal welfare is of crucial importance to our citizens , and fairness is of crucial importance to our producers , to our consumers and to our market .
I am particularly drawn to Amendments 45 and 46 on ensuring that third countries seeking to export to our territory match our standards .
That is a crucial element of fairness for our producers and for consumer confidence in our markets , so it is very much to be welcomed .
Likewise , the proportionality of the measure in Amendments 65 to 67 allowing for on-the-job training is particularly to be welcomed for smaller slaughterhouses and smaller operations across the European Union .
Also , the derogations allowing small abattoirs to be exempted from having the animal welfare officer present are very much to be welcomed .
On religious slaughter , I think the Commissioner is absolutely right .
I do not think we need to regulate that in this package , so this is good news for consumers .
This is good news for confidence in the EU meat market and it is a good job all round . My congratulations .
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur and thank him for the approachability he has shown .
I agree with the Commission 's proposals stipulating that animals must be killed only using a method which ensures immediate death or after stunning , while accepting however as an exception slaughter as part of religious rituals .
I also support this regulation not being applied either in the case of animals being slaughtered for personal consumption , in keeping with the traditions of major religious festivities , such as Easter and Christmas , and only for a period of 10 days prior to when these festivities take place .
Staff involved in slaughter and other related activities must attend suitable training courses which are carried out in the normal way , with a certificate of competence being awarded .
The European regulations introduced in the area of animal protection are among the most stringent in the world .
They result in higher production costs and may also distort competition with states whose legislation is less strict in this respect .
This is why I call on the Commission to ensure that meat products or other products of animal origin imported from nonEU countries meet European standards .
What we would like to see is for the Commission to be able to carry out inspections in abattoirs authorised to export their products to the European Union , confirming that , in addition to the health certificates already awarded , regulations on animal protection are also being respected .
Mr President , can I thank Ms Vassiliou very much for her work here in Parliament .
She picked up the dossier only for the last couple of years and has done an extremely good job , so I congratulate her .
Can I also congratulate Janusz Wojciechowski for doing a very good report and being a very good vice-chair of the Agriculture Committee .
I believe that animal welfare standards in Europe are absolutely paramount to the fact that we produce high-quality meat .
We want to make sure that it is slaughtered carefully and to high standards , both for hygiene and for animal welfare .
I do actually welcome the idea of mobile slaughterhouses , because I think this will be extremely good .
I also think we have to be careful , because many small slaughterhouses in Europe have been closed down in the past - and in my own Member State that has happened - so we want to make sure we have got proper regulation , but not too much regulation that will actually close them down .
I am going to be quite controversial now .
I believe that animals are born into this world and we , as man , decide exactly how they are going to be slaughtered . I think the Commission must make up its mind .
Either you accept religious slaughter and the fact that the animals are not stunned , so those animals in other countries which we want to be killed at Christmas can have the same process , or you actually stand up for what I believe to be right , and that is that we , as man , decide how an animal is to be slaughtered and that animals should be stunned before slaughter .
I think it is absolutely clear that this should happen .
In some Member States there is pre-stunning and post-stunning of animals under both halal slaughter and under Jewish slaughter .
I wonder why it cannot happen in the whole of Europe , because we have to be absolutely certain that we treat all animals the same .
While I accept subsidiarity , I also want to see the Commission put pressure on Member States to make sure that we have proper slaughtering and stunning in the future .
Also , when it comes to labelling , I see no problem .
Why should we not label animals as to how they have been slaughtered ?
If there is no problem with the halal and Jewish slaughter , then why worry about labelling it ?
So let us have proper labelling so people know exactly what they are buying in the future , because it is very important for European agriculture to have very high standards .
Mr President , the right of freedom of religion cannot , in my view , disregard the rules and regulations of our countries and cannot violate so profoundly our standards of respect for slaughter hygiene and animal welfare .
Therefore , I fail to see why , in the name of religion , we should tolerate anachronistic , unhygienic and even sadistic killings of animals , sometimes done in pompous ceremonial circumstances , carried out in front of both adults and children .
I therefore believe that animals should only be killed under the controlled circumstances of an authorised and inspectable slaughterhouse and no animal should be slaughtered without prior stunning .
Freedom of religion is one thing , causing unnecessary pain to animals and violating hygiene rules is another .
The rules and laws in the EU should be the same for all , irrespective of religion .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in this debate I think the issue of animal welfare has been narrowed down too much to the question of whether or not we should use stunning .
It is not that I am against stunning , it is just that we must realise that stunning was originally introduced , not out of concern for animal welfare , but for economic reasons , to be able to slaughter animals in factory farming , which involves mass killing in slaughterhouses , without affecting and lessening the quality of the meat through the anxiety caused by slaughter .
Thus with religious slaughter it is about the high art of slaughtering without the animals experiencing additional suffering , and with the issue of stunning in slaughterhouses , it is not only about whether or not stunning should be used , but also about the handling of animals during transportation and during the waiting time in the slaughterhouses .
I agree with Mr Parish 's point that religious slaughter should be labelled accordingly , so that consumers know what they are buying and what they are supporting .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's debate on the Wojciechowski report reflects the concerns of Parliament , the Commission and indeed of the public over the welfare of animals at the time of slaughter .
The Commission proposal introduces important innovations which I hope you can support .
Today , EU legislation requires that operators from third countries exporting to the EU apply equivalent standards .
In addition , meat import certificates must confirm that EU standards have been respected in the exporting establishments .
Therefore , as regards the Commission proposal , we are of the opinion that the principle of equivalence should continue to apply .
I have listened carefully to all your comments , and I think this input is very useful in our efforts to arrive at a truly effective production of animal welfare .
With the adoption of this report , we are sending the right signals to the public that we are addressing their concerns while , at the same time , we are setting modern standards for global welfare practices at the time of slaughter of animals . I thank Parliament and its rapporteur for their support .
Finally , as this is my last address to this House , I would like to say how much I have enjoyed working with all of you , and let me wish all of you success in your future endeavours and every happiness .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to add my voice to those wishes , and I am glad the Commissioner 's last speech in Parliament concerns the presentation of what is truly a good draft and a good regulation , and indeed the majority of those who have spoken in this discussion are in full agreement here .
I very much wish that the final result of this work , this joint work of Parliament , the Commission and the Council , will not significantly impair what the Commission has proposed , because the Commission has indeed made very good proposals .
However , in the approach to animal protection , in those measures which aim to improve the welfare of animals , there are two important things .
The first of these is money .
Unfortunately , we will not gain the acceptance of society for raising these standards if we do not ensure that they are properly financed .
Community means are essential here in order to achieve the objectives that have been set .
It is not possible to introduce higher standards such as these without money , passing all the costs on to the bodies that have to introduce the standards .
The second matter concerns equivalence , so that the improved standards do not reduce the competitiveness of producers within the European Union .
I think we are on the right road to achieving this .
I am glad that there is approval for these proposals in this Chamber .
Once again I would like to thank the Commissioner .
I would also like to thank all the fellow Members who have spoken in this discussion , and I am glad that the idea of raising the standards of animal welfare is universally accepted in this Chamber .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 6 May 2009 .
General revision of the Rules of Procedure ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the general revision of _ Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I intend to use somewhat less than my four minutes now in introducing it and maybe a little longer when I reply at the end , if there are questions that need clarification .
This report is the fruit of a lot of work .
The sources of the reforms that we would hope to introduce to our Rules of Procedure come in part from the work of the Reform Working Group established by the Conference of Presidents , ably chaired by my colleague , Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , who made a number of proposals that were approved by the Conference of Presidents and have been forwarded to us to translate as best we can into the Rules of Procedure .
The second source is a lot of smaller changes that , in many ways , have been in the pipeline for a long time but , rather than have a string of reports changing the rules on minor points , we have grouped them together .
Some of these are technical ; some are clarifying and make our rules more readable , such as the one that puts together Rules 141 , 142 and 143 into a single codified text governing how we actually organise our debates in plenary .
Related to that is the innovative amendment to say that we should have this blue card procedure to be able to interrupt each other .
Mr Duff for instance , right now , may want to put a question to me about what I said , and I would let him do so for 30 seconds under this rule , if it is adopted .
I am sure , Mr President , you would already let him do so now if he wanted , but , fortunately , he does not want to .
So there are some innovative features that should make our debates a little more lively .
I remember when I first proposed the catch-the-eye period at the end of ordinary debates , everyone said : oh , no , we cannot do that , it will mess up the speaking time of the groups , and so on .
Yet we now do it , and it is an accepted part of our procedures and very much welcomed , I think , by most Members .
I would suggest that maybe the blue card procedure will be the same : there are some hesitations now , but let us try it out , let us see how it works , and I am confident we can make it work .
There have also been some amendments which arose as we discussed this , either at committee stage or now in plenary .
For instance , there was a suggestion that all final votes on legislation should automatically be by roll-call vote - I think that came from Ms Dahl .
I welcome that amendment , and we have put it in my report .
There have been suggestions from many Members that we put something in the rule about intergroups , if only actually to delimit very clearly what they are and what they are not , to show that they are informal and that they may not take over the responsibilities of parliamentary bodies .
So there are a lot of interesting things in here .
There is also the amendment to deal with the odd system we have that our opening session is chaired by the oldest Member instead of , for instance , the outgoing President , which happens in some parliaments - or an outgoing Vice-President , even , if the President were not re-elected , perhaps .
That is a rather sensible improvement to our procedures .
I will wind up there .
I have not used all my time , but , if I need to , I am happy to come back at the end and answer questions or queries .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to welcome this proposal and also to thank Richard Corbett for his hard , and not always rewarding , work .
Very often when we change the Rules of Procedure our colleagues get worried about what is happening .
Most of them only realise what has happened and what changes we have made once it has come into effect , by which time it can no longer be changed .
I firmly support most of the proposals which have been tabled , especially because they reflect not just your hard work , but also - as you mentioned - that of the parliamentary reform group chaired by Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , which prepared this proposal very well .
However , during the parliamentary reform process , I also made it clear for our group when we had our discussions that this report on parliamentary reform has to be approved by changes to the Rules of Procedure .
This is a democratic procedure ending in a vote .
Nothing could be changed just by discussions in that group and we worked very much along these lines .
I would also like to mention that I was somewhat critical about what has just been mentioned , namely that some of the informal procedures which we have in the Parliament are institutionalised .
I am somewhat afraid because if we have a custom , then it is better to keep it as a custom and not necessarily change the rules .
For our group , the most important point is , however , proportionality .
In our Parliament , the committees have very strong roles .
In preparing the votes here in Parliament they take a lot of the burden from this House by voting in committee .
It is not just a simple question of procedure , but a question of democracy , that the committees reflect the proportions which exist in plenary when important issues are decided .
I think this is a basic question of democracy and , on behalf of the PPE-DE , support the report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I am one of those curious constitutional animals who think that the Rules of Procedure mirror our own work here in our own Parliament .
So I think this is an important piece of work by Richard Corbett , who is the eminent specialist in this field .
To his credit I must say that this is the second modification of the Rules of Procedure .
There are things that have changed very recently and that we are changing again , because we have seen that the practice of our Parliament demands that those changes be made .
I have one general remark and three specific ones to put before you tonight .
The general remark is that I think it is also very important to talk about the second aspect of Mr Corbett 's report : the impact of the Lisbon Treaty upon our Rules of Procedure .
It is very important to talk about that too , because a change to the Rules of Procedure without that second part would be imperfect .
My three specific remarks : the first one concerns a modification in which I played a small part myself .
It is the fact that we are trying to put into the Rules of Procedure this idea of an agora , of the possibility for citizens , too , to address the European Parliament and to participate in discussions before the European Parliament .
I think this is a symbolically important initiative that we took together with my friend and colleague Gérard Onesta , and I think it would be a good thing if that were to be enshrined in the Rules of Procedure .
The second thing that is , I think , of importance is the change we have made to the own-initiative reports : the fact that , having seen how the own-initiative reports have been in practice , we are reintroducing the possibility for amendments , albeit by one 10th of parliamentarians .
The third aspect is this blue card procedure .
I am in favour of everything that will enliven our parliamentary discussions here , so this possibility for parliamentarians to interrupt one another in a civilised way and to speak like that is a good idea .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first I would like to thank Mr Corbett for his work .
The ALDE Group will support the package .
It is a modernising reform of the House , which we appreciate : it will make us more efficient and more pluralistic , and I hope in the end it will make us more attractive to public opinion and , indeed , the press .
I have two or three quibbles , however .
The first is on the point that Mr Szájer spoke about : the attempt to force committees to be rigidly proportionate to the disposition of parties in Parliament .
I think it is actually perfectly proper for a political group to express a preference to put more of its members on a committee that it regards as especially important .
I think that , if we pass Amendment 42 , then the groups and Members will find it frustrating , and it will require , in the end , greater flexibility .
I would also like to defend strongly the changes agreed in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to Rule 45 ( 2 ) that Costas Botopoulos has just spoken about .
I think we need to have a fall-back position to improve the own-initiative reports if they require it , and our experience since July , when that previous change was brought in , has exposed the fact that they frequently require improvement in the plenary .
I would also like to commend Amendment 68 concerning the recasting procedure .
I think Parliament has constrained itself too tightly , and we should more properly reflect the interinstitutional agreement of 2001 in our procedures to permit committees to talk about substantive changes to parts of directives or regulations that the Commission is seeking to recast , but in a very restricted form .
Finally , I am seeking to take out the addition of split and separate votes to the procedure that will permit the President to refer back to a committee a report which has attracted more than 50 substantive amendments .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have never had much time for the great parliamentary reforms carried out by Mr Corbett - he is a friend of mine and we have worked together for many years , he is aware of this and he will not hold it against me - because they tend to turn our Parliament into a bureaucratic machine where the role of individual MEPs and minority groups and even the committees must be subject to the growing , partly arbitrary , decisionmaking power of the Conference of Presidents and the administration .
In addition , they make the relationship between the primary committee and committees asked for an opinion in the legislative procedure confused and basically conflictual .
I must say I am staggered that this evening , in this debate , we are not talking about the things that we consider to be the fundamental problems in this procedural reform .
The first thing is the confusion that will inevitably be created between the primary committee and the committee asked for an opinion , because when the primary committee rejects the amendments of the committee asked for an opinion , these amendments might end up directly in the Chamber , obviously creating an extremely risky potential for legal confusion - as we also incidentally saw in the case of REACH .
No committee asked for an opinion is , furthermore , actually free to carry out its work , due to the confused and absolutely unacceptable mechanism represented by the possibility of making joint votes and having joint rapporteurs on topics particularly important to our legislative power .
Lastly , Mr President , there is another element that concerns us very much .
One of the outcomes to emerge from the working group on internal reform , of which I was a part , and that we originally considered positive , was the proposal to strengthen the powers and the role of the Committee on Petitions in a truly significant manner .
In this reform , however , the role of the Committee on Petitions has been killed off , in the sense that it will no longer be possible for the Committee on Petitions to find its way directly to the Chamber except after unspeakable complications and possible conflicts with the competent committee .
For all these reasons , our group considers that this reform is not ready and we believe that it would be an error by a majority of our Parliament to adopt it .
Thank you , Mrs Frassoni .
Mr Corbett will naturally have the right of reply , but I cannot fail to note that Mrs Frassoni used a red card while waiting to try out the blue card .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , rules of procedure form the basis of all work in a democratically elected House .
Clear rules ensure that everyone participating in the political process is treated equally .
You cannot change the requirements in order to keep certain groups , persons or attitudes from having influence .
You cannot bend the rules just because it suits you to do so .
In the past week , for example , the Conference of Presidents discussed an application to circumvent the vote on the Staes report .
Fortunately , the Legal Service rejected this .
The result of a vote must stand .
Consequently , my group , too , has tabled amendments that would make all voting electronic .
This would enable us to avoid mistakes and at the same time ensure that we have a quorum .
I call upon the Members to vote in favour of these amendments .
( DE ) Mr President , to reform the European Union is difficult , but to reform the European Parliament is even more difficult , as we have seen in the debate on the revision of the Rules of Procedure and the work of our fellow Member Richard Corbett .
I would like to thank Mr Corbett for the truly enormous commitment he has shown , to bring the many different interests under one umbrella and to carry this revision of our Rules of Procedure through to the plenum .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament will support this report .
We are waiting for the Treaty of Lisbon ; then Parliament will have more legislative powers and we must get ready to place legislating at the heart of our work .
Initiative reports will have to take second place ; legislation needs to come first .
We must also be more robust in our work around the world .
Journeys by parliamentary delegations to different countries , to different parts of the world must be linked to Parliament 's technical committees .
If a delegation is dealing with a subject like climate change or social protection , experts from the relevant technical committee should be on board as well .
I welcome the fact that we are making our debates more attractive : in future it is not the red card , but the blue card that will bring more dynamism .
This is excellent .
Cooperation between committees , these joint committees , that is a test run , because the previous practice was unsatisfactory .
Let us be honest , the advising committee had almost no chance .
In this respect , the trial with joint sittings by two committees is a new attempt to devise something better .
This reform is essential .
It is also good that we are doing it before the elections and not postponing it until the next legislative period . I would once more like to thank Mr Corbett and all those who participated .
( FR ) Mr President , although excellent , Mr Corbett 's report unfortunately includes a serious error .
Our aim is to provide high-quality parliamentary services .
We must therefore avoid mistakes and be able to improve the texts .
Only Amendment 8 , which concerns Rule 45 , will enable us , with the support of 75 Members - which will not be easy to obtain - to table amendments in the Chamber .
The rapporteur and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs have decided to reject this procedure , for fear of being swamped with amendments .
The changes we proposed , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , sought to grant this right to two or three political groups .
We have coordinators and shadow rapporteurs who are competent and follow the legislative process .
Rejecting the change proposed by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs amounts to denying the power to improve a text within the framework of a normal procedure , which is a serious error .
. - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Schadenfreude is the only true joy , says the cynic .
However , even those of us who are not cynical naturally admit that Schadenfreude is a form of joy , and it is this sort of joy that I am feeling now .
Why ?
Well , last year we in the June List and the Independence and Democracy Group started to request roll-call votes in all final votes .
I remember how President Pöttering scolded us , derided us and claimed that it cost the earth .
Now the committee is proposing that all final votes on legislative proposals be conducted as roll-call votes . And quite rightly , too !
In order to be able to demand political responsibility from their MEPs , voters must be able to check how they voted .
How did Mr Hannan , Mrs Wallis or Mrs Svensson vote , to name just a few of my favourite Members ?
This proposal constitutes an important step towards a democratic process and it strengthens voters ' control of the ' yes-men ' in this House .
I would like to thank Mr Corbett for this and to thank the President for allowing me to speak .
( FR ) Mr President , in reality , if a quorum were to apply to our deliberations , imagine what would happen .
There are only 11 of us present today taking part in debates on extremely important issues , which concern the next Parliament .
This is why I believe that the very principle underlying these changes is highly questionable .
What is even more questionable - irrespective of the work carried out by Mr Corbett - is an amendment which has been rejected by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs being referred back to us by the two main groups in this House in order to modify - in circumstances we know full well concern a specific individual - the traditional provision common to all parliaments of the world according to which the inaugural session is chaired by the oldest Member .
This provision is particularly valid , and wanting to change it simply because the next oldest Member might not be agreeable to the majority groups is clearly an especially underhand measure .
For that matter , this sums up Parliament 's problem .
I will have been a Member for 20 years soon .
I have noticed that each time the minority exercises a right , the Rules of Procedure are changed .
It would be better to repeal the Rules of Procedure and then just accept the will of the majority groups .
rapporteur . - Mr President , may I first begin by thanking my shadow rapporteurs , who have got to grips with the detail of this issue : Mr Szájer , Mr Duff , Mrs Frassoni and Mrs Dahl .

Without their help and work we would not have been able to bring this work to fruition .
May I secondly confirm what has been mentioned already .
This report was actually split into two .
There is another report which we have not brought to plenary yet - which we will have to revisit in the next Parliament - concerning how we adapt our procedures to the Lisbon Treaty if it comes into force .
We were , of course , looking at this as preparation , without prejudice to the ratification that will , hopefully , take place tomorrow in the Czech Senate and later in the year in Ireland , but we will return to that with the preparatory work having been done if the Treaty is ratified .
Secondly , may I confirm that , indeed , there are rules here which revisit , as Mr Szájer pointed out , recent reforms that flowed from the first report of Dagmar Roth-Behrendt 's reform working group .
It concerns this question of initiative reports , where we have a procedure which many Members feel is a little bit too inflexible now .
We have made it slightly more flexible .
For a start , the debate will not just be a short presentation by the rapporteur , a reply from the Commission and that is it .
There will be up to 10 minutes of catch-the-eye possible for such occasions .
Secondly , when it comes to amendments , these are now prohibited for own-initiative reports .
Instead , groups can table an alternative motion for resolution .
That right would continue , but in addition we would allow amendments if they are tabled by a 10th of the Members of the House .
Mr Wielowieyski , who has just left us , has criticised that point , but at the moment there is no right to amend initiative reports whatsoever .
This enables a restricted right .
We do not want to open the floodgates and have hundreds of amendments rewriting lengthy resolutions by a committee of 700-and-something Members , but on the other hand a limited right of amendment where there is a strong wish for it , we felt , was a reasonable compromise and a right balance .
Another way in which a previous reform from a number of years ago is being revisited is the amendment by the ALDE Group concerning recasting .
I think that is also a welcome adjustment to the procedures that we have at the moment .
May I also confirm that lots of new ideas have come from other Members .
I mentioned some earlier .
I forgot to mention the article on the agora , which Mr Botopoulos and Mr Onesta can claim the paternity for .
There are other ideas on the roll-call voting for legislative reports - not for all final votes but final votes on legislative reports , which I think I did mention earlier .
Finally , the points where I disagree with some Members .
Mr Duff , the rule on when there are a large number of amendments in plenary and the President can ask a committee to look at it : it is not a referral back to committee of the report .
The committee simply acts as a filter for the amendments in plenary so that we do not have to spend several hours voting , but only on those amendments which have a certain degree of support .
It is not a referral back .
Second , the point raised by Ms Frassoni about opinion-giving committees having the right to table amendments in plenary .
I myself have grave doubts about whether that is a good idea or not , but it came from the reform working group on which you sat .
It was endorsed by the Conference of Presidents .
That was something that had a degree of consensus behind it , and therefore we are submitting it to the House for approval or , indeed , rejection .
We will see how the House votes tomorrow .
Finally , I will not address the Committee on Petitions issues , because we are about to have a specific debate on that and I will come back to that point then .
I will just finally say , in response to Mr Gollnisch , that he is wrong on two counts .
This is not the same amendment that was rejected in committee .
It is a different one , a different approach to the subject .
I had grave reservations about the amendment that was submitted in the committee .
I am happy to support the one that has been submitted to plenary .
Secondly , the oldest member is not common to all parliaments of the world , as he suggested .
It is to many , but it is by no means the only system that exists , and it is quite legitimate for us , as a European Parliament , to look at the various systems that exist and choose one which is suitable for our circumstances .
It will be up to the House to decide .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 6 May 2009 .
The petitions process ( amendment of Title VIII of the Rules of Procedure ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Onesta , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on revision of the Rules of Procedure with regard to the petitions process .

Mr President , after the large cake that was the Corbett report , I do not know whether this is the cherry ; it is more like the little cake you get with your coffee , just as they slip you the bill .
I am going to talk about petitions .
We have seen in the past that the Rules of Procedure , as they stand , have caused us a few problems , as sometimes certain rules were difficult to interpret or even led to political deadlock as to the admissibility of this or that text .
We have therefore tried to do some tidying up , to clarify and to consolidate , but that does not make it a revolution .
First of all we want to better identify the petitioner , since , at the moment , when we receive half a tonne of petitions , it is not that clear who the contact person is .
We will therefore ask the petitioners to specify who is , as it were , their leader ; otherwise , we will decide to use the first name on the first page .
We have established the right to withdraw from a petition .
We are saying to the citizens , ' you can submit a petition but you can also waive this right and request that your name be withdrawn from the list of signatories ' .
You are aware that Parliament can receive correspondence in minority languages , such as Galician , Basque , Catalan and so on , when they are recognised by the Member States .
We have decided to extend this right to petitions , too .
If we receive correspondence in certain languages which the Bureau recognises as languages for written communication with citizens , we shall also reply in those languages .
The true reform , however , lies with admissibility .
Until now , the members of the Committee on Petitions at times had to battle quite hard to find out whether a certain document really was a matter of European law or not .
After all , since Europe extends to all areas , people were getting in through the back door .
We have therefore tried to simplify things by giving a kind of admissibility incentive .
If a quarter of the members of the Committee on Petitions regards a text as admissible , it will be considered , as there is no question of our restricting a vital right , a right which is , in any case , based on primary law .
In the event of a declaration of inadmissibility , we shall even try to recommend possible means of redress .
There must always be transparency , since the petitioner 's name and the content of the petition will always be published on our registers , but if , in order to protect privacy , the petitioner asks for anonymity , we will be able to provide this .
The same holds true if confidentiality is requested during discussions .
Naturally the petitioners ' right to speak , at the discretion of the committee chairman , has been retained .
As for the right to take follow-up action , we have extended it - or rather clarified it - to a degree , as in the past the Committee on Petitions could practically issue an own-initiative report on more or less anything and everything .
We do not see why this committee should have more rights than the other committees .
It will of course retain this right provided that there is no objection by the Conference of Presidents .
The electronic register has been retained .
If necessary there will be fact-finding visits in situ to establish facts or indeed to seek a solution .
This role is one of mediator ; it is something slightly original which we have decided to introduce , and which will be to Parliament 's credit .
If need be , we will ask for the assistance of the Commission , represented this evening at the highest level , to clarify the application of Community law and , possibly , to supply information to us .
The information collected will naturally be supplied to the Commission , the Council and the petitioner .
However , what about the Treaty of Lisbon should it be ratified ?
You will be aware that a new type of petition is provided for by this Treaty - alongside the petitions submitted to the European Parliament which have existed for a very long time - namely petitions submitted to the European Commission , bearing at least one million signatures .
We have simply decided that , in the event that the Lisbon Treaty is ratified , if a related issue is ever raised in a petition submitted by a million citizens to the Commission , we in Parliament would check whether we were dealing with an identical issue and whether or not the petition submitted to the Commission could affect our work , in which case we would simply inform the petitioners .
Well , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think I have more or less summed up the situation .
There is no revolution then , just some clarifications and the prevention of any possible deadlock .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , it is with great pleasure that my group can announce its support for the report by Mr Onesta , who has done a fine job in looking at this , and did it some time ago .
It is a somewhat curious fact that the Conference of Presidents waited so long to put this report on our plenary agenda .
However , the fact that it has waited so long and has put it on the agenda at the same time as my report means there is a slight interface on one point between our two reports , which Ms Frassoni alluded to in our previous debate .
That is the matter of cooperation between the Committee on Petitions and the committee responsible for the subject matter .
Everyone agrees that they both have to cooperate and they need to work together , but there is an argument about what you could call the bottom line : if they disagree , who has the final say ?
You can understand both sides .
The members of the Petitions Committee feel that they have received petitions , they have looked into the matter , they may have had hearings , they may have had a visit , they have sometimes found something that is perhaps wrong in the legislation that the subject committee has dealt with , and they feel they have got to grips with that and should have the final say if the subject committee disagrees .
On the other hand , you can understand the subject committee .
Why should it suddenly find another committee responsible for the subject matter just because somebody sent a petition to that other committee ?
You can understand both sides .
What I have tried to do to reconcile the two is to say that yes , of course , they should work closely together and , at the end of the day , the Petitions Committee must listen to the views of the subject committee .
It can , if it so chooses , depart from the views of the subject committee - it is allowed to do so - but if it does , the price to pay is that the subject committee has the right to table amendments in plenary .
I think that is a reasonable quid pro quo .
I do not understand why Ms Frassoni said earlier that would destroy the Petitions Committee .
I really have no understanding of how she could reach such a conclusion .
Certainly , the members of the Petitions Committee in my group have told me that they are happy with that compromise and I think it is a workable compromise .
It is a compromise .
If you are an extremist on one side or the other of this argument you will not be happy , but I think it is a workable compromise .
It blends in very nicely with the excellent report by Mr Onesta , and I think altogether this package will work .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Onesta said that his report is not revolutionary , but it is however an important reform , which strengthens the rights of citizens as well as the Committee on Petitions .
The right to petition is a right accorded to citizens and a few improvements will be made , which will also encourage citizens to address questions to Parliament .
I also think it is right that when it comes to the admissibility of a petition , it is not the chairman of the committee who should decide .
Although I myself am chairman of a committee , I agree that if a quarter of the members think a subject should be discussed , then it must be discussed .
I would like to correct something Mr Onesta said : the European citizens ' initiative is not a petition - that is an aliud .
It is actually a European popular petition , a different sort of right .
It is not addressed to Parliament but to the Commission and we should not confuse them .
The representatives of civil society have set great store by this .
This will probably be the last report that Mr Onesta will make here in Parliament .
I would like to thank him most sincerely for his work , which in many respects has been excellent , both as Vice-President and as a member of our committee .
I should also mention Agora , Parliament 's forum with civil society , which is making history and is a really important instrument .
We therefore support the Onesta report and would like to thank you once more for your constructive cooperation .
( Applause )

I must correct Mr Leinen because , since he has been concerned with property policy , Mr Onesta will leave many permanent works in addition to those connected with political initiative .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank Mr Onesta for his work and presence in Parliament .
I would like to make a few remarks about his last report .
I am convinced , as is Mrs Frassoni , that the right to petition is an important right , but I must say that the Committee on Petitions is a rather odd committee ; it is important , interesting , but also odd .
This mini court where everything and nothing is discussed is quite important but also interesting , and different from what we do .
I would like to come back to three points very briefly .
Firstly , minority languages .
I am in agreement , but this must not open the door to languages which are not fully legal being used in Parliament .
Secondly , admissibility .
I am in full agreement , and it is a good thing that the aim is to admit rather than reject petitions .
Lastly , I would like to say that I agree with our chairman , Mr Leinen .
The right of citizens ' initiative indeed has nothing to do with the right of petition , which is a democratic , constitutional right regarding Parliament , and the two should not be confused .
Finally , I took the floor above all in order to thank Mr Onesta for his work .
I apologise to the honourable Member because I was immediately told off for pronouncing his surname incorrectly , which is Botòpoulos and not Botopoùlos , I apologise again .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank Mr Onesta , also on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Incidentally we were both at a party earlier and we will soon be going back to finish the thank-yous and celebrations .
In this respect , I naturally wanted to say that we support this report , but that we also feel that the subject of the relationship with the primary committee remains a thorny topic in the Corbett reform and at this point I also would like to say something to Mr Botopoulos : it is not that the Committee on Petitions is a strange committee , it is a committee that has a very specific role and on most occasions petitions are concerned with the application of Community law , they are concerned with breaches of directives and laws that do not evidently always have a very clear relationship with the primary committee .
I would go further , and say that anybody who has had anything to do , however little , with the work of the Committee on Petitions can see that it is a sort of ' Cinderella ' in our Parliament .
They will also see that the primary committee does not respond to the requests of the Committee on Petitions , it absolutely cannot be bothered to respond to anything that the Committee on Petitions says , does or proposes .
This is my fear : my fear is the fact that the Committee on Petitions , which not always , but often , is concerned with the application of Community directives , must somehow wait for permission from the committees responsible for making the laws , which therefore have a different part to play , and must also ask the permission of the Conference of Presidents when it is a simple case of checking the application , which has nothing to do , I repeat , with the legislative function of the parliamentary committees .

This is why I am expressing my concern about the reform proposed by Mr Corbett on petitions even though I agree strongly with what Mr Onesta said , and I thank you again , Vice-President , for being flexible about the time .
It was actually a gallantry due to the fact that it was the last speech of the evening , except for the reply by our rapporteur , Mr Onesta , whose turn it is to speak now .
Mr President , I will try to answer my fellow Members .
Mr Leinen , you are absolutely right : it was a slip of the tongue .
The procedures are completely different when it comes to appealing to the Commission under the provisions of the possible future Treaty , and appealing to Parliament via the petitions procedure .
However , in the hypothetical event that these two types of appeal - which are very different in terms of place and format - should concern an identical issue , we decided that the petitioners should be notified in order to ascertain whether or not it is appropriate to continue our investigations .
We simply opted to strengthen coordination in this scenario .
I do spell things out , but you were right to ask me for this linguistic clarification .
I will continue my linguistic explanations with Mr Botopoulos 's question .
Obviously , there is no question of adding to this Tower of Babel , which is already extremely complex : just look at the number of interpreters still here this evening .
We are quite clear that it is Parliament 's Bureau which decides that petitions and correspondence with petitioners will be drawn up in other languages used in a Member State .
These languages must therefore be recognised in the State , and the State must ask for this .
This is currently the case for only four languages .
If tomorrow I wanted to write in Volapük - an imaginary language - clearly it would not be recognised by any State , and neither Parliament nor the Bureau would reply in that language ; all that is clearly specified .
Regarding issues of conflict between the committees to which Mr Corbett drew our attention , I would point out that my report states , in accordance with Rule 46 and Annex VI , that the Committee on Petitions can already seek the opinion of another committee which has ' specific responsibility for the issue under examination ' .
You say that , in this case , conflict could still arise .
Well , we have put in place an arbiter , since the Committee on Petitions will not be able to issue own-opinion reports or go against an own-initiative report of a responsible committee unless the Conference of Presidents allows it .
We have a referral system , namely the Conference of Presidents , which will decide whether it is down to the Committee on Petitions or the responsible committee to take action , in the event that both committees are unable to reach an agreement .
We have therefore made provision for a safeguard in any case .
I think that , with those clarifications made , we can conclude , Mr President .
I have waited almost 20 years for the right to speak for six minutes in the Chamber , but to do so before an audience such as this was a real pleasure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 6 May 2009 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) - Economic Recovery Programme : energy projects - Amendment of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Petya Stavreva on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) - C6-0051 / 2009 - ,
the report by Eugenijus Maldeikis on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a programme to aid economic recovery by granting Community financial assistance to projects in the field of energy - C6-0049 / 2009 - and
the report by Reimer Böge on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the amended proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management as regards the multiannual financial framework - C6-0508 / 2008 - .
The Commission has presented an extremely important additional Economic Recovery Plan package in the area of energy projects , which is extremely important , because the economic crisis presents a challenge for European energy .
The package consists of three parts .
The first of these is gas and electricity infrastructure and projects involving particularly important electricity and gas interconnections .
We know that this is a very sensitive and old problem .
Given the current crisis , the funding of interconnection projects would provide a great boost to the regional development of energy and inter-regional cooperation , and would strengthen the creation of a common European energy market .
The second part of the package is offshore wind-farm projects and the third part carbon capture and storage projects , which take into account the needs of climate change and renewable energy , as I believe that , faced with the economic crisis , the European energy sector must fundamentally reform its structure and systems .
This would really be a very opportune moment to assess the current situation and reconsider many energy problems .
I think that this package , these three programmes , would significantly strengthen the European energy sector , would have an impact on other sectors , and would be of great help to economic recovery in Europe .
I believe that the 3.9 billion value of this package is a large sum , which would help to solve the particularly urgent problem of European energy security .
Together with the consequences of the energy crisis and socio-economic consequences , there exists a great political risk that individual European countries will face gas supply problems .
This risk remains high to this day .
The funding of interconnection projects would significantly strengthen Europe 's position and would provide additional guarantees of supply .
I would like to add that while debating this document , the European Parliament proposed that the following be included in the package .
Firstly , Parliament focused on the possible redistribution of financial resources not used for projects .
As we propose to lay down very strict deadlines for the preparation and development of projects , we think that if any money should remain unused , it should be redistributed to projects which are designed for energy efficiency and renewable energy .
A trialogue took place in a very short period of time and we were able to reach an agreement with the Council .
The Council considered Parliament 's proposals and incorporated them into this package .
I am very pleased about this and would like to thank the Council representatives , the Czech Presidency and Commissioner Piebalgs for their very close and fruitful cooperation .
We really did manage to achieve a good outcome within a very short space of time .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as soon as agreement was reached on the 2009 budget the Commission presented a proposal on the revision of the MFF in order to finance trans-European energy networks and broadband infrastructure projects in the context of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
In retrospect we must say , first , that this has complicated proceedings , as we did not consider it right and appropriate that new proposals should be presented just a few days after agreement was reached on the budget and , second , that it would have been virtually impossible to reach agreement with the Council both on the food aid facility and on these elements of the economic stimulus package on completion of the 2009 budget .
In the original proposal to provide five billion through a revised financial perspective split into two tranches - EUR 3.5 billion in 2009 and EUR 2.5 billion in 2010 - the Commission learned from the budget disaster of the proposal on the food aid facility .
What the Commission presented on that occasion did not correspond to what had been agreed in the budget .
This is clearly the case here too .
I welcome the fact that the Commission took up the suggestion from the Committee on Budgets , which we made in the first debate , to limit the review and to leave matters relating to rural areas and broadband and the modernisation of these structures in rural areas in heading 2 in the agriculture budget , and not to transfer them to heading 1a .
This was a proper suggestion , which had come from this House , and which was acted upon .
In the second round we learned that it was the Council that initially said that the Commission could not present this proposal for the food aid facility and that it was in principle a review .
The Council simply wanted to slink past the budgetary conditions and agreements .
We correctly rectified this in the negotiations and in the trialogue of 2 April .
I believe that we have taken the first correct step through our proposal to provide EUR 2.6 billion in a first step , to raise the ceiling for the year 2009 for commitment appropriations under subheading 1a by an amount of EUR 2 billion , to lower the ceiling of heading 2 by the same amount , and to provide EUR 600 million for rural development .

We will endeavour to secure the remaining EUR 2.4 billion through a compensation at the conciliation of the 2010 and 2011 budgetary procedures by using all - and I quote , because it is important - ' by using all means foreseen in its legal framework and without prejudice to the financial envelopes of the co-decided programmes and the annual budgetary procedure ' .
It was also important to us that commitments entered into should not be affected and curtailed across the headings .
That is why the breakdown we decided on was what could be negotiated in this timeframe , because we all realised we had to push forward the subject of energy solidarity and the modernisation of infrastructures , including the health check measures , in this parliamentary term .
However , it is also clear that what we said in the plenary session of the European Parliament on 25 March regarding the review of the multiannual financial framework needs to be on the agenda even more urgently .
We call on the Commission to take into consideration all these deliberations on flexibility and improved conduct of negotiations in the context of budgetary policy annually and multiannually during the deliberations on the review of the multiannual financial plan in the autumn .
These annual negotiations with the Council about the same issues year in , year out that we get bogged down in because one side does not want to move are just a shambles , and they have to stop , because no one outside understands what is going on any more .
We need more flexibility , more manoeuvrability in the multiannual budgetary procedure .
The Commission is called upon to learn from these experiences from the last two to three years and present relevant proposals in the autumn .
We expect nothing less !
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the current economic downturn requires a stimulus also at EU level .
This has been our common conviction since the crisis began last year .
In November 2008 the European Commission proposed a comprehensive European Economic Recovery Plan , which was endorsed by Heads of State and Government in December .
Building on this , a ' five billion package ' to inject immediate stimulus into the EU economy was proposed in January .
The package directs that stimulus to key objectives , such as broadband development , energy security and low-carbon technologies .
The Commission very much welcomes the agreement found on the package , after difficult but constructive discussions , within a very tight timeframe .
I would like to thank Parliament for its support for our proposal , as well as its flexibility and sense of compromise shown in the course of interinstitutional discussions .
This case shows that the EU is able to react quickly if a crisis requires an immediate response .
As regards the budget side - and now I am speaking on behalf of Vice-President Kallas - the Commission can accept the solution as now agreed by the three institutions , though its approach differs from our initial proposal of December 2008 .
We are confident that the projects will be implemented as scheduled .
I would also like to confirm that the Commission has taken good note of Parliament 's expectations with regard to the budget review and the assessment of the functioning of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
As you know , we are working on these issues and will come forward with our conclusions in the autumn or , at the latest , by the end of the year .
I will now turn to my subject : energy .
The regulation on energy projects constitutes a significant tool to achieve two goals : responding to the key security issues and environmental challenges in the energy sector whilst at the same time contributing to the recovery of our economy .
The package is also an example of solidarity within the European Union .
In particular , the gas crises needed a quick response .
Never before has the European Union agreed to dedicate such a significant amount to key energy projects .
I know that some of you would have preferred to see more measures on renewables and energy efficiency projects in the package , but I believe that the compromise finally found on this subject is a good one .
The Commission provides reassurance in a comprehensive declaration that it will reconsider the situation in 2010 , referring expressly to the option of suggesting using uncommitted funds for measures in the area of energy efficiency and renewable energy sources .
The declaration was sent to Parliament and will be published in the Official Journal , together with the regulation , so I will not read it out here .
I welcome the fact that the principle of proposing new projects , if we identify serious risks in implementing the current projects , is also referred to in the recitals and an article of the regulation .
In addition , I can assure you that we will swiftly go ahead with the many other initiatives in the area of renewable energy sources and energy efficiency , as they are referred to in our declaration .
After the successful and rapid conclusion of the legislative procedure , the Commission will focus on implementation of the package .
I can tell you that , with respect to the energy projects , we intend to launch the call for proposals by the end of May , and I expect first decisions on support by the end of this year .

I would like to thank particularly the rapporteurs , Ms Stavreva , Mr Maldeikis and Mr Böge , for their engagement in finding a quick solution to this very important proposal .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am only going to touch upon the part of this package which relates to rural development .
First of all , like Mr Piebalgs , I would like to thank Parliament for its cooperation , especially the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
There has been a very good and constructive dialogue over the past month and it is obvious that your support in this issue is crucial for a successful outcome .
Legislation must be adopted as soon as possible so that this money can be invested in rural development in 2009 and the money can be spent as well , i.e. both programming and expenditure of the money .
The final compromise left us with a bit less money for rural development than we had wanted .
We had initially wanted EUR 1.5 billion and we ended up with EUR 1.02 billion .
The scope for investment in broadband in rural areas has been extended , and Member States will now have full flexibility in the choice between broadband and new challenges .
I think this is quite a good idea , so you do not limit people that see special difficulties in the new challenges in some parts of the European Union .
The Commission also takes good note of the amendments .
You request an extension of the scope of eligible broadband operations to soft measures such as training in ICT and investments in ICT-related services and facilities .
I would like to point out that these investments and activities are already widely supported within both the structural funds and the rural development funding .
Focus is put on broadband , because of the fact that it is considered to boost technological development and growth in the best possible way .
As regards promotion of the recovery package , the Commission agrees that this is needed , but it can be done within the existing tools already in our toolbox in rural development .
The current policy framework also allows money to already be spent on projects in 2009 .
We have also studied the proposal to already include in the financing the EUR 250 million which were added to the 2009 budget for rural development by Parliament in its final vote on the budget last year .
However , this proposal was not part of the agreement on the financing of the recovery package reached in the trialogue discussions .
In order to avoid any delay in the final adoption of this package , I believe we should take the opportunity to come back later this year when the rest of the financing of the recovery package has to be agreed .
As this is the last meeting here in the plenary before the elections to this Parliament , I would like to express my sincere thanks for your very good cooperation and exchanges of views - sometimes with lots of patriotism and with lots of dynamism , but it has been a pleasure .
To those of you who are not running for re-election , I would like to say that it has been a pleasure working with you .
( Applause )
Thank you so much , Commissione Fischer Boel .
It is very kind of you to mention this .
It was and is always a pleasure to work with you and with your colleagues in the Commission .
Of course , there are some differences , but with you and with Commissioner Piebalgs it has always been a pleasure , and I want to thank you very much on behalf of Parliament and also personally .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the trialogue of 2 April , an agreement was finally reached between Parliament and the Czech Presidency .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , I am very pleased about this agreement , which has made it possible to continue with the legislative process for the recovery plan within the timeframe we had hoped for .


The financing methods for 2009 are very clear : of a total of EUR 3.98 billion , EUR 2 billion will be earmarked for energy by means of compensation under heading 2 , ' Preservation and management of natural resources ' .
The remaining EUR 1.98 billion allocated to energy will be decided on as part of the budget procedure for 2010 and , if necessary , the conclusion will come with the budget procedure for 2011 .
I feel it is important , however , that the compensatory mechanism applied to the various headings should not jeopardise the financial package for codecided programmes , or the annual budget procedure .
I also consider that , in the light of the deficit that the current interinstitutional agreement has highlighted , we need to look more deeply into the subject in order to make this agreement more flexible and therefore more able to respond to further financial needs .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( ES ) Mr President , I am conveying the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , for which I was draftsman , on the proposal to amend the regulation on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
The proposal forms part of the European Economic Recovery Plan .

The European Council held in late March 2009 proposed allocating EUR 3.98 billion to the energy sector and EUR 1.02 billion to the Rural Development Fund , in order to create new broadband infrastructure in the countryside , improve existing infrastructure and respond to new challenges : climate change , renewable energy , biodiversity and the restructuring of the dairy sector .
The Committee on Budgets unanimously decided that the reference amount indicated in the legislative proposal is compatible with the ceiling of heading 2 of the current multi-annual financial framework 2007-2013 .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( BG ) As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to say how pleased I am with the final version of the European Energy Programme for Recovery .
Parliament defended a strong position during the negotiations with the Council and obtained the best possible outcome for Europe 's citizens .
The Energy Programme for Recovery is extremely important for the future of our European economies .
The current economic and financial crisis is jeopardising various programmes in the area of energy security , which is detrimental to our future economic growth and success .
As a result of this , the correct approach is to grant additional financial incentives for projects in the energy sector which will help restore our economy and promote the security of energy supplies , and are also aimed at cutting greenhouse gas emissions .
This new programme will effectively strengthen energy security in my country , Bulgaria , too , thanks to the provision of funding for the Nabucco gas pipeline and our connection with the infrastructure networks in Greece and Romania .
This will make us less vulnerable during crises similar to the one we had last winter .
Fellow Members , our European economies and our infrastructure depend on good access to energy .
In this respect , the European Energy Programme for Recovery paves the way for a more effective and efficient energy infrastructure in Europe .
This is why I would like to stress once again the need for a common European Union energy policy .
Only together will we be able to achieve greater success and give our citizens the energy security which they deserve .
I would like to end by congratulating the rapporteur for her fine work .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Regional Development has been called on by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to give an opinion on the proposal for a Council regulation on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) , which has now reached the Chamber for debate within the context of the more general EUR 5 billion package .

The measure in question can be seen as a timely response by the Commission to the needs underpinning the decision , adopted by the Council on 11 and 12 December 2008 , to approve a European economic recovery plan containing specific measures in many sectors of Community and national competence to tackle the economic and financial crisis that has involved the European markets since 2007 .
In the rural development sector , the Commission measure proposes the introduction of appropriate updates to Council Regulation No 1698 / 2005 that are designed to implement the guidelines of the said European plan .

Taken as a whole , the Commission 's proposal - which provides for a budget of EUR 1.5 billion to be made available to all the Member States through the European Fund for Rural Development , to develop access to broadband Internet in rural areas and to confront the new challenges identified in the medium-term common agricultural policy reform assessment , concluded in November 2008 - has the full support of the Committee on Regional Development , which feels that the suggested measures , if implemented quickly and in full , will certainly be able to help pick up the national economies and make consumers trust in the system again , while also effectively pursuing objectives of territorial and social convergence in regions of the Union .
All of this is particularly true if the measures are combined with the need , expressed by the Council , to maximise spending opportunities during the early years .
In expressing its opinion , the committee did not limit itself to a simple evaluation of the measures proposed by the European Commission but decided to make its own proposal by including certain amendments in the text submitted to it .
The main aspect that the Committee on Regional Development wished to highlight is that which refers to the need to increase transparency and information on results obtained during the period 20092011 and to provide appropriate instruments for coordinating actions funded by the EAFRD and the Structural Funds in relation to broadband Internet infrastructure .
It did this by asking the Commission to insert a section specifically devoted to the verification of the results obtained in relation to this activity within the annual monitoring report required for the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development , in the form of a specific amendment introduced in the text of the proposed measure .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) Tackling the financial and economic crisis is an important test of Europe 's unity and solidarity .

We have to demonstrate two things : firstly , that we are going to take concerted action and that we will be able to profit from it and , secondly , that we are capable of maintaining the strategic priorities which we have set over the past few years : that is , priorities facilitating a shift towards a knowledge-based society and an innovative society with low greenhouse gas emission levels .
I am pleased to see that Europe has responded to this challenge in a rapid and unified manner .
We have spoken out against protectionism and established the internal market as one of Europe 's important achievements , and one which also needs to be preserved at a time of crisis .
In so doing , we have also managed to preserve our vision and to take action , without losing sight of our long-term challenges , which certainly include climate change , also .
Let me also briefly mention projects in the field of energy .
In a relatively short space of time , we have secured additional financial resources which we intend to earmark for the future development of new , cleaner technologies and for the purpose of increasing a reliable energy supply .
What is important here is that we include , within this package , technologies for carbon capture and storage , the promotion of offshore wind energy and interconnection of gas and electricity transmission networks .
However , I would draw your attention to the fact that , despite the number of good projects to which additional aid is to be allocated , some important projects are missing from this dossier .
For this reason , I would ask that these projects be carefully monitored , that their implementation be supervised and that we also find additional funds with which to finance projects that promote efficient use of energy and other renewable energy sources .
Let me also add , in this context , that geothermal energy is certainly another major potential which remains untapped .
I consider this to be one of our most important tasks for the very beginning of our next mandate .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems as though the peace of Christmas is upon us - everything is passing off so peacefully .
Unfortunately , I have to add a sour note to the proceedings .
The Council , which is not represented here today , has taken months to revise and reconsider the proposals presented by the Commission and to come up with a solution in a situation where we have huge , rising unemployment .
It is therefore not the fault of Parliament .
In this case the people responsible for the budget were even ahead of us in the energy field .
That certainly did not make our life very easy .
Normally , they are the blockers .
But then we tried to find a solution , and the Commissioner was very helpful , but the Council was obdurate .
Our concern - and this really ought to be self-evident - is that all the budget appropriations that cannot be disbursed should be allocated to projects to create jobs , especially in projects aimed at energy security , energy efficiency and energy conservation .
This really ought to be self-evident .
Were we to ask the citizens of Europe whether they would be in favour of allocating money that is not spent to this particular area , the vast majority would say yes .
Only the Council has not yet acknowledged that this is actually what is needed .
In this context , all of us - including the members of the new Parliament - should insist that this is exactly what is implemented .
I do not know whether Mr Piebalgs will still be a Commissioner and will still be responsible for this area , but I hope that the Commission is also of the opinion that we must ensure that all budget appropriations that cannot be disbursed are transferred in other areas to employment-related projects concerned with energy efficiency and energy security .
Finally , I would like to thank both Commissioners for their cooperation both personally and on behalf of my Group .
Whether it was always a pleasure is another matter , but you were always prepared to engage in dialogue , and I hope you can say that of us too .
We are in the middle of an election campaign but things are a bit calmer for you now .
I do think , however , that you can live without us parliamentarians .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal we are discussing is part of a package of EUR 5 billion allocated to the European economic recovery plan , of which EUR 1 040 is earmarked for the construction and completion of infrastructures for broadband Internet coverage in rural areas and for development in relation to the new challenges brought to light by the health check on the common agricultural policy .
In order to respond to the current financial crisis , we must take action above all in rural areas using instruments designed to help these areas emerge from the structural isolation in which they find themselves .
It is therefore crucial to guarantee the use of available Community funds , increasing their effectiveness and added value .
In the field of rural development , every possible tactic must be adopted to ensure greater financial flexibility and efficiency .
I believe it is essential for the Commission to undertake to assist Member States in the adoption of national strategies and rural development programmes aimed at boosting employment .
I am bound to say , however , that , according to the rules of the Rural Development Fund , broadband implementation projects are mainly managed by public administrations - provinces , municipalities and mountain communities - which are , however , unable to include VAT in their accounting .
This does not happen with other programmes , with other regulations underpinning the Structural Funds , where such expenditure is considered eligible .
The economic crisis has simply accentuated the difficulties that were already present for these local authorities , and thus the incidence of VAT on budgets associated with the implementation of various works is so high that there is a risk of public authorities failing to invest and the unspent resources returning to the Community budget .
Lastly , as far as the distribution of resources is concerned , I believe we must focus on the use of historical criteria , as proposed by the Commission .
Thank you , Madam President .
I believe that the agreement that has been reached on support for the European Union 's energy policy in the long term , providing incentives in the short term for the recovery of the economy , achieves both goals .
The only exception , which cannot provide an economic return in the short term , is the funding of carbon capture and storage projects .
However , this undoubtedly meets long-term energy policy challenges by increasing the competitiveness of the technologies of EU businesses on world markets , where alternative forms of energy will not be able to replace the burning of coal for the foreseeable future .
I very much welcome the channelling of the majority of funding towards European energy network interconnection projects .
I am pleased that significant resources have been allocated for the integration into European electricity networks of the Baltic States , which are the most isolated region in the EU .
Although these investments do not bring about the full integration of the markets of the three Baltic States into European networks , nonetheless this is an important , strengthening factor that will promote energy supply security .
I hope that this will serve as an incentive to the Baltic States to continue to make structural reforms to their energy systems , and to create market conditions that will improve the situation for energy consumers in that region . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , this is a sad day for the credibility of the European Union .
The economic recovery package we will vote on is , in reality , a non-recovery plan which will produce almost no immediate economic stimulus .
We have had months of sometimes intense negotiations with the EU Council .
Unfortunately , rather than standing up to those governments like Germany , the Netherlands and the UK , which adopted a short-sighted ' I want my money back ' approach , the majority of this House and the Commission have simply caved in to their demands .
This outcome is very bad and it could have been avoided .
We could have built a real solidarity instrument , where the vast majority of the funds would have gone to those economies most in need : our friends in eastern Europe .
We could have enhanced the economic effectiveness of this package by using innovative finance instruments , like loan guarantee funds and the public banks , or the European Investment Bank .
This would have transformed the EUR 5 billion into EUR 50-80 billion in investment , which we need at this moment for the European economy .
We could have focused our investments on those areas with immediate job creation , such as cities in Europe investigating in the renovation of buildings and public transport , or independent power companies investing in renewables , or our industries in Europe investing in eco-technologies .
Instead , you have decided to concentrate the bulk of these EUR 5 billion on old-fashioned state aid to those least in need of cash : the big energy oligopolies in the UK , Germany and France .
Instead of sending a strong signal , we are sending a signal of a lack of political courage : spineless European institutions that have caved in to the whims of nationally blinkered governments .
Unfortunately , we have no brave and visionary Commission President .
Unfortunately , the Liberals and the Socialists in this House were not ready to fight with the Greens to make this recovery package a real first step to a green new deal .
Before change can happen in Europe we must change the President of the Commission .
In order to make this change happen , we need to change the majorities in the European Parliament .
' Stop Barroso - go for a green new deal ' : this is more than ever the right slogan for the upcoming European elections .


With regard to the European Union 's so-called 5 billion package for the European economic recovery plan , it is useful to recall the resolution adopted by this Parliament on the mid-term review of the 2007-2013 financial framework .
That resolution states : that the own-resources ceiling represents 1.24 % of EU GNI in payments and that this has effectively been below 1 % ; that every year significant margins are left below the ceiling set up by the multiannual financial framework , with over EUR 29 billion in payments in the last three years ; and that huge margins exist between the multiannual financial framework ceiling and the ceiling of the EU own resources , with over EUR 176 billion from 2010 to 2013 .

In view of this , we must ask ourselves : why is it that , faced with the worsening economic situation , we are not at least using the funds provided in the multiannual financial framework ?
Why is the European Union opting to deduct EUR 2 billion from the agriculture margin , when thousands of farmers are facing ever greater difficulties ?
Do farmers have a greater need for support to deal with increasing costs of production and falling prices to the producer , or for broadband Internet ?
To ensure that this adjustment is neutral , from which other budget headings will almost EUR 2 billion be deducted ?
Will this amount be deducted from cohesion ?
How will they go about distributing the nearly EUR 4 billion for projects in the area of energy and the nearly EUR 1 billion for - apparently - the promotion of broadband in rural areas ?
How will this unfair exchange be applied ?
Where , finally , is the highly proclaimed solidarity across the European Union ?
Or will the mountain , in the end , once again turn out to be a molehill ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , wanting a recovery plan is a good intention .
A Keynesian recovery is needed to respond to a cyclical downturn , but this crisis is structural .
The tool , then , is inadequate .
Re-injecting funds into an unrestrained economy is just throwing money down the drain .
In fact , boosting an economy without first having restored Community preference at our borders is like trying to warm a house when all the windows have to be left open .
What happens is the boiler runs out and the heating bills go through the roof .
After these opening remarks , I have three comments to make .
Firstly , an energy market is not relevant .
In fact , in this area , competition does not reduce prices because these are determined by the costs of the means of production .
We believe , therefore , that it is essential to invest in truly efficient energy sources , to avoid the trap of energy sources that are largely subsidised , such as wind power , and to opt for solar and nuclear energy .
Secondly , there is no efficiency in a single electricity market .
Over a large distance , energy loss is proportionate to the distance travelled .
The likelihood of breakdowns and outages grows with the geographical complexity of the network .
Therefore , the interconnection of Europe 's electricity network should get back to its primary purpose , which is to serve as a reciprocal backup resource at the borders and to allow energy swaps , but merely in the background .
This work should be our priority .
Thirdly , as for the Podimata report , which relates to the current report , we recommend that we not only take into account the energy needed to operate a product , but also consider information on the amount of energy needed to manufacture that product .
The communication of this information to consumers will enhance the standing of those products with high added-value and low energy requirements .
The inclusion of this information will give a much-needed competitive advantage to our economies , which are under too great a threat of unfair global competition .

- ( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion the European Parliament and the Council have taken some extraordinary but effective decisions in transferring EUR 5 billion of unused resources from 2008 to 2009 for a stimulation package to mitigate the effects of the financial crisis , along with the sum of EUR 4 billion to resolve some of the bottlenecks in the European energy network .
On the other hand , Mr Turmes 's speech was true in many respects , particularly concerning fund management .

I consider it important for Member State governments to respond flexibly and for all of the resources allocated for the years 2009-2010 to be spent and to be spent effectively , as far as possible .
The crisis situation in gas supplies at the beginning of the year after the dispute between Russia and Ukraine showed how vulnerable a significant part of Europe is in critical situations .
The measures implemented and financed from this package should therefore help prevent a repeat of this crisis .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank Mrs Stavreva for her excellent report .
It is absolutely crucial that this economic programme , which we have adopted in its entirety today , is also available in rural areas .
Broadband is an indispensable means of communication for rural areas , especially in Austria , for new and modern jobs and for rapid information delivery .
It should not be overlooked that more than 50 % of the population of the European Union lives in rural areas .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am coming to the end of my political career .
I would like to extend my sincerest thanks to all my colleagues , the Commission and all the institutions of the European Union , especially officials and staff , for their help and support .
It has been a pleasure to work with you all .
Finally I would like to thank the interpreters who had to interpret my Austrian German .
I am convinced that it must continue to be absolutely clear that the common agricultural policy , with its two pillars , is essential for the society of the European Union .
Farmers are naturally aware of their responsibility towards society .
But I also expect the society of the European Union to be aware of its responsibility towards all those who safeguard its resources .
With this in mind , I wish the European Union all the best for the future .
( Applause )
( HU ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Stavreva for her cooperation and to congratulate her for her excellent work which received the unanimous support of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Following the debate held in the Council , we have EUR 1.02 billion available to us to alleviate the painful impact of the crisis on rural areas .
We have successfully reached a situation where the money can be used in a much more flexible way compared to the original proposal , within a suitably broad framework , to develop broadband Internet access in rural areas and to tackle the new challenges defined during the review of the common agricultural policy .
Member States ' rural development plans must be reviewed as quickly as possible so that the amounts now specified can be made available as soon as possible .
This is perhaps the most important aspect for the rural population as with the help of these developments , new jobs , new training courses and new markets may become accessible , resulting at the same time in a reduction in costs and the deployment of new innovative technologies .
The rural population are the most vulnerable victims of the economic crisis .
In fact , looking at the future , it can be said that there is also the risk of further territorial and economic exclusion , extending beyond the economic crisis .
Even before the crisis broke , a large number of Member States had to face continual decline in rural areas .
Our responsibility is to devise and implement as soon as possible the necessary measures aimed at safeguarding our rural values .
Fellow Members , given that my party is not expected to do well enough in the elections for me to continue working for the next five years among you , I would therefore also like to thank you for the excellent cooperation which I have enjoyed in this House .
As a young politician , I can only wish every young politician the chance to learn in such an excellent organisation how European politics works .
( SV ) Madam President , there are three crises in the world and in Europe right now : the financial crisis , the consequent job crisis and the climate crisis .
Packages of measures should be directed at finding solutions to all three crises , but I find it difficult to see that this is case with this package .
Marilyn Monroe once said ' lead me not into temptation , I can find it myself ' .
This is how the governments of the Member States seem to have acted with regard to using the money that we have jointly been able to release for this economy package .
It can be greatly criticised for dealing with the old type of energy and , in particular , in terms of the time factor .
The measures contained in the package lie so far in the future that they are more likely to create jobs during the next recession than this one .
Our intention was to try to get new technology and new ideas in place as well as measures for creating jobs now during this recession in Europe .
We will therefore ( hopefully , if we are re-elected ) continue to monitor what the Commission promised via Commissioner Piebalgs , namely proper , reliable monitoring of the implementation and supervision .
Finally , Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Fischer Boel for the extremely constructive work that she has done and Commissioner Piebalgs , who has worked very closely with the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and who has personally been extremely important as far as the energy package and the climate package are concerned and in terms of what we have achieved in this area over the last five years .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , who has done a good job , and my fellow Members .
Finally , I really think that we should discontinue the European Parliament 's work in Strasbourg and meet in a single location in future .
( PL ) Madam President , support for rural areas is a very important activity , irrespective of what form it takes .
All the more so , when that support comes in the form of the introduction of new technologies on a massive scale to rural areas .
However , the order of priorities raises doubts in my mind .
What is more important at the moment for the development of urban areas - broadband Internet , further modernisation and development of the transport infrastructure , or measures connected with increasing jobs in rural areas , especially during the crisis ?
For me it is obvious that the money needed for the introduction of broadband Internet and tackling climate change in rural areas will be provided mainly to the enterprises and firms which carry out this work , and not farmers or residents of rural areas .
Perhaps this money should have been designated for reducing the disproportion in subsidies for medium-sized farms , especially in the new Member States ?
The European Union is currently giving farmers broadband Internet at huge cost instead of meeting more important needs , such as bringing farms , and not farming concerns , to a higher level .

( EL ) Madam President , the aim of the EUR 5 billion economic recovery programme is to take advantage of the capitalist crisis and help capital to achieve its objectives by promoting capitalist restructurings in strategic sectors , such as energy and electronic communications .
Broadband internet and networks are necessary for the development of rural areas , but they are not a priority .
When the income of owners of small and medium-sized farms is constantly shrinking and they face the threat of eviction from their land and unemployment , when the economy of entire areas is in crisis due to the CAP and the dictats of the WTO , it is not the development of networks that will contribute to rural development ; it is a mockery at the expense of poor farmers .
EUR 1.5 billion has basically been earmarked for the development of electronic communications companies , not for farming and rural development .

Exactly the same applies to the EUR 3.5 billion earmarked for the completion of an integrated electricity network and the completion of the single electricity market , facilitating the privatisations , mergers and takeovers promoted by the third liberalisation package and carbon capture and storage , that extortionately expensive and non-environmentally friendly plan designed to increase the profits of and allow continuing pollution by production units .
The workers and farmers understand that these measures are being taken in order to strengthen capital and the monopolies , which is why they are rejecting them and fighting them and demanding that grassroots changes be satisfied so that they do not become the beasts of burden of the crisis .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true to say that the European Union is trying to make its own contribution in this major financial and economic crisis .
It is also true to say that , with regard to promoting broadband in rural areas , it should be entitled to make a real contribution to ensuring that the digital segregation of society is overcome and that more people have the opportunity to take part in it and to strengthen internal cohesion in the European Union .
However , as a budgetary politician , I would like to point out that , although the announcement of such a programme will have public impact , it is not clear where the money will actually come from .
It is , to some extent , dubious .
I cannot endorse it , and if the Council takes such decisions , and if the Commission , through Mr Barroso , comes up with something like that , one must seriously ensure that it is clear where the money is coming from .
That is the only really convincing form of politics that we can present to our citizens .
At the moment the money is unfortunately not there .
Member States must once again take a stand so that we can really make it clear that this is a contribution to a better structural policy and to more solidarity in Europe .
Then we must make a joint contribution so that it can actually become a reality .
( DE ) Madam President , although the European Union has introduced subsidies for rural development , at the same time the rural depopulation caused by the conditions imposed by Maastricht has encouraged unbridled enthusiasm for liberalisation and the accompanying dismantling of rural infrastructures .
Following the demise of Chrysler and the closing of police stations and schools , thanks to deregulation decreed by the EU the post offices will also soon be closing .
The Commission is quite clearly planning to administer further euthanasia .
Should the eligibility criteria of below average economic power and rural depopulation cease to apply from 2014 this could be the kiss of death for many disadvantaged areas .
This , in my opinion , is an assault on all rural areas , which we should not let pass .
We need equivalent living conditions in towns and cities and in the country .
Otherwise not only individual areas but also entire valleys in Europe will soon be deserted .
Cutting subsidies is certainly the wrong approach if we wish to safeguard vital rural areas and lower middleclass structures .
However , rural areas cannot be kept alive through agricultural subsidies alone .
The demise of farming in recent years shows this more clearly than ever .
Subsidies for disadvantaged areas must not be cut but increased .
Small , medium-sized and organic farms must survive and food sovereignty should be maintained .
If the EU cannot soon be dissuaded from promoting primarily intensive stock-rearing and large landowners - like the British Queen for example - then it is high time that agriculture was renationalised or , at the very least , party renationalised .
Madam President , can I thank the Commissioner very much for presenting this to us this morning , and thank Ms Stavreva very much for her report .
It is very important that we deal with this ' five billion ' package .
Can I say quite bluntly to the Commission that , when they embark upon a five billion package in future , they should probably get a little more agreement out of the Council before we get this far .
I understand it is not always easy to get the Council to agree to the money but we do need to know whether this money is going to be forthcoming in the end .
I suspect it probably will be and I think it can actually be put to very good use .
There is no doubt that agriculture is very important to the countryside but there are also many other businesses out there .
Especially when it comes to smaller farms , you do need another income .
Broadband in particular means that lots of small businesses can be developed in the rural areas .
Once broadband is available , the connections can be very good in some of the most rural areas we have in the European Union .
Broadband could also be essential to help businesses go forward in agriculture , tourism and all those businesses that are linked to the Internet .
At this time of a real recession in the European Union this is a stimulation package that - if we can get the money out to the right areas and if we can get it out in time - will make a real difference because we need to stimulate business .
Agriculture is important but other businesses are also important to the rural area and this package can help .
So I wish the Commission well with the whole project .
I hope that you get the money but - as I said - I think in future we probably need to go about it in a much more uniform way .
( FR ) Madam President , in November 2008 , the Commission presented a recovery plan that was not up to the job , either in volume or in content .
Six months on , it has to be acknowledged that the implementation of this recovery plan is almost non-existent , and I want to find out what is happening with these EUR 30 billion of recovery funds .
What has happened to the EUR 15 billion announced via new actions and entrusted to the EIB ?
How can one reconcile a announced stimulus of EUR 7 billion through the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund with an announced structural budget under-spend of EUR 10 billion in 2009 ?

Finally , as for the EUR 5 billion that we are discussing today , I would like to make four observations .
Despite the pressure from the European Parliament , the Council of Finance Ministers was unable to release the EUR 5 billion for 2009 , providing only EUR 2.6 billion .

We are by no means sure , therefore , that the Council will be able to find the EUR 2.4 billion missing for 2010 .
Parliament is ready to find any possible solutions through regulatory means .
However , the other political priorities must not , under any circumstances , be called into question .
That will not be permitted by Parliament .
We cannot accept re-deployment ; that is a red line that we will not cross .
It will be difficult to find these EUR 2.4 billion because , with the presentation of the Commission 's PDB , we know that a maximum of EUR 1.7 billion will be available .
Moreover , the Council still has to agree to release these margins .
It is therefore important , in any case , that , in the name of short-term budgetary orthodoxy and of a legal approach to budget regulation , the many Member States no longer be able to stop this entire recovery plan .
A strong budget needs to be maintained for the future of the Union , and we can see - and this is my fourth observation - that the size of and the manner in which the latest financial perspectives were negotiated and accepted puts Europe 's future at a great disadvantage .
( NL ) Madam President , listening to this debate , I get the feeling that most of us are satisfied but , nonetheless , I am under the strong impression that this is a meagre package .
I think the paramount concern here was saving the faces of President Barroso and the Commission .
The measures put forward will undoubtedly be useful , but the funding still remains insecure .
Although the agricultural budget needs to take into account unforeseen situations , even in the case of a surplus , I have some objections to it perpetually being used as a cash cow to cover any unforeseen event .
I am of the opinion that the Commission and the European Union have failed to learn much from the outbreaks of infectious animal diseases which have occurred in the past .
If they were to occur again , we would have to finance them from the agricultural budget .
What I would like to know is : what are we giving priority to ?
Funding the measures proposed for combating animal diseases or funding this package , which still needs to be tidied up ?
There is a major uncertainty there that continues to remain , but I understand that income support will always be available , in any event , and that does put my mind at ease .
As far as the actual measures are concerned , they vary from Member State to Member State , but they are useful , without a doubt .
I , too , am in favour of energy security and I think that anything we do in that respect will be useful .
In conclusion , I would like to congratulate the two commissioners on the work they have done and Mrs Fischer Boel , in particular , with whom I have enjoyed very close cooperation over the past five years .

( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , an initiative of EUR 5 billion in total is a good basis both for the further development of the European Union 's common energy policy and for rural development in the long term .
The reinforcement of internal networks is also important , as is the establishment of interconnections , forming single networks .
In my view , greater emphasis should be placed on energy efficiency and diversification , by creating real incentives for the use of offshore wind energy , geothermal power and other renewable energy resources .
The Member States ' plans , including those of the large states , such as Germany , France and the United Kingdom , must be developed in accordance with the European Union 's common energy policy .
For those states particularly badly affected by the economic crisis , a cofinancing ceiling of 50 % ought to be laid down .
Genuine support must be given to local and regional initiatives aiming to introduce renewable energy and to encourage its use .
With regard to rural development , more attention must be paid to the real situation than to historic indicators .
There is talk not only of the introduction of broadband , but also , for instance , of the development of rural roads .
Resources from the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ought to be made particularly accessible for the economically weaker Member States . Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , this Economic Recovery Plan is no masterpiece .
Above all , there is not much left over for rural areas .
It also entails a transfer of funds from the agricultural budget to rural development .
Commissioner , it does not lead to independent rural development for rural areas but once again follows a balancing logic .
Above all , it is left to the discretion of the Member States to create compensation programmes .
In Germany , this affects the milk fund .
A loss of 15 cents per kilo of milk means a shortfall of EUR 4.2 billion for German milk farmers alone .
Now , a compensation is to be created with EUR 100 million .
Commissioner , let me be clear about this . This is just peanuts , not an economic recovery plan !
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Stavreva for the quality of the report which she presented to us today .
I support the amendments proposed by the rapporteur , such as making available EUR 250 million for activities related to tackling the new challenges , even though , as the Commissioner herself said , we will need to revisit this .
Given the need for a rapid response to the current economic crisis , it would be helpful , as we are all well aware , for payments to be provided which can be made already during the 2009 budget year .
This approach actually reflects the conclusions reached by the Presidency of the European Council on 12 December 2008 .
One significant aspect of the current economic crisis is the reduction in the general resources available and in loans , along with stricter conditions being imposed for obtaining credit from banks .
As a result , I support the rapporteur 's suggestion for Member States to have the opportunity to use funds made available through loans and credit guarantees , which would allow the relevant parties in rural areas to make investments during these difficult times .
Given how widely dispersed the population is and the high costs in some rural communities , not all citizens would have personal access to the broadband infrastructure .
In my opinion , therefore , in addition to the infrastructure operations being proposed , Member States should have the opportunity to support public Internet access points in rural communities , such as those in public libraries and town halls .
Consequently , I agree on specific information being made available to the general public and the local authorities responsible for implementing these new measures .
In order to ensure the most effective use of the resources available and to give a considerable boost to the development of broadband Internet access in rural areas , I think that the current differences between Member States in terms of broadband coverage should be used as a guide for making differentiations when allocating these funds .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are less than two hours away from the final decision on the European Economic Recovery Plan .
It has taken us five months - needless to say because of sophistry in the Council - five months to come to a decision on the package now before us .
Had we taken the title of this package at all seriously , we would have had to be much quicker .
The package in itself is fine ; there is no question about that .
However , I very much doubt whether it can really bring about Europe 's economic recovery in the current crisis .
Can the designated money flow into the designated projects within the designated time ?
It is a good thing that the Members of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy also had their doubts and negotiated a declaration from the Commission not to put leftovers into energy efficiency .
There is a chance therefore that the EUR 2.6 billion to be decided on will be used reasonably .
But will we also manage to agree on the EUR 2.4 billion deficit in the EUR 5 billion Recovery Plan with the Council in the autumn ?

EUR 5 billion over two years are an expression of European solidarity .
That is all well and good .
However , more effective help for the entire European economy comes from a common regional and structural political framework : EUR 38 billion - this year alone !
These resources are the driving force behind the European economy .

( LV ) Madam President , Commissioners , the compromise on not giving this EUR 5 billion back to the donor states but using it for rural development projects in energy and broadband has the following important political message .
It shows that even at a time of crisis European solidarity has not completely disappeared .
I understand what a few of my fellow Members have said , about most of the money having simply gone back to those states and their energy projects , but I believe that in this proposal the solidarity principle is evident .
I also think that the initiation of a long-term project in the energy sphere , like the connection of the Baltic States to the Nordic electricity networks , also sends the right signal , for it is rather up to the Member States themselves to resolve issues to overcome the short-term crisis , taking into account their specific situations .
Another point on which we must , in my view , be very careful is that these short deadlines for the introduction of the project may lead to great bitterness if the projects contained in this proposal are not completed .
On this point , we must all act jointly in a very responsible manner . Thank you .
( NL ) Madam President , this is the third year of our financial perspectives and it is also the third year that we have gathered here to talk about their intermediate adjustment .
In 2007 we had Galileo , which was fairly easy to explain .
In 2008 we had the EUR 1 billion Food Facility , when we had to use every trick in the book to secure funding because it had to be funded within the limits of the existing categories even though there was little space left to accommodate it .
Now we are talking about an economic stimulus package , which is certainly a welcome contribution to national efforts in this field and which will hopefully be a stimulus for energy and broadband projects in the northern part of my country .
However , once again , I feel obliged to express two reservations in this regard .
I am glad to see that we are sticking to the rules and actually adjusting financial perspectives , but we have had to resort to jiggery-pokery again in order to make an appeal for the 2010 , and possibly 2011 , budgets .
Naturally , it is good to know that this will not affect the codecision programmes , but what about agriculture , which we know still does not fall under codecision ?
What will happen , if , as has already been suggested , another animal disease breaks out or if we experience a serious market crisis and we still need this funding for agriculture ?
Can the Commission reassure us that it will not shirk these responsibilities ?
My second reservation is that we have to be able to monitor the spending on which we , as a whole , decide .
A fortnight ago , my delegation opposed the granting of discharge for the 2007 budget because of problems involving oversight and financial responsibility .
What this package must not result in , in any case , is deterioration of responsibility and oversight .
As the British would say , ' the proof of the pudding is in the eating ' , and I think that this plan will only be a success if we meet all the conditions .
I know that my speaking time is over , but I would like to take another three seconds to thank the Commissioner for spending many late evenings here with us , discussing things after debates on agriculture had finished .
So thank you , Commissioner , for your accessibility and cooperation .
( EL ) Madam President , the report and the initiative in general which we are debating today is necessary , but I am afraid that it is of dubious efficacy .
It is more of a shot in the arm than a therapy .
Europe had to do something , because this is a serious crisis and it had to do something , but I think that this is not up to the challenge .
Firstly , it is not much money for the crisis we are going through and there is no guarantee that it will reach those who need it most .
Both energy and broadband Internet are important sectors , but we cannot be sure that they are the top priority sectors and , more importantly , the sectors that will generate the additional jobs and growth that we need .
Secondly , as all my fellow Members have said , we still do not know if , when and where a large part , almost half of the money , some 2.4 billion , will come from .
The other day we were talking in the Committee on Budgets to Commissioner Kallas , who is unable at present to give us an answer as to where the appropriations will come from .
Thirdly and perhaps most importantly , we are providing solutions which will not help us to address the problems in the long term .
It is no solution to keep taking the money left over from agricultural policy ; it is no solution to shift the balances underground between agricultural and regional policy and the Union 's other needs .
Europe needs a global plan in the face of the crisis , which it does not appear to have at present .
I am afraid that this opportunity has been lost for the European Union and I am afraid that it has been lost mainly by the Commission itself .


( ES ) Madam President , Commissioners , President-in-Office of the Council ( wherever he may be , because he is not here ) , in this House words are important : calling EUR 5 billion a ' European economic recovery plan ' is a flash of humour by the European Commission , but it has nothing to do with reality ; it is a simple budget diversion , which is modest , of limited scope and with limited effects .
However , we should welcome it , not so much because of the funding allocation , but for what it means in political and budgetary terms : it means , firstly , an acknowledgement that the current financial framework that we adopted for the 2007-2013 period does not have appropriate instruments with which to tackle a situation of economic crisis .
In order to find EUR 5 billion it has been necessary , as Reimer Böge said , to force a way through the budget procedures , to strain the interinstitutional agreement and for the three institutions to work for six months ; and all this , as has been said many times , in order to leave half the funding subject to the hazard of another conciliation procedure .
It is also a strange way of protecting Community agriculture .
Let us make no mistake : what it comes down to is that extra money from the common agricultural policy is funding the inadequate allocations of other categories of expenditure .
This is a direct consequence of the mistakes made in negotiating the financial framework .
We will see what the results are when we have to negotiate the next agricultural agreement in 2013 .
I therefore welcome this package 's aims , but I hope that we will not in the future be forced to repent the means that we have used .
Mr President , our citizens expect us to provide real help for them in these troubled times .
The European economic recovery measures before us constitute an important package , and I applaud the strong emphasis on green jobs and technologies that will help reduce our carbon emissions and promote energy security .
I am also , naturally , very pleased that my own country will be receiving up to EUR 500 million of financing to promote offshore wind energy and carbon capture and storage projects .
However , it is clear that the overall package proposed is lacking in both size and ambition .
I would like to see more emphasis placed on youth unemployment .
We need to give the younger generation hope for the future .
Nevertheless , what we have here on the table today is , without doubt , better than doing nothing at all .
Labour MEPs will therefore support these measures , although we are clear that a new economic recovery plan is needed .
I hope the Conservative MEPs present will also vote to support these measures in defiance of the ' do nothing ' approach of their isolationist leader , David Cameron , who has consistently opposed Labour measures in the UK , which offer real help to those worst hit .
- ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , European countries are adopting bailout packages worth billions to save their financial institutions and industrial sectors .
The European Union as a whole is also seeking to invest in the European economy .
The debated proposal to support economic recovery through Community financial assistance for projects in the energy sector is part of a European economic recovery plan which envisages allocating an overall sum of EUR 30 billion .
This EUR 5 billion plan for public investments is aimed primarily at energy infrastructure , high-speed Internet access , and agricultural restructuring .
It should be understood that European diplomats spent several weeks debating the specific shape of the package .
The presidency , led by the Czech Republic and the Commission , has made a responsible attempt through this package to respond - among other tasks - to the gas crisis , and in so doing to defuse some sensitive issues , particularly in Central and Eastern Europe .
The fact is that some of the issues remain unresolved .
Some Member States that are slower in drawing down EU funds may pay the price of failing to prepare all of their projects by next year .
Doubts also persist as regards financing the package .
However , in my opinion , these facts do not justify us rejecting this hard-won compromise .
Rejection may eventually cause not only a shortage of money for energy-saving projects , but also a lack of funds to ensure reliable supplies of gas to our homes .
And voters would surely count that against us come the next gas crisis .
( EL ) Madam President , today 's debate is defined by two important parameters .
Firstly , by the incontrovertible need for us to do more in Europe for electricity interconnection and broadband Internet .
Secondly , today 's debate indirectly raises the very important question of the present and the future of agricultural spending under the Community budget .
The positive message , of course , is that Europe is using the Community budget as a tool against the crisis .
That is positive and we must hold on to it .
The five billion is not much , but our systemic method of using the Community budget as a tool to fight new problems is the right method and that was precisely why the Heads of State and Government approved it at the recent summit , where they upheld this approach .
However , we must be careful .
If this systemic method leads us to the simplistic deductive reasoning that agriculture will always have unused appropriations to pay for new requirements and from that we conclude , in the run-up to the important debates on the future of agriculture after 2013 , that agriculture already has more than it needs , that would be a huge strategic mistake for Europe .
In other words , we should not consider that we need to go ' lower ' in agriculture , because the budget proved that , up to 2013 , we always had money , which we took from for Galileo , for energy and for broadband Internet .
Farming needs resources and it will still need resources after 2013 .
At the same time , we must clarify something in the European Union which is self-evident : new priorities will always need new resources .

- ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , the ' peanuts ' have meant that , in my small village of 450 inhabitants , it has been full steam ahead with work on bridging the broadband gap .
I believe that , in three to four months ' time at the latest , we will have it .
Mrs Stavreva , thank you very much for your report .
It is very good .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have been able to work in this lofty Chamber on the development of agriculture for 15 years , helping to shape it , irrespective of farm size and legal form .
The time has now come for me to do something else .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members , officials , Mr Piebalgs and , in particular , you , Mrs Fischer Boel .
( BG ) I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Maldeikis , and emphasise the importance of the projects linked to energy security .
They will create proper conditions for greater solidarity between Member States through the diversification of gas supply sources and the actual suppliers .
I would like to mention that after the negotiations , my country , which was hardest hit by the energy crisis at the start of the year , received some resources and connections were established with the systems in Greece and Turkey .
The resources earmarked for Nabucco and the reverse supply of gas will also contribute to security in south-eastern Europe .
I think that these measures from the Commission and these proposals are just the start of devising an energy security policy .
I am expecting a strategy for improving the gas supply directive , as well as a draft common energy policy to be proposed in the very near future .
( LT ) I would like to talk about the macroeconomic impact of this package .
We often say that we need to solve the banking problems and give the banks more liquidity , more funds .
This package is important because it boosts our common market 's liquidity .
As capital circulates among countries because of the crisis - a natural process in economic development - in many countries companies have ceased operating because of a shortage of funds .
Such a package is needed not as some sort of subsidy or aid .
It is needed to sustain our united European market , our integration , which we have built up over many years .
- ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to thank Commissioner Fischer Boel and Commissioner Piebalgs .
This is a good sign : agriculture and energy side by side , working together .
The same is true of Mr Schierhuber and Mr Karas , Members of Parliament , who are putting themselves on the line , so to speak , for small and medium-sized farms .
This is a good sign .
This debate about the EUR 5 billion shows that we have the right agenda and that we have to strengthen purchasing power in rural areas .
In a time of economic and financial crisis in particular , our challenge is , as a matter of priority , not to send the money we need for energy to the Russia oligarchies and oil magnates , but to keep it in Europe and strengthen rural areas here .
I should like to express my congratulations on this initiative and am particularly pleased that we can adopt it today .
( RO ) I too would like to congratulate our rapporteurs .
This document is important as the interconnection of the energy infrastructure must be a priority .
However , I think that more must be invested in modernising the infrastructure for producing and transporting electrical energy .
I say this , bearing in mind the power outage a few years ago , which affected many European states .
I do think , however , that the Nabucco project must be allocated a larger amount of money .
It is good , nevertheless , that the importance of this project is being recognised once again through this document .
With regard to energy efficiency in buildings , compared to the communication from the Commission in October in which EUR 5 billion was earmarked for this area , we do not find anything about resources in this document .
We have this provision linked to intelligent cities , but the resources will only be able to be used if there are unspent resources left over .
I think that this situation is unacceptable because jobs need to be created and this sector has huge potential .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I see broad support for our proposal and I think it is very important to remember where we were at the beginning of this Parliament .
We have more or less 27 national energy policies and 27 markets with different states of liberalisation .
Cooperation between Member States on energy issues has been rather complicated .
We provided for the very important common drivers , namely the energy and climate change package and strengthening the European dimension of the European internal energy market .
But the issue of where the money comes from was always there and until now we really have not dedicated substantial sums of money to energy .
Due to the financial crisis we are clearly facing delays in a lot of energy- and capital-intensive projects .
Additionally , the gas crisis at the beginning of the year again reminded us how vulnerable Europe is with regard to its energy supplies and how badly we are interconnected , making it hard to use the scale and scope of the European Union .
The lion 's share of this package actually goes to this much needed interconnection .
Mr Paparizov mentioned Bulgaria .
If Bulgaria were to have three additional interconnections there would be less suffering in Bulgaria , and it does not cost a lot of money .
The question is why it was not developed .
There are many factors .
Interconnection is not just developed by one Member State : you need at least two for this .
You also need companies to deal with this .
This package also actually provides for political drivers .
The Baltic States talked a lot about cooperation and interconnections with the Nordic market but , until the formulation of this package , we had somehow stopped short of real development on Baltic interconnection .
A recent meeting of Baltic prime ministers and the decisions taken there are so vitally important that the Baltic countries will no longer be an energy island .
I believe the package provides exactly what the Parliament is looking for to achieve three goals : security of supply , sustainability and EU competitiveness .
So I would ask the Members of this House to support this proposal , because it really is a significant change in European energy policy .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I have listened carefully to the many positive , constructive remarks in the discussion here today .
First of all , as some of you have said , we have to make it very clear that we will not be facing a situation where there will be absolutely no margin in the agricultural budget .
We have a surplus because we have not had extraordinary expenditures - we have had very low costs on intervention and a very low cost on export refunds - and therefore we can manage this specific situation .
But we are not leaving ourselves in a situation where there is no margin in the budget , because of the reasons mentioned by Mr Mulder .
If we run into a situation with an animal disease , I can give a guarantee here today that we will not face a situation where there will be no money or insufficient money to solve these situations .
It is also important to underline the solidarity in the distribution of the money .
When you look at rural development , it is obvious that it has been redistributed in accordance with the money available in the rural development budget for the various Member States , which de facto gives an advantage to the new Member States .
It is also important to see this injection of money as a one-off .
In rural development it is simply going to cover the gap that we have in 2009 because the Health Check only enters into force on 1 January 2010 and therefore we found ourselves in a situation where we had no money to meet the new challenges .
Those challenges are quite in line with my dear colleague Mr Piebalgs 's ideas on renewable energy in the rural areas , using new technologies , using waste from the agricultural sector to contribute to the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , climate change , water , biodiversity and the challenges that we are now facing in the dairy sector in Europe .
Finally , I completely agree that broadband is an advantage , not only for the agricultural sector but also for everybody .
However , it is very important that we secure a link to the broadband network in rural areas to encourage small and medium-sized companies and to make it easier for people to move out and still use their computers , maybe one or two days a week , to take care of a job that might be in the city .
So broadband is one of the issues for the future .
In general , and in conclusion , I think there has been broad support and I hope that the investment we are going to make in this one-off payment will prove to be well spent .
rapporteur . - ( BG ) I would like to thank you for your positive attitude , as well as for the recommendations and views which you expressed .
I also wish to thank Commissioner Boel for her positive approach and for the support which she continues to give farmers and rural inhabitants .
I wish to extend special thanks to the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Parish , and our coordinator , Mr Goepel , for their support and confidence .
Today when we are discussing the future of the common agricultural policy and the opportunity for adequate support , it is very important for us to say that hundreds of millions of European citizens live in the rural areas which cover a large percentage of the Community 's territory .
They need support through our solidarity .
I am very pleased that all the reports which we have been discussing over recent months here in the European Parliament in Strasbourg with the common agricultural policy as their main subject are all drafted in the same spirit and have the same general thrust : that we must take into account and recognise the needs of and opportunities for farmers and rural inhabitants from all Member States .
As a representative of Bulgaria , one of the last Member States to join , I feel it is paramount for European institutions , and in particular the European Parliament , to send the Community 's inhabitants today a clear message of support to show that we are there to help in the difficult times of an economic crisis .
It is important on the eve of the European elections for European institutions to show that they are close to the people and that they want to help them during the difficult times which we are currently going through .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) I would like to thank all my colleagues for their support .
This debate has revealed that the package is of huge importance and we simply cannot forget how complicated it was for the Commission to prepare it and to ensure that this agreement is adopted .
I think we must value the fact that , within a very short space of time , Member States were able to come to an agreement , and this document is in Parliament and will be put to the vote .
It was very difficult , I think , to strike a geographic balance for the funding of these projects and assess recovery measures ( by which I mean how much they will impact on macroeconomic processes and individual sectors ) , and to use various energy subsector projects for funding .
Thus I believe that the composition , which we now have , must provide a result , and today I was very glad to hear Commissioner Piebalgs mention that calls for tender should be announced before the end of May .
This demonstrates that we are reacting in a sufficiently strategic manner , knowing the sensitivity of this whole question .
I think that this package is also very important in the sense that investment processes in the European Union are slowing significantly in the face of the economic crisis , and this package will be a very good impetus and signal both to Member States and energy companies to continue their investment activities , so that our strategic energy goals within the European Union can be achieved .
Once again I thank everyone for their support and I urge you to vote and support this package .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
( DE ) Madam President , you overlooked me during the catch-the-eye procedure .
That is , of course , your prerogative , but now I would like to make a personal statement according to the rules of procedure .
It is not possible , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , the debate is closed .
You know very well that there are five minutes available under the catchtheeye procedure and that Members who have not spoken in the debate have priority .
I therefore cannot allow you to speak now , the debate is closed .
I am sorry .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
In the debate on the report on budgetary discipline and sound financial management as regards the multiannual financial framework ( 2007-2013 ) I would like to draw attention to three matters .
1 .
We should support the allocation of EUR 5 billion to financing energy projects in 2009 and 2010 and to financing development of the Internet infrastructure in rural areas .
We should allocate EUR 3.5 billion to the energy network and EUR 1.5 billion to the Internet infrastructure in rural areas .
2 .
Having given my support , I would like to express my concern that the source of this additional money is found in heading 2 , so this means the common agricultural policy , where the annual ceilings foreseen for the financial perspective for 2007 to 2013 will be reduced by EUR 3.5 billion in 2009 and EUR 2.5 billion in 2010 .
This is particularly disturbing , when the food security of the European Union is under threat .
3 .
I must also express my concern at the fact that this kind of fundamental change in the financial perspective for 2007 to 2013 is being made two months before the end of the current parliamentary term , in great haste , and without any chance of objective debate on the subject .
in writing . - As part of the European Economic Recovery Plan , an extra € 1 billion has been earmarked for the development of broadband internet infrastructure in rural areas via the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
As someone who focuses on agricultural and rural issues , I heartily welcome this initiative .
In many Member States including my own , farmers and rural dwellers do not enjoy the same levels of broadband access , putting them at a distinct disadvantage in comparison with people who live in cities and towns .
We should remember that this initiative is part of a package which aims to stimulate failing European economies .
In this context , I am hopeful that improved broadband access will help stimulate small and medium-sized enterprises in rural areas .
in writing . - ( FI ) It is excellent that the five billion package promised by the Commission when the economic crisis first began has at last been approved .
The cash was badly needed , and I think that the Commission 's chosen priorities of energy and rural support , which means in particular the development of broadband networks , are worthwhile .
The 100 million granted for the Estlink 2 submarine cable project will have a special impact on Finland .
It is excellent that the Estlink project should have remained on the list , its sum unchanged , right from the time the Commission first put forward its proposal .
The priorities for the energy recovery package , however , are really very irritating - the fact that the Commission 's original idea purely and simply to support power lines , carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) , and offshore wind projects has not changed along the way .
Power lines and offshore wind did , of course , deserve the additional cash .
The unreasonable emphasis on carbon capture and storage , however , is incomprehensible , especially as this is likely to receive considerable funding from revenue from emissions trading .
Other renewable energy projects should also definitely have had an equal chance to apply for the extra recovery funds , apart from those relating to wind power .
Instead of investing in CCS technology , which is an uncertain venture , the emphasis ought to be on renewable energy sources .
The various solar energy projects , in particular , would have deserved to receive financing .
There was a statement that came with the package that suggested that unused funds might be channelled into projects to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy sources .
In the Commission 's original plans , funds would have been earmarked for energy efficiency , rather than using any of the crumbs that might have been left over for this .
It is also very unfortunate that the component originally planned for ' smart cities ' was , in the end , excluded from the recovery package .
Madam President , the European Economic Recovery Package , also known as the 5 billion package , is connected with the development of rural areas in the EU .
We will allocate an additional sum of over EUR 1 billion to improving Internet access in rural areas and to the new challenges which are specified in the review of the common agricultural policy .
It is a pity that the money available has been somewhat reduced , but now the most important thing is to complete the entire legislative process as quickly as possible .
This action will enable us to reduce the disproportion which exists between rural and urban areas in the development of broadband Internet infrastructure and of services related to new technologies .
The Internet is not only a special kind of window on the world , and a tool for exchanging views and gaining knowledge , but it is also a means for facilitating many administrative matters .
By accepting this package the EU will send a positive signal to our rural society .
Farming plays an important role in rural areas , but many kinds of small enterprises are also found in rural areas , such as shops , workshops and warehouses .
I believe that development of the Internet will contribute to the development of education and of small enterprises , including tourist services , in these areas .
It may also help to gain additional income , especially in small , family holdings .
Credit requirements directives : Directives 2006 / 48 / EC and 2006 / 49 / EC - Community programme for financial services , financial reporting and auditing
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Karas , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 2006 / 48 / EC and 2006 / 49 / EC as regards banks affiliated to central institutions , certain own funds items , large exposures , supervisory arrangements , and crisis management - C6-0339 / 2008 - , and
the report by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Community programme to support specific activities in the field of financial services , financial reporting and auditing - C6-0031 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today I have the opportunity to present to you not only the findings of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs but also the results of long negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
Last week we reached agreement in a trialogue on a common approach to developing a new framework for the financial markets .
I tell you , I ask you , to look on these proposals , which we are debating today , as a complete package .
Some of us wanted more , some of us wanted less , in this Parliament , in the Council and in the Commission .
I can tell you that we did not agree on the smallest common denominator but attempted to agree on more than the biggest common denominator .
We have proposed a line for the next steps , because this can only be a first step .
We have not come up with an answer to the economic and financial crisis .
But we are ready to take a new step , to achieve a breakthrough in the development of a new framework for the financial markets , which will lead to the simplification of financial market regulation and to Europeanisation , which will create certainty on the financial markets and stability for all market participants , which represents a development of the financial markets , is a reaction to the financial crisis and safeguards the decentralised sector .
I would like to thank Mrs Berès , Mrs Bowles and my fellow Members in the other groups for their support and , especially , the Secretariat and all staff members .
This proposal leads to more transparency , more legal certainty and more stability and therefore creates more trust in a time characterised by a lack of trust .
It is not the only body of laws we are proposing .
In the last plenary sitting we decided to regulate the rating agencies , we adopted the new supervisory structures for the insurance industry , and the Commission presented a new proposal for hedge funds .
It is an additional package , with which we are pointing the way .
There are five points .
The first is financial market supervision , where , as a first step , we have strengthened the role of CEPS and that of the European Central Bank .
We have also enhanced the balance between home and host regulators .
The second step is that we must now achieve stronger integration of financial market supervision .
All the requirements are contained in this report , because we need an integrated supervision structure to enable us to overcome the new challenges .
The second area is securitisation , the granting of loans .
For the first time we are introducing the rule that a loan can only be granted if the lender holds a retention for securitisation in its books .
We have provided for a retention of at least 5 % , but we have commissioned CEPS to look into whether an increase is reasonable and to publish its findings in a Commission review before the end of the year , taking international developments into consideration .
This is an important signal to the markets : without a retention there is nothing .
The retention leads to transparency and also to better control .
Thirdly , we have regulated large exposures in terms of the own funds / risk ratio .
No large exposure may account for more than 25 % of a bank 's own funds .
And , when banks lend to each other , the sum of EUR 150 million must not be exceeded .
The fourth point is that we are working to improve the quality of own funds and hybrid capital .
However , we are taking into account existing statutory regulations in the Member States , because we do not wish to have procyclical effects during the economic and financial crisis .
That we have created a correct , professional transitional regulation is an important point , especially for cooperatives , savings banks and silent capital contributions in Germany .
Nonetheless , there is still a lot to do .
I would like to single out pro-cyclicality as the fifth point .
This reports states that the Commission must clearly identify the pro-cyclical effects of the existing directives very quickly and that we must see that the necessary change is made before the autumn .
I call on you to accept this report and the proposal for agreement with the trilogue so that we , as the European Union and as the European Parliament , can maintain our leading role in the reform of the financial markets .
It is also important that we implement all the requirements for future development so that can open the door to an improved , more stable and more trustful financial market and once again assume a leading role at the next G20 Summit .
I ask for your support in this .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the lack of financial oversight operating uniformly throughout Europe and the failure of the system at international and European level are some of the reasons for the current financial and economic crisis .
We must therefore ensure that information is integrated in the system in a coordinated manner and that the individual organisations exchange information so as to prevent another crisis .
The good public oversight operating in some Member States must be optimised for all 27 Member States to ensure the good transfer of information .
This needs financial resources .
We must resolve the crisis now and provide the resources now .
This is exactly what the Community programme to support specific activities in the field of financial services , financial reporting and auditing achieves .
I welcome the fact that the Commission has responded to Parliament 's call for action and is proposing to provide financial support for the Community in the financial services sector and in the financial reporting and auditing areas as well as for the activities of certain European and international institutions in order to ensure that Community policies in this area are effective .
A new Community programme will be brought out to enable direct contributions to be made to finance these individual institutions from the Community budget .
Cofinancing of this kind for the committees and the supervisory authorities can to a large degree help to ensure that they fulfil their mandates independently and efficiently .
The programme must be flexibly designed and adequately funded to ensure that the requirements of at least the level 3 committees , including CESR , CEIOPS and CEBS , are covered .
The Commission proposal was 40 % below what the level 3 committees considered necessary for the next four years .
There was little appetite in the Council for substantially increasing the budget even though it was clear that considerable improvement of financial market supervision was called for .
At the end of the negotiations we had agreed on a figure of approximately EUR 40 million over the four years : EUR 500 000 for the level 3 committees for 2009 and a further EUR 38.7 million from 2010 to 2013 , 13.5 million of which are earmarked for these committees .
As regards the financial reporting and auditing committees , the original Commission proposal for reform of this organisation was too weak .

This means , therefore , that we , as Parliament , have been able to make improvements and , following the trialogue negotiations , we have achieved an acceptable result as far as the individual financial reference amounts and financing periods are concerned .
The latest findings of the Larosière Group and of the report indicate that there are goods reasons why the Commission should present to Parliament and the Council no later than 1 July 2010 a report and the necessary legislative proposals for further reform of the regulation and oversight of the European financial markets to adapt this programme to the changes made .
Against the backdrop of the current financial crisis it would seem essential to give top priority to expanding convergence on oversight and cooperating in the area of financial services in connection with financial reporting and auditing .
In the plenary session on Solvency II 14 days ago I said that it was important that Europe sent clear signals that were heeded in the rest of the world .
I believe that we have sent clear signals in recent weeks , including with the report by Mr Karas on the rating agencies , that we can be taken seriously by our international partners and that we are not just passengers , as we have been over the last few decades .
This is a good signal .
I would like to thank my shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Bowles and Mrs Berès .
As this is my last speech in this Parliament , I would also like to thank the Commission , my fellow Members and the Council for their cooperation .
It has been a pleasure to work with you all .
Let me give you an example of a pleasing result of this cooperation .
The Czech Presidency of the Council decided 30 minutes ago to accept the outcome negotiated in the trialogue negotiations .
We have a proposal that we can adopt today and I am certain that the large Groups in this Parliament will also vote in favour of these proposals .
Many thanks once again for your cooperation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , two weeks after our last debate on measures against the financial crisis , I welcome this opportunity to discuss with you further actions which were jointly taken to face this challenge .
Today I am particularly pleased to welcome the prospect of a first-reading agreement on two key measures : the Community programme to support specific activities in the field of financial services , financial reporting and auditing , and the review of the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD ) .
They would both make an important contribution , not only to the recovery efforts , but crucially to the long-term effectiveness of financial supervision and the strength of the EU financial sector .
Firstly I would like to welcome Parliament 's amendments to the proposal for a Community programme to support specific activities in the field of financial services , financial reporting and auditing .
The financial crisis has demonstrated the need to further strengthen EU supervisory arrangements .
It has also reminded us of the importance of transparency and independence for bodies active in the field of financial reporting and auditing standards .
For the Commission , an essential move to achieve those aims is to reinforce the role of the key bodies in these fields , but at European and at international level .
This is why the Commission proposed to provide them with financial support .
We believe there is a consensus that these bodies all need stable , diversified and adequate funding .
When adopted , the programme will enable them to accomplish their mission in a more independent and more efficient manner .
For the three committees of supervisors , the programme will be a first step in the strengthening of their capabilities in line with the recommendations set out in the de Larosière report .
It would give them the opportunity to develop projects which will enhance the convergence of supervision in Europe and the cooperation between national supervisors .
In particular , exchange of information will be made easier by the setting-up of new IT tools .
Common training for national supervisors will enable the emergence of a common supervisory culture .
The programme will also prepare the ground for the next steps of supervisory reforms , which the Commission will be dealing with in the coming weeks .
We also need to ensure high quality for finance reporting and auditing rules , which are harmonised at international level .
We need to make sure that there is a level playing field for European users and these rules are being developed by the standard-setters .
This is an important condition for creating a favourable business environment for firms , even more so in the current economic context .
By avoiding the reliance of the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation , the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group and the international Public Oversight Board on voluntary funding from non-diversified potentially interested parties , we can improve the quality and credibility of the standard-setting process .
By strengthening the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group we will provide stronger advice for the European Union when international financial reporting standards are being developed by the International Accounting Standards Board .
By helping the international Public Oversight Board to increase its oversight capacities , we aim to ensure that the international auditing standards will fit the EU 's requirements for quality when applying them .
The proposed amendments make adjustments to the Commission 's proposal on the way the envelope should be redistributed between beneficiaries .
We are not fully satisfied with this .
In particular we would have preferred that no amounts be redistributed from the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group ( EFRAG ) to the EU Committees of Supervisors .
EFRAG is a European body .
It is an essential element of the EU 's influence in the standard-setting process of the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation .
Distributing amounts under the envelope from EFRAG to other European bodies does not send the right signal .
However , we recognise that only a very limited amount will be redistributed from EFRAG to the EU Committees of Supervisors .
We also believe we can still achieve most of the objectives we are aiming at under the programme and for these reasons we can support the amendments .
As Mr Hoppenstedt said , I am pleased to take this opportunity to announce that Coreper has adopted proposed amendments this morning and this means both the Council and the Commission can now support the Parliament proposal .
Moving to the review of the CRD , I am pleased to express the Commission 's general support for Parliament 's amendments .
General support , but not full support , as the Commission still harbours some concerns on securitisation .
The proposal adopted by the Commission last October is the outcome of extensive consultation , a process that started before the financial crisis .
In many aspects this review of the CRD has turned out to be a timely and robust first response to the crisis .
The European Parliament has commendably responded with a sense of urgency to adopt this proposal at first reading .
As a result , we now have tighter liquidity risk management principles , strong rules on risk diversification , strengthened supervision , a better capital base , and skin in the game , coupled with due diligence requirements for securitisation .
By any measure this is significant headway .
On the now famous 5 % retention for securitisation , I am pleased to see that Parliament has resisted the call from industry to do away with what they had only last year characterised as complete nonsense .
I would like to say that the retention rule has emerged as something that is not nonsense but plain common sense .
It is now recognised by the G20 as a key measure to strengthen the financial system .
Looking forward , the Commission will , without a shadow of a doubt , support any further efforts making the text even more watertight .
The Commission has been at the forefront of the global initiatives to tackle the crisis .
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision will follow suit .
I therefore very much welcome the clause providing for a review by the end of 2009 suggested by the European Parliament .
The Committee will consider the need for an increase of the retention requirement , taking into account international developments .
I am also pleased to see that Parliament has resisted the calls from industry for less stringent rules on interbank risks .
Let us just remind ourselves that banks are not risk free .
This is a crucial lesson of the financial crisis .
Adequate diversification and collateral are critical to ensuring financial stability .
On own funds I understand the reluctance of some Members that Parliament could consider the downgrading of certain national instruments that do not meet the eligibility criteria for Core Tier 1 .
Let me be more precise .
I understand this reluctance , but only for the current economic context .
Much recovery is on track .
The Commission is strongly committed to further enhancing the quality of own funds , as agreed at the G20 Summit .
As regards securitisation , the Commission still considers that in some aspects there would have been merit in further clarifying and specifying the way the 5 % retention will be calculated .
I understand that the European Parliament has worked under time pressure and I am pleased that the Commission has been given a second chance to tighten up the text in a report due by the end of 2009 .
The two reports on which you will vote today demonstrate that , when MEPs , Ministers of Finance and Commissioners think ahead of the curve and provide political leadership , a speedy and effective response to the challenges we face is possible .
Both measures discussed today will significantly contribute to paving the way for the revision of the EU financial and supervisory framework .
In addition to these measures , last Wednesday we presented a package of crucial initiatives to respond to the financial crisis , on alternative investment funds , on remuneration structures and on packaged retail investment products .
Last but not least , in three weeks ' time a Commission communication will set out its views on follow-up actions to the recommendations of the de Larosière report on financial supervision .
Upon endorsement by the June European Council , further legislative proposals will be presented in the autumn .

rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - Mr President , I rise on Mr Hoppenstedt 's report to give the Budget Committee 's opinion .
Like Mr Hoppenstedt , this will be my last speech before this Chamber after 20 years .
The Budget Committee recognises the importance of these proposals and their urgency .
It is quite clear that some key EU policies will be undermined without proper financing and therefore we are happy to support the proposal .
However , we would point that this money is coming from the margin of heading 1a , so that will reduce the margin and therefore reduce the availability of funding for other projects which may be important in the future .
We should bear that in mind .
Secondly , we should also ensure that these organisations do not in any way become agencies because , if they did , they would of course be subject to the interinstitutional agreement on agencies .
Finally , we would not want the Budget Committee 's position to be in any way undermined by the rush for these proposals .
That is why the Budget Committee was happy to support Mr McCreevy 's proposal on Monday night about interim funding , so that we can ensure that proper financial procedures and a proper trialogue takes place on the financial implication of these proposals .
Thank you , Mr Titley , for the 20 years you have dedicated to the European cause .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , we seem to be a succession of old hands rising to speak , but would that I were not making my last speech in the European Parliament in the worst economic situation of my lifetime - and that is a lifetime that started in the blighted 1930s - and would that I were not also having to speak in a debate on a piece of European legislation which is not , I am afraid , wholly satisfactory : the Capital Requirements Directive .
I and my group will support the compromise reached by rapporteur Karas with great skill and patience under heavy time pressure and in the current feverish economic circumstances .
But I hope my colleagues who return here after the election will revert to the full codecision process , which can really fully test and refine our legislation .
I fear that much of this over-hasty legislation will reveal unintended and untoward consequences .
For example , I fear that the rules on large exposures , extolled by Commissioner McCreevy and prompted by genuine concerns about counterparty risk , will make it that much more difficult to reactivate the interbank money market to its full and desirable extent .
I fear that the new retention rule , also extolled by Commissioner McCreevy , will , in fact , impede the revival of securitisation , which is an essential and predominantly beneficial mechanism for funding mortgages , car loans and consumer spending .
All the government-induced stimuli which one might contemplate cannot compensate for a moribund securitisation market .
So I just hope that , when the time comes to review this directive , the necessary impact assessments will have been made , that wise counsels will have been consulted , that the global context will have been properly and fully considered and that fully appropriate rules are ultimately implemented .
Commissioner , I deplore the absence of the Council Presidency .
Mr McCreevy , you have made your mandate as commissioner for the internal market one of regulatory standstill .
Unfortunately - I do not know how to phrase this - you should have changed your mind and ultimately taken the advice of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament which , when Mr Katiforis 's report was presented , told you that legislation on rating agencies was needed , or you should have listened to our rapporteur , Mr Rasmussen , who told you that retention on securitisation needed to be introduced in the banking sector .
Finally , you should have also decided to introduce guarantees for bank deposits .
You see , the regulatory holiday is not news .
Fortunately , we will no longer have to address these issues with you in the next parliamentary term .
I say this because the last proposal that you submitted to us on alternative funds and investment funds was unreasonable , and the fact that you will not even agree to come and discuss it with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs proves it .
As for Mr Karas 's report , I think it is an important report that we should adopt today , because it gives the signal , within the Union , to our banking sector and to all our G20 partners that retention must be introduced for securitisation .
Own funds must be defined better .
In future , there will need to be more transnational supervision of groups , and integrated supervision along the lines of Jacques de Larosière 's report .
Finally , we have to organise clearing houses for derivatives and credit default swaps .
I would also like to thank Mr Karas for the way in which we have been able to re-open the trialogue so that we will be able , in the period before this directive comes into force , to revise the retention threshold .
Having ordered studies , and having given CEBS a mandate to determine under which conditions this retention should be expertly planned , we have been able to verify whether the 5 % threshold that we are going to vote on today was the appropriate threshold , even more so now that we have corrected the scope of the retention by making what I believe was the right choice and getting rid of the guarantees sought by Mr Purvis .
As for Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , I wish to thank him most sincerely , as I believe that , here , we are getting involved , usefully and positively .
In the past , the Commission would tell us that it could not fund level 3 committees ; today , it is possible even before these committees become agencies .
We welcome this .
At the rapporteur 's instigation , both the operating costs and the project costs will thus be eligible for funding , and Parliament will have a clear insight into the nature of the projects being funded in this way .
We can only welcome this ; it is along the right lines .
Finally , in relation to accounting standards and the conditions in which international organisations contribute to their drafting , we have put pressure on these organisations so that they improve their governance and define their roles better .
I believe that in this area , too , the European Parliament , with Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , has done a useful job , and I wish to thank all of the rapporteurs , as well as this House if , as I hope , it adopts these two reports by a large majority later on .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the agreed CRD text is a good step forward on core capital , exposures and supervision .
The securitisation provision , now with proportional penalties for due diligence failures , is not perfect but it is fit for purpose - the purpose to rebuild confidence and repair the securitisation market .
Review at the end of the year on the retention per cent means we have covered all bases , including international cooperation .
European problems with securitisation came on the buy-side from the US , but fear has dried up our own securitisation .
Banks have lost the main instrument that enabled them to sell on their loans - an important instrument because it freed up capital for further lending and was a major driver for growth .
In 2006-7 European securitisations totalled EUR 800 billion : EUR 526 billion supporting European mortgages and tens of billions each on car purchases , credit card spending and SME loans - yes , including something like EUR 40 billion of German SME loans .
These are the very areas where the credit crunch is biting hardest .
It is no coincidence .
Because we have to face the fact that bank lending is limited by their capital and they are stuck until either more capital is raised or the loan sold on .
So the sooner that we can get Europe 's quality control securitisation working , the better .
It may seem that , if 5 % retention guarantees good behaviour by banks , then 10 % would guarantee it more , but the retained portion attracts a capital charge so it reduces the capital that can be freed up and in turn restricts lending .
A 10 % hit during times of ongoing capital stress would just hurt borrowers and businesses , not banks .
That is why other forums - also having started with higher retention proposals - are tending to settle on 5 % too .
Ultimately , it will be intelligent supervisory vigilance that will prevent future new abuses rather than regulation for the old and gone .
On Level 3 committees we can see that , despite the problems and failures in supervision , it is Parliament that has recognised better than Member States that holes cannot be plugged without resources .
It has followed this by demanding more resources for those committees .
International accounting and audit bodies will also benefit from more diversified neutral funding and the EU can lead off on this , but not indefinitely if other countries do not join in .
I am pleased to have clarified that .
Funding should also be sought from the user-side such as investors .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , today 's economic crisis is a crisis of over-production and over-accumulation of capital .
It is , as everyone now admits , a crisis of the capitalist system itself .
Efforts to present this crisis as a financial crisis , as a liquidity crisis , are being made in order to mislead the workers and to avoid acknowledging the real causes , which lead to increased unemployment , reduced incomes , flexible labour relations and the all-out attack on them .
The measures being taken to supervise accounting standards with controls on lines of credit and own funds , not only fail to limit the unaccountability of the banks ; in essence they are measures which the banks themselves are seeking in order to safeguard that unaccountability beneath superficial supervision and control , supervision which , instead of protecting the interests of small depositors who have been and continue to be at risk from the economic crisis , will safeguard the conditions of competition of the banks and will allow new tools to be used to increase their profits .
The reserve which the banks demonstrated even to their cofinancing by the state , in return for even minimal controls , is typical of their stand , a stand of unaccountability which , in the jungle of the market , again results in increased profits and prices , while the workers are again being called upon to pay the costs of the crisis .
The workers are not being deceived or disorientated by the decisions of the European Union to end the crisis .
They know that these decisions put the entire weight of the crisis onto their shoulders and seek to safeguard even greater profits for capital .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
We have now gone through a global financial meltdown and it is continuing to cause us problems .
We need then to analyse why this has happened before we begin to act at EU level .
I would like to say the following .
Firstly , we have an ownerless capitalism .
The large companies are no longer governed by their shareholders , but by pension funds , insurance companies and other types of fund .
This leads to a situation in which officials can govern however they want to , and they do this in a way that suits their own interests , which are in increasing the risks enormously , and then the result is what we are seeing now .
We have banks that are ' too big to fail ' , as the catchphrase goes .
The Glass-Steagall Act was intended to prevent this , but it has been abolished in the US .
We ought to consider whether this might not be part of the solution .
We have deposit guarantees for small-scale savers and even quite large-scale savers .
This means that people depositing money in banks do not give two hoots whether the banks are safe , as they know that taxpayers will protect them .
This is a problem .
The heads of the central banks do not burst the bubbles , but rather are praised when they constantly ensure that the bubbles can continue to grow ad infinitum .
Alan Greenspan gained an immensely good reputation for something which , in practice , is a significant explanation for why things have become so bad .
Subprime lending was the start of this and a fundamental part , and it was introduced by politicians who are now saying that we will solve this by taking more power away from the market .
I doubt that .
The regulatory system in Basel II was circumvented by means of shadow banking .
Now we are talking about new rules for capital .
If this is more shadow banking , it is not going to help .
I therefore believe that we should tackle this in a different way and ask what should be done .
Then we will discover that very little should be done at EU level .
This is a global problem and should be dealt with elsewhere .
- ( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion one of the best steps taken by the European Parliament in the current functional period was last year 's decision on the need for close regulation and greater stability in the financial system .
It is a pity this did not happen three years earlier .
The submission of a draft directive on capital requirements is another practical outcome in this context .
The financial crisis has drawn attention to the shortcomings in supervision mechanisms , including consolidated supervision .
I agree that the starting point for resolving the problem should be the creation of a decentralised European system of banking supervision bodies based on the model of the European central banks .
I am also in favour of stricter securitisation rules .
Originators should hold a certain percentage of the risk arising from the exposures that they securitise and further due diligence should be required from the investor .
This is the only way to achieve progress .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs and the groups ' shadow rapporteurs for the compromise that has been reached .
Although many of us find a large number of the arguments far from ideal or beneficial , I think it is important that the regulation is drawn up right now , before the elections .
I would like to make a couple of remarks . 1 .
As the rapporteur responsible for microcredit , I welcome the fact that the report featured the requirement , which also appeared in my report , for a risk management system to be devised reflecting microcredit features , such as no traditional collateral and excess . I hope this will happen as soon as possible .
I would like to thank Mrs Berès for her amendment to the proposal .
2 . I was highly critical of the supervisory arrangements even during the debate on the 2005 amendment .
This applies particularly to the supervision of parent institutions , which actually also raises constitutional concerns with regard to deployment in the country of the subsidiaries , although subsidiaries are generally located in the new Member States .
This vulnerability is reduced , if not actually stopped by the collegiate system which , in my view , is still only a step in the right direction , but not the real solution .
Nevertheless , for the sake of compromise , I regard this situation as progress mainly because the current compromise also advocates that the draft regulation on the integrated supervisory system should be produced quickly based on the De Larosière material , which will already be good , in our opinion , as well as providing a very significant benefit for communitarisation .
I would like to say a special word of thanks for the solidarity shown to the countries outside the euro zone in connection with the amendment to Article 153 ( 3 ) as , with the acceptance of my proposal , the separate risk premium will not apply until the end of 2015 to the credits for these countries , which they have generally received in euros from the public finances or central bank .
Taking all these points into account , I propose block-voting on the compromise , including the 5 % retention , since this in itself marks some measure of progress .
Finally , as this is my last speech , I would also like to thank you , Madam President , and all my fellow Members for the work which I have been able to do here for the last five years .
( PT ) This year European wealth will fall by 4 % and unemployment will increase up to 26 million .
The world and the European Union should have done more , better and earlier with regard to regulating the financial markets .
I welcome the work done by this Parliament , much of it in an atmosphere of urgency , but I would underline the contribution made by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , which should have received more recognition at the appropriate time .
I regret that the Commission 's reaction has been slower , more piecemeal and more limited than the situation required and requires , as illustrated by the recent proposal on hedge funds .
The adoption of the directive on capital requirements is another step in the right direction .
We know that it is not ambitious enough and falls short of expectations , but today the most important thing is to give a clear signal to the financial institutions and markets that business as usual has come to an end .
I applaud the work of the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , particularly Pervenche Berès , in their search for a compromise .
This directive does introduce clear rules , but a great deal of work will still have to be done during the next revision on some of the more controversial issues , particularly on the level of retention for the purposes of securitisation .
Today it is vital that this Parliament ensures the adoption of this directive , thus sending a clear message to European citizens that things are changing and will continue to change , and that we are particularly concerned about them .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis has made it clear that the financial market framework of the European Union must be revised .
My Group supports the proposals developed in the trialogue negotiations , especially the proposals for a new Capital Requirements Directive for banks .
Risk-based supervision will increase , the abuse of special purpose vehicles will disappear and the quality of structured products will improve as a result of the 5 % retention for securitisation .
However , I regret that the rule for in-year interbank loans is very restrictive and that silent capital contributions are accepted as full-value capital for a transitional period only .
The progress achieved with the restructuring of the financial market framework is good but not yet sufficient .
The work will therefore continue .
I hope that the banks will prove to be more cooperative than they have been in the last few months , when I saw them more in the role of a brakeman than a partner in search of forward-looking solutions .
( DE ) Mr President , I would first like to say that we have started on this second project , which is under discussion today , to put financial market regulation on a normal footing .
The financial market crisis can be attributed partly to a failure of the markets and partly to a failure of regulation .
We have drawn up a list of measures that must be regulated by the rating agencies .
We have adopted resolutions on the Capital Requirements Directive , on managers ' salaries , on hedge funds , on accounting regulations and on the European supervisory structure .
Today , we are dealing with the second point .
Negotiations are being conducted on the basis of a vote in committee , not in the normal first reading procedure but on the basis of an agreement reached between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
I acknowledge that Mr Karas has achieved many things .
However , a large number of fellow Members , like me , are of a different opinion , as Mr Klinz pointed out .
This primarily relates to the retention for securitisation .
The securitisation market and the financial market crisis arose not least because financial market products without own risk were created .
That is why the banks no longer trust each other , because no one has securities for which they take responsibility through risk .
The proposal is for a 5 % retention .
In my opinion , 10 % is far more appropriate and that is why I have tabled an amendment .
I am certain that the Council , if it accepts all the other things , will have to consider this 10 % retention .
We , as Parliament , have a responsibility to give citizens further assurances that a global financial market crisis of this kind can never be repeated .
That is why I propose and request that we accept the compromise reached by Mr Karas apart from the 10 % retention and the deduction of silent capital contributions .
Mr President , I am standing here with mixed feelings in my last debate in this House .
I am very happy with the decision that we took on the Hoppenstedt report to increase the funding of the Level 3 committees .
This is a step towards strong European supervision of the financial markets that have developed far beyond national borders .
I have been a strong supporter of this and I hope the debate on this will continue very strongly in the next term .
The other dossier on the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD ) is not , in my view , a good example of better regulation under the Lamfalussy process that we have developed in the 10 years I have been active .
I will support the results because we need to send a strong signal to the market , but I would have preferred a more principles-based approach and more transparent consultation in the political process .
This was the pressure of obtaining this hasty result .
I hope that , at the end of the year when there will be a fuller review of the CRD , the Lamfalussy process will also be taken properly into account .
I strongly recommend that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs reinstate this process .
In my last speech , I would also link to what Ms Berès has said and would say to Mr McCreevy that it is a pity that what he has done to regulate these financial markets is really too little and too late .
I want to express my appreciation to my colleagues in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their cooperation over these 10 years .
I hope they get a Commissioner in the new term who will be exclusively devoted to the financial markets , handling a portfolio which really focuses on this very important subject that brought us into these dire straits nowadays , and who will really be devoted to regulation and proper European supervision of the financial markets .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if you want to drain a bog you do not ask the fattest frogs how they would like it to happen .
That is exactly the problem with the report on the Capital Requirements Directive , which is under discussion today .
If we do not wish to still be setting up bad banks in ten or twenty years ' time then we must get banks and credit institutions to assume a significant business risk if they continue to deal in critical products .
Five per cent is not significant .
Commissioner McCreevy brought up 15 % and was then beaten down to 5 % by the industry .
The Council went along with this and the European Parliament cut a very sorry figure indeed .
We German Social Democrats will vote for a higher retention and we will also vote for the continuation of the silent capital contributions , because a competition policy that attacks a business model and that has nothing to do with restructuring the banks is unfair .
I hope that we will adopt a reasonable resolution and that , after 7 June , we will have a Parliament that , with courage and more guts , speaks a clear language during the restructuring of the financial market .
( ES ) Mr President , as a first response to the financial crisis of August 2007 , the adoption of this directive should not be delayed .
In view of the circumstances , it should be applied with prudence , in order to avoid U-turns , and it should be accompanied by a more ambitious revision , in accordance with international developments .
The financial institutions require a solid capital base and need to compete in a balanced way through a harmonised definition of own funds , in particular of hybrid instruments , and a proportionate strengthening of the management of major risks .
It is vital to bring in more transparency and align the interests of issuers and investors in securitisation processes .
Retaining at least 5 % of securitised products on the balance sheet , avoiding multiple use of such products and stepping up the due diligence of investors are steps in this direction .
Creating colleges of supervisors for cross-border groups and making the role of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors more robust are moves towards more fully integrated European supervision .
( LT ) I would also like to thank my colleagues for five excellent years of cooperation , although I have to say that there are still unsolved questions for the next legislative term .
Above all , this directive does not solve the problem of assessing bank activities .
The risk-based approach was not fit for purpose and we really need to think about another type of assessment , perhaps what is known as the performance-based approach .
Moreover , we still have not decided who will pay .
Which country 's tax payers are going to risk their own money , if a large European group has problems ?
Will a special fund be set up at European level ?
Will various countries contribute to a joint fund ?
Until we have the answer , we cannot say that we have strong and well prepared regulation of the financial sector .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I firmly believe that the measures we are debating here should also be of a preventive nature , since the situation is very grave .
The volume of financial derivatives on the world market is five times larger than the worldwide gross domestic product and this is a bubble that is going to burst , with the risk that gross domestic product will drop dramatically , particularly in the United States .
The whole world , including European countries , would suffer .
There is also the danger of hyperinflation , since the prevailing idea , especially in the United States , appears to be that all problems can be resolved by pouring more and more money into the system , even though this strategy displays serious shortcomings .
I therefore believe that the preventive aspect is highly important , and that some of the more controversial instruments used on the financial markets , such as shadow banking for example , should simply be banned .
Before Commissioner McCreevy takes the floor , because several Members have today spoken for the last time in the Chamber , I feel it is my duty , on behalf not only of the MEPs but also of all European citizens and voters , to thank them for their commitment over the years .
I believe that their chosen task of seeking to improve things deserves the gratitude of all our fellow citizens .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly may I thank in particular the rapporteurs , Mr Karas and Mr Hoppenstedt , and others for their dedication in finding compromises in these two particular areas .
As regards the Hoppenstedt report , the positive outcome of Coreper this morning paves the way for an adoption at first reading .
An agreement on this strategic initiative is very welcome because it sends the right signal : a signal of our determination to respond to the financial crisis , to strengthen financial supervision and to improve the standard assessing process for financial reporting and auditing .
But this is only a first step in a very long process .
In the months to come , I look forward to continuing this work with you in the new Parliament .
On securitisation , we all agree that the 5 % retention requirement is a first step .
The Basel Committee will work on quantitative retention .
This has been required by the G20 .
The European Union is ahead of the curve , and we will contribute to bringing about further consistency at global level .
Let me just make a point concerning securitisation .
Mrs Bowles made a pretty strong contribution in this regard .
She is very much for securitisation and pointed out the good aspects of it and the amount of money that is contributed to the capital markets for small and medium-sized enterprises and to lenders at large in all Member States of the European Union .
In case there is any impression that I do not see the benefits of securitisation over the years , may I say that I certainly do !
In my previous capacity , and long before I came here , I was aware of the benefits of securitisations .
However , the issue is what proportion the originating securitiser should hold in that particular matter .
I accept what Mrs Bowles said : that in future a holding of whatever percentage will attract a capital charge .
One cannot be certain as to when the current financial crisis will end .
But , irrespective of when that end is going to be , I think we can be absolutely certain in years to come that financial institutions will be required , at all levels , to hold more significant and more quality capital against their lending .
I will not be here - but many of you will - but , whatever the end is , that will be the inevitable outcome of this particular financial crisis - not immediately , not maybe in the medium term , but in the longer term that will be a certainty .
If I looked into my crystal ball , that is what I would see in years to come .
So it is the percentage which is being debated .
People know my views on this .
I have held very strong views on this for a long period of time .
Various amendments have been put forward during the Council of Ministers stage and with the European Parliament about different ' outs ' on one thing and another , which my officials , at my request , are very , very strongly against , because I strongly believe in the very simple proposition that 5 % of something is better than 55 % of zero .
The more outs that there are - we can have 5 % , 10 % , 15 % - 15 % of zero is still zero .
That is why I welcome the opportunity that the Commission in its report by the end of this year will come back to this particular matter in order to ensure that the wording is fairly tightened up .
I am strongly of that view because I do not wish to see particular outs .
But I readily appreciate what Mrs Bowles and others have said regarding the merits of securitisations for the capital market .
I hope I have never given the impression that I did not .
Finally , may I , too , join with the President in wishing those Members who are retiring well in their future careers , whatever they might be . I have known most of them in some capacity or other in my five years here and I appreciate their contributions , even though I have not always agreed with them .
I suppose I should not single out any one person , but I would like to make special mention of Mr Purvis in this regard .
I always found his advice to be wise , measured , considered and not dogmatic , and I wish him , in particular , a very successful future .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank you for your support and for the signal we are sending to savers , businesses , banks and the world of finance .
The debate was very open .
It also highlighted the weaknesses and the need for further development .
I can tell you that all your wishes , as well as your criticisms and reservations , played a role in the negotiations , that we tried to incorporate them in recitals and in the request for reviews .
There is nothing that was said here today that did not also play a role in the agreement presented - in some cases not a very strong role - but everything played a role .
It is therefore absolutely clear that this is an important step forward , but it is not the final step , because we are announcing , giving notice of and promoting further steps in this agreement and specifying the direction for this debate .
In other words , the debate will continue , it has to continue .
But I believe that it is important that we send a clear signal now , in this legislative period , that we are competent , that we wish to create trust , security and stability , that we can react quickly and that we know what still needs to be done in the future .
I therefore call on you to take this step together and with a big majority .
Thank you very much for the debate .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I have already given my opinion on certain things in the first round of talks .
However , I would like to say once again very clearly that the world , including our partners in the United States , China and other places , is watching the European Union , the Council , the Commission and Parliament to see how we will react to the crisis .
I have already said that there has been a reaction , which we notice in certain rules that are being re-drafted .
Things are moving somewhat in the US in terms of the Reinsurance Directive and other things like that , such as the collaterals .
Moreover , the received wisdom is that , if we , as Europeans , do not have anything concrete in our hands , then our partners will not react .
Last month and this month we took decisions and got them off the ground , and we managed to find reasonable solutions together with the Council .
I would once again like to take this opportunity to thank the Commission , which was sometimes a bit heavyhanded , and the Council , where we tried to find reasonable solutions in night sittings and in many trialogue sittings , because , just an hour ago , they also approved the reasonable compromise we found .
I of course thank my co-combatants in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mrs Berès , Mrs Bowles and others , but also the members of staff , who had to bear a large part of the burden .
I believe that it is important to perhaps point out once again that I was involved in the introduction of the European Single Market , as coordinator during the introduction of the euro and other things like that .
These are milestones that have naturally informed this work and also policy making .
It has been fun working with you all , and I should once again like to thank my fellow Members , the Commission and the Council - I have already said that - for their cooperation .
I wish all those who will voluntarily not be returning all the best for the future .
There are many tasks , including the task of conveying just how important the European Union is and what an important job the European Parliament does .
It is also important for the elections to be held in Germany on 7 June and elsewhere from 4 to 7 June that people 's attention is drawn to just how important our work is .
I hope that there will then be a high turnout .
Once again , many thanks to you all and all the best for the future .
This is my last speech , as I have already said .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Wednesday 6 May 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by amending the directives on credit institutions , their own funds , large exposures , supervisory arrangements , and crisis management , the European Union is moving towards a general realignment of the entire system .
The amended directive would eliminate the discretion the Member States have over their own funds , which would hinder the harmonisation of supervisory and fair competition practices between banks .
These discrepancies must be overcome by common rules to allow audit bodies and central banks to face up to the possible insolvency of the banking system , particularly in countries that have adopted the euro .
The amendments concern the need to tighten up the supervision of cross-border banking groups .
The reopening of interinstitutional negotiations on the agreement reached between the European Parliament and the Council concerned the minimum threshold to be allocated to the nominal value of the securitisations .
This refers to the amount of risk that banks must retain in their own balance sheets when they place ' structured ' products with savers .
Within the Council all the Member States voted to keep a threshold of 5 % .
Raising it would make it impossible for the securitisation market to recover and would not help to make the markets safe again .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12.05 p.m. )

( DE ) Madam President , I refer to Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure .
In the sitting of 24 April , in my absence during the vote HansPeter Martin claimed that a vote was illegally cast with a voting card from my seat by an unauthorised person .
The Presidency was able to reject this immediately as incorrect .
I understand that , at present , in the election campaign , many of my fellow Members are becoming nervous .
However , this is tantamount to an accusation of deception , fraud , and unjust enrichment on my part .
It is an accusation of a serious criminal offence .
Mr Martin defames , denounces and maligns Parliament , its Members , even the officials and , especially , his Austrian colleagues time and again in public with distortions , half-truths and untruths , and the extent of what I can tolerate has been exceeded .
I demand the retraction of this accusation , an apology and a condemnation by the Presidency .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Mölzer .
As colleagues will know , the machine was checked last time and it was found that there was no other or inappropriate use of the machine , so the matter has been clarified .
I see that Mr Hans-Peter Martin would like the floor .
I give it to you briefly .
( Murmurs of dissent )
( DE ) Madam President , could you please call for silence in the Chamber ?
( Laughter )
Or will I be punished through the withdrawal of my daily subsistence allowance if I dare to call out ' referendum ' ?
I have the right to make a personal comment under Rule 149 .
I absolutely reject what my fellow Member has just uttered .
I recall what I actually said in plenary in the absence of many of the right wing extremists and the mob behind me .
I stand by it .
And if I am being accused ....
( Protests )
You can hear many other protests here that are so terrible that I do not wish to repeat them in public .
But that is what the right wing extremists are like .
We know that from history and that is the huge danger that lies ahead of us .
As regards the accusation of the unlawfulness of my action , I would just point out that there may have been various attempts to criminalise me , but never any criminal investigations , not because the Austrian judges or public prosecutors were prejudiced but because they saw how unfounded those allegations were .
If the right wing extremists now go on the offensive with such arguments , it is up to the electorate to judge .
( The President cut off the speaker )
We have listened to you .
I have said that the matter has been clarified .
That is enough .
Thank you .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam President , as you are aware but many of my fellow Members are not , due to the extreme lack of information supplied by the Presidency on this matter , which is being kept quiet , the European Court of Justice has finally reached a verdict on the long dispute that has unfortunately seen me oppose the European Parliament and Mr Occhetto .

The Court has overturned the decision taken by this House on 24 May not to confirm my mandate following the proclamation by the national authorities , and the European Parliament has been ordered to pay costs .
The intention of the Court 's timely decision was to restore Parliament 's legitimate composition before the mandate came to an end , but at 5 p.m. on 4 May President Pöttering gave this Chamber a one-sided , ambiguous and confused account of the affair , calling once again on the Committee on Legal Affairs to confirm my powers even though he was well aware that this was only a notation .
Not only this , but he also failed to request an extraordinary meeting of the Commission , because this was the final sitting of the parliamentary term , unless he decides to extend my mandate to the next term too .
I therefore call on the Presidency to rectify this further gross mistake by tomorrow in order to comply with the Court of Justice ruling .
Madam President , I would have preferred the European Parliament to have been spared this heavy legal defeat , and , in spite of everything , I offer my sincere regards to you and my fellow Members .
Thank you , Mr Donnici .
Your comments have been noted and , of course , the President did make a statement on Monday afternoon .
Your comments will be passed on to the Bureau meeting this afternoon .
1 .
Responsibilities of committees (
2 .
Number of interparliamentary delegations , delegations to joint interparliamentary committees and delegations to parliamentary cooperation committees and multilateral parliamentary assemblies (
- Before the vote :
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my group would like a separate vote on the last indent of paragraph 1 ( a ) , entitled , and I quote : ' Delegation for relations with Albania , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Serbia , Montenegro and Kosovo ' .
In our opinion , this represents de facto recognition of the existence of Kosovo , which we find unacceptable .
I would therefore like us to be able to vote separately on this paragraph .
The request is outside the deadline , but if it is accepted ...
Are there any objections ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I have serious objections .
This House voted in favour of the independence of Kosovo by a three-quarters majority , as did the Commission and almost all the Member States .
I find this unacceptable .
3 .
CFP : repeal of Directive 83 / 515 / EEC and 11 obsolete decisions (
4 .
CFP : repeal of 14 obsolete Regulations (
5 .
Support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) (
6 .
The petitions process ( amendment of Title VIII of the Rules of Procedure ) (
7 .
Amendment of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 (
8 .
Draft amending budget No 4 / 2009 (
9 .
Draft amending budget No 5 / 2009 (
10 .
Indication of the energy consumption of television sets (
11 .
Indication of the energy consumption of household refrigeration equipment (
12 .
2009 Annual Action Programme for Non-State Actors and Local Authorities in Development ( Part II : Targeted projects ) (
13 .
General revision of the Rules of Procedure (
- Before the vote on Amendment 9 :
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I am making a request for referral back to committee and I would like to explain why .
When discussing this legislation we talked a lot about impact assessments .
That is to say : every time you introduce a new rule you have to be able to say what the impact will be .
Concerning the new rules that we are going to vote on today in the Corbett report , we do not understand what the consequences will be of dramatically changing the way in which we make legislation by allowing the possibility of committees and multiple rapporteurs being able to present completely contradictory procedures and amendments for the vote in plenary .
That is why the Verts / ALE Group demands a referral back to the committee , not because we believe that we cannot improve the situation but because this involves pushing through a reform that will make our legislative life very difficult in the future .
( Applause )
Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , the reform of the European Union is difficult enough but the reform of the European Parliament appears to be even more difficult .
However , I must say to Mrs Frassoni that this reform process has now lasted two and a half years .
We had a reform group that Mrs Frassoni herself belonged to .
Our Committee complied with the conclusions of the reform group point by point .
In other words , today we are presenting in plenary something that took two and a half years to discuss , debate and decide .
There is therefore no reason why this point should be referred back to committee .
Today , we should complete this final act and prepare for the new legislative period with many improvements to our work .
I am therefore voting against the motion tabled by Mrs Frassoni .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I do not really think I need to add anything except that Monica Frassoni 's justification about particular amendments might be a reason for her to vote against those amendments .
They are certainly not a reason to refer the whole thing back to committee , which would preclude the adoption of any of the amendments that have been tabled today and which would be most unfortunate .
rapporteur . - Madam President , before you proceed to vote on Amendments 49 and 67 , could I ask that you reverse the order of the vote and vote first on 67 , which is a later compromise that emerged after the vote in the committee ?
I think it would be more helpful for us if we were to proceed that way around .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Address by the President of Parliament
Ladies and gentlemen , in a few weeks ' time , between 4 and 7 June , the citizens of the European Union will elect the new European Parliament .
For the first time 375 million people from all 27 Member States will be able to take part in the European elections together .
For many of you this will be your last week in Strasbourg .
For me , too , this is the last week in which I will be allowed to chair the plenary part-sessions .
We all know that democracy gains strength through constant change .
We do too .
Together we have covered a good part of the way towards creating a forward-looking European Community .
Together we have been able to achieve a great deal .
We have been successful not only during the last two and a half years of my term of office but also in the term of office of my predecessor , Josep Borrell Fontelles .
What we have achieved in the last five years has been achieved by all of us .
I would like to extend to you all my sincerest thanks for your commitment and for your passion for our common European cause .
As the European Parliament , we are the directly elected representatives of the citizens of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , we all embody the rich diversity of our European continent and reflect , through our political families , the huge variety of convictions and attitudes .
What is more , a few days ago we celebrated the fifth anniversary of the historic enlargement of the European Union , the reunification of our continent on the basis of our common values .
In the words of our Berlin Declaration of 25 March 2007 , ' We , the citizens of the European Union , have united for the better ' .
( Applause )
The successful integration of Members from Member States joining the European Union in 2004 and 2007 and the adaptation of our parliamentary work to a European Parliament now bigger and more diverse rank among the most significant successes of this parliamentary term .
We , the 785 Members of Parliament , have learned to meet each other half way , to learn from each other and to work better with each other .
During this time , the European Parliament has gained in experience , strength and cultural richness .
Ladies and gentlemen , new Members will soon revitalise the work of Parliament .
They will join those who are re-elected in June .
I hope that we will continue to have the mutual respect that binds us across all political and national boundaries .
In my work in the last two and a half years , I have been guided by a basic feeling for parliamentary work and I have you all to thank for your support , encouragement and counsel .
The President is responsible for ensuring that all the rules of the European Parliament are followed and must ensure that these rules apply equally to all Members and are applied uniformly , and that the dignity of our Parliament remains intact .
That is what I have striven for .
( Applause )
I would like to say to those entering Parliament that we are only convincing if we preserve the dignity of the European Parliament and always defend it on the basis of our common laws .
Today , very few resolutions are adopted in the European Union without the explicit consent and involvement of the European Parliament .
To an increasing extent , the European Parliament has developed into the place where , crucially , political compromises are found at a European level .
Evidence of this is the adoption of the Services Directive and the Chemicals Regulation , REACH , in recent years .
For the 2007-2013 financial perspective , the codetermination of the European Parliament was groundbreaking .
The European Parliament was instrumental in ensuring that the necessary funding was provided for programmes such as Erasmus to promote the young generation .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have also placed tackling climate change at the top of the political agenda .
The fact that we arrived at an acceptable result lent tremendous credence to the European Union for the negotiations at the Conference to be held in Copenhagen in December .
Today , we are no longer alone in our endeavour ; the new US administration led by President Barack Obama supports many of our proposals .
Our task is now to win the hearts and minds of our global partners to support measures to combat climate change .
One often hears that others are taking the lead in tackling climate change .
We have taken the lead in tackling climate change and , ladies and gentlemen , it is something we can be proud of .
( Applause )
Financial market reform at European level is , in many respects , taking place on the initiative of the European Parliament .
Since 2002 , Parliament has called for better financial market supervision and regulation .
All legislative procedures for better banking and financial supervision and for regulating hedge funds and managers ' salaries should be completed as quickly as possible .
The European Parliament has already set many important benchmarks as a result of the resolutions it has adopted .
There is still a lot of work to do , however .
The newly elected European Parliament must continue this work in a committed and resolute manner in order to find a way out of the crisis on the basis of the social market economy defined in the Treaty of Lisbon and to safeguard the competitiveness of the European economy for the benefit of society against a backdrop of globalisation .
Ladies and gentlemen , the overwhelming majority of Members see Parliament as the motor of the European unification process .
In the last two and a half years we have revived debate on institutional reform and driven forward the process leading to the conclusion of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We also succeeded in ensuring that the basic principles we have always represented are maintained in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Treaty of Lisbon contains the central reforms required to make the European institutions more democratic , transparent and capable of action .
We should put all our effort into ensuring that the Treaty of Lisbon can enter into force at the beginning of next year .
We are hoping for a positive outcome in the Czech Senate in Prague .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is celebrating its thirtieth anniversary as a directly elected democratic European Union institution .
It is now at the heart of a European parliamentary democracy unimaginable in 1979 .
Together we have advanced parliamentary democracy in the European Union and beyond .
The European Parliament and national parliaments are now partners .
Our work is complementary .
We have deepened our cooperation with national parliaments and held regular meetings to move the important current issues forward together .
The development of our relations with parliaments in third countries has always been a core concern of all our efforts .
Today , Parliament is a partner respected around the globe , an advocate for human rights and democracy .
And it must stay that way .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have made every effort to ensure that Parliament is represented , through its President and through representatives of the political groups , in bodies of importance for shaping our common future .
The President of the European Parliament now participates in the annual meetings of the Heads of State or Government of the G8 and in summits with third countries , such as the EU-Africa Summit , the EU-Latin America Summit and the EU-US Summit .
Tomorrow morning , I will participate in the Troika summit on employment and tomorrow afternoon in the Summit for the inauguration of the Eastern Partnership in Prague .
It is also an achievement of this legislative period that the role of Parliament in the European Councils is no longer restricted to the inaugural address by the President .
Now Parliament also participates in the institutional and constitutional deliberations of the summits .
At the Intergovernmental Conference that led to agreement on the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament was fully involved at the level of the Heads of State or Government through the participation of its President and , at the Intergovernmental Conference itself , through a delegation consisting of three Members .
This is a huge step forward .
Ladies and gentlemen , the reform of the working methods and procedures of the European Parliament was and still is a major project .
To this end , the Conference of Presidents set up a working group equipped with a detailed mandate , in which all Groups were represented .
The work was completed successfully .
Much - approximately 80 % - of what was proposed by the working group has been put into effect and implemented .
This includes the reorganisation of the plenary debates , the reform of the legislative process , the improvement of the work done in committee with enhanced cooperation between the committees as well as the possibility of legislative initiative reports or conflicting resolutions .
I would specifically like to thank the Chair of the working group , Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , and her - our - colleagues for their special commitment .
( Applause )
Together we have succeeded in adapting the working methods of the European Parliament to changing political circumstances .
Now we have modernised procedures and reorganised working methods at our disposal and that is a good basis for the work to be carried out in the new parliamentary term .
In the Bureau of the European Parliament we have also tried to improve the administration of Parliament , to make the day-to-day work of Members easier and to modernise the infrastructure for communicating with the citizens of the European Union through the introduction of Web-TV , the prize for journalism , the citizens ' prize , and the European Charlemagne youth prize .
The new Statute for Members , on which we have worked for many years , will come into force in the new legislative period .
It is an important contribution to the policy on Members ' finances , transparency and public relations .
The adoption of a clear , transparent assistants ' statute is an important step forward and a huge success , for which we have to thank all our fellow Members .
Ladies and gentlemen , today I should like to repeat and reaffirm the central idea that , for me , sums up the work of European integration .
We are committed to the dignity of every human being .
It is the supreme value .
It unites us in the community of shared values of the European Union .
Human dignity must always be respected - it is the ethical answer to the moral crises in Europe 's past .
( Applause )
For us , this leads to the precept of the unconditional protection of human dignity and the promotion of a dialogue of cultures , which have been guiding principles during my term of office .
A lasting impact was made by the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , be it dialogue with the EuroMediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , encounters between young people of different faiths - including from Israel and Palestine - or the Arabic and African weeks held in the European Parliament .
We have laid the foundation of a lasting dialogue , which must also direct , inspire and commit us in the future .
A peaceful settlement in the Middle East is also important for peaceful coexistence between Christians , Jews and Muslims as well as the people of the European Union and of countries across the globe .
Gaza and the West Bank are not in the back of beyond ; they are on our doorstep on the Mediterranean .
We must be more self assertive on the international scene and contribute to peace and stability in the Middle East .
As Members of the European Parliament , we can offer an additional perspective in Middle East relations , as we can think and act outside conventional diplomatic channels .
With this in mind , I have campaigned for a working group to be set up to deal with the Middle East crisis .
Especially in the light of new developments in the Middle East it is important that we resolutely support a two-State solution - Israel within secure borders and a Palestinian State within secure borders .
We must not allow these principles to be called into question .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that , in our day-to-day work , we deal with many issues , sometimes relating to very specific circumstances .
We should never forget our roots or lose sight of the values that bind us .
Today 's free , peaceful and socially committed European Union was a long time in the making .
We must breathe life into the foundations on which the European Union is based .
That is why I am particularly thankful to you for your encouragement and continuing support for my initiative to establish a ' House of European History ' .
In particular , I should like to thank not only Vice-President Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez for his unflagging support but also my fellow Members in this Chamber .
The ' House of European History ' will be used as a place where our European identity can be remembered and renewed .
The basic decisions for establishing the House have already been taken .
The constituent meetings of the two oversight bodies were held yesterday .
With your support - if I am reelected as a Member of the European Parliament on 7 June of course - I will devote myself to the task of ensuring that the ' House of European History ' is completed by the end of the next legislative period in 2014 .
In 2014 we will be commemorating the one hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the First World War .
A hundred years later we are living in a new Europe of peace , freedom and unity .
Many people support us in our constant striving .
In particular I thank all the committed staff in the administrative services of the European Parliament , especially our new Secretary-General , Klaus Welle , and his deputy , David Harley , without whose commitment , expertise and dedication our political work would not be possible .
( Applause )
You are worthy of our thanks , our support and our appreciation .
I extend my sincerest thanks to my personal staff in my Cabinet , but , above all , I thank you , fellow Members , especially the Bureau and the chairmen of the political groups , for your trustful cooperation .
We have just had another meeting of the Conference of Presidents .
On Monday evening we had a meeting of the Bureau , and we will have another meeting today .
On substantive issues of European democracy , hardly any contentious , really controversial decisions were taken , and we agreed on the basic issues .
A bond of trust was created , for which I am sincerely thankful .
We have achieved a great deal together and we must once again gain the trust of our electorate .
We do this , firmly convinced that this is the historically correct way towards European unification .
The upcoming election campaign gives us the opportunity to speak with citizens about why the European Union is necessary .
I should like to call on all citizens to vote in the elections and to cast their votes for the future of Europe in the 21st century .
Much work awaits the newly elected Parliament .
This includes helping to overcome the economic and financial crisis , implementing a European energy policy , moving to a low-CO2 economy , providing more security for the citizens of Europe and peace and stability across the globe .
Our work has provided a good basis for the newly elected Parliament to build on .
My work over the last two and a half years as President of the European Parliament has been a tremendous challenge , and I have carried it out gladly and with dedication and will continue to carry it out until 14 July .
It is a great privilege to be at the service of Europe .
I thank you most sincerely for placing your confidence in me and for every moment of this collaborative effort in working towards a unified Europe .
I wish you all the best for the future .
( Sustained applause )

Mr President , my dear Mr Pöttering , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament is the voice of 500 million Europeans and they are not sufficiently aware of this .
They are even less aware that this Parliament has a heart and a soul .
Mr Pöttering , during the two and a half years of your presidency , not only have you been the citizens ' spokesman , you have also personified the heart , generosity and solidarity of Europe .
Some say that it is not possible to fall in love with Europe ; you have proved the opposite .
Although this parliamentary term is coming to an end , I wish to stress how far European integration has progressed and how much our Parliament , under your leadership , has contributed to this .
I will mention only the most remarkable examples of this , which you have already referred to : the energy and climate change package , the Services Directive , the 2007-2013 financial perspective and , more recently , the regulation of the financial markets .
However , rather than running through a tedious list of directives and regulations , I would like to stress how much , behind the often very technical legislation that we debate and adopt here , our joint work has meaning .
This meaning is the general interest of all Europeans .
It is often said that Europe is removed from its citizens , but are issues such as toy safety , research into the prevention of rare diseases or of Alzheimer 's disease , consumer protection , environmental protection measures and the fight against global warming , energy policy or the defence of human rights around the world really removed from citizens ' daily lives ?
Under your presidency , this Parliament has seen other major advances .
I am thinking of the internal reform , which you have brought to fruition and which will make our institution more transparent and more effective , and of the new statute for Members of the European Parliament and their assistants .
Under your presidency , this Parliament has multiplied the initiatives within the framework of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , doing justice to the great wealth of cultures and faiths in our society , and sending out the best possible image of Europe : that of openness and tolerance .
Under your presidency , Parliament has seen the importance that it attaches to the future of the Mediterranean region and its desire to help bring about peace in the Middle East .
Mr President , on 25 March 2007 , you signed on our behalf the Berlin Declaration commemorating 50 years of the European Union .
That declaration reminds those who might have forgotten the objective of our daily work , in other words the integration of a free , democratic , tolerant Europe that respects the rule of law .
By taking the initiative of creating a House of European History , you are giving a lasting dimension to the work carried out by yourself and your predecessors and by all those who , in their own way , have contributed to our common history .
For all these things , I would simply like to thank you , Mr President .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you , Mr President , for your hard work .
I should like to say on behalf of my Group that you have exercised your office with great dignity .
You have given Parliament dignity through the way in which you have led this House .
This is not the time to review your work .
The legacy of a President of the European Parliament is always subject to political scrutiny .
You can agree or disagree with one thing or another .
A review of the President 's work must focus on what the President has done for the success of this House .
You have presented your conclusions .
There is nothing to add .
The question therefore remains : what has the President , as a human being , done for this House ?
For me and my colleagues in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament it is clear that you have conferred dignity on this House , both inside and outside .
This House does not always conduct itself with dignity .
But that is true of all parliaments worldwide .
The dignity of a multinational joint parliamentary assembly of well over 700 Members from 27 countries , who belong to eight different parliamentary groups , who belong to different faiths , who have different skin colours , who come from different political traditions , who have experienced different historical development , must be safeguarded .
To unite them and to give them a sense of unity through their own representation is difficult .
That is exactly what you have done .
And for that you deserve our sincere thanks .
( Applause )
Mr President , you have tackled many activities in your two-and-a-half-year term of office .
To underpin what I have said about the way in which you have exercised your office , on behalf of our Group I should like to single out one point on which we fully shared your view and where you gave this House a voice that extended far beyond the bounds of political divisions , and hence gave a voice to disenfranchised people in a place that is assembled in exactly the way I have described .
You raised your voice against the scandal in Guantanamo at a time when it was not easy to do so .
That , Mr President , will remain an enduring milestone in your term of office .
You have shown that the requirement you placed on yourself to be a tolerant and cosmopolitan person on the one hand and to be committed to your fundamental Christian understanding on the other has been met .
But to place the entirety of human dignity , whether it comes from the tradition of enlightenment or , as in your case , from a religious orientation , at the core of your activity has earned you the distinction of being a good President of the European Union and that is how we will remember you . Thank you very much .
( Loud applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , your words today were typical of your time as President .
Our groups may not always agree , but during your mandate you have proven an honest , fair and unifying figure , one whose modesty masks your many achievements .
You were elected on the basis of a worthy pledge to engage our House in intercultural dialogue but your record reaches further than that .
On Members ' allowances , you concluded the vital work started by Pat Cox .
On parliamentary procedures , you oversaw the reforms that many of us have long called for and , through initiatives like Europarl TV , you have supported modern methods of communicating with our citizens .
That is a record to be proud of and a legacy on which your successors should build .
I hope you will write about your experiences and impressions .
They will be too interesting to be left in the cold and powerful hands of oblivion .
Moreover , as the poet Emerson taught us , there is no such thing as history , only biography .
This Parliament has become more powerful over the years .
It will be more powerful still under the Lisbon Treaty , if and when it is eventually ratified .
It will be interesting to see what plans future presidents will bring to expand on the role that you have played , projecting the common values and principles that we hold dear .
But today I think I can speak for many when I say that you have earned our respect and affection .
Like you , this is my last plenary speech in my current role .
Having led my group since 2002 , I have a touch of what we call in English the seven-year itch .
Although I will not sit in this seat again , I know you are aware that I am keen to try sitting where you are .
President , on behalf of my group , I thank you .
I thank the session services and the interpreters and all the staff who have contributed to the very fine job you have done as President of our House .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during this term , Parliament , especially under your presidency , has reinforced its ability to make a political impact on the future of the Union , even though we will have to wait for the new treaty to see the realisation of the ambitions of those who have always believed in the need for increased legislative power for our institution , which is unique in the world because it is elected by the citizens of 27 countries .
Events - tragic ones , in many instances - have followed one another thick and fast during this term , and on many occasions , particularly during the last two and a half years , Parliament , through you , Mr President , has been able to perform a crucial role in mediating proposals .
Ours has become an increasingly obvious political role that must help us to overcome the party differences that divide us in our own countries so that we can achieve shared goals in the common interest of our peoples and ensure more justice , peace and safety in the world .
When the parliamentary term began , we finally saw nations join us that for many decades had been deprived of their freedom , and the accession of Romania and Bulgaria during the parliamentary term has reinforced the world 's image of a Europe that is able to create unity by respecting differences .
We are concluding the parliamentary term in the midst of an economic crisis that has made us realise that we have a systemic crisis on our hands , and the new Parliament must therefore also be a driving force that will help society to rediscover values that are nowadays too often neglected .
Now more than ever , parliamentary democracy , in Europe and nationally , represents a guarantee of freedom .
Mr President , I thank you on behalf of my group and personally for your commitment - you have represented all of us - and for the great contribution you have made to establishing the reputation of our institution , for which we demand not only ever more transparency , but also due attention on the part of certain sections of the media that have taken an interest in Europe solely for the purpose of stirring up petty , futile debates instead of contributing to the growth of common awareness and shared progress .
Mr President , after the 20 years I have spent in this Parliament , I feel it is my duty to join you , representing me magnificently in this Chamber , in thanking the millions of European citizens who , through their daily toil and respect for the principles of solidarity , justice and the roots of our past , are contributing to the development of a society that is more respectful of rights and more aware of its own duties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Herr Präsident , you have had the immense privilege of presiding over the most original institution in the world , and we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are sure that you have done so with motivation and with passion , and we thank you for this .
When , two and a half years ago , I stood against you as a candidate for the Presidency of the European Parliament on behalf of my group , I laid great emphasis on the need for the President of Parliament to represent an institution free from the interests of the Member States and the pressures exercised by financial lobbies , to guide an equally free administration chosen on the basis of merit and not of political loyalty , and to be able to speak to an increasingly divided and indifferent public .
At the time , we very strongly criticised the joint decision taken by yourself and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament to rule out any attempt to relaunch the constitutional debate following the 2005 referendums , an enormous mistake that made it easier for the States to reappropriate the process of European reform .
Two and a half years later , we in the Verts / ALE Group would assess your work , President Pöttering , as having its ups and downs .
We approved and supported your work in the Middle East , particularly your work in the Presidency of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
We appreciated your unwavering proEuropean belief , the idea of a Parliament open to citizens , groups , associations and the boldest cultural initiatives , and your determination over the Assistants ' Statute .
We also looked positively on your determined commitment to fundamental rights , even in places that did not sit comfortably with the majority of the European Parliament , from Russia to China , and on your new green credentials , as borne out by your comments on climate change made a short time ago .
Yet it is also clear , Mr President , that , under your presidency , our Parliament has continued its gradual transformation from an institution that demands and fights for democracy to an assembly that is all too often submissive and careful not to rock the boat of this or that government .
It has resigned itself to not making this fight or transparency privileged areas in relation to which voters have visibility - one need only think of the entirely orchestrated failure of the working party on lobbies , which has come to an end today having achieved nothing despite a very explicit resolution approved a year ago , or the silence on the matter of the two seats in Strasbourg and Brussels and on that of the waste of money and CO2 that is incomprehensible to our electorate .
Mr President , I will now conclude .
Through the successive reforms of the rules , your presidency has also overseen the gradual centralisation of power into the hands of the few in our institution , with respect to strengthening the work of the committees and the role of individual MEPs , and doing more to promote diversity and pluralism .
Mr President , perhaps there will be a new majority in the new Parliament , but we are certain of one thing : the long fight for strong , respected , pluralist and sympathetic European democracy is not over , and at least in this we will always have you by our side .
Mr President , your presidency - as you have just pointed out - has been marked by events of major political import , which have , on more than one account , been a challenge for Europe and , at the same time , for our Parliament .
Some of these are internal to the Union , especially what many call the institutional crisis , and which I would describe instead as an additional symptom of a crisis of confidence in , or a crisis of legitimacy of , the current European model among a growing number of our fellow citizens .
Others have an international dimension , such as the conflict in the Middle East , which you mentioned .
The latter , far from advancing towards a just and sustainable peace , is worsening as we watch and is poisoning international relations , when it is not threatening the cohesion of our societies .
Others , finally , are shaking the entire planet , such as the environmental crisis and , ultimately , the financial , economic , social and political crisis , which is imposing on us certain choices of society or indeed civilisation .
It is in this exceptionally complex context that you have had to lead the European Parliament and to represent it before our Member States and before the world .
My group and I consider that you have fulfilled your duty with honour .
Of course , our political choices are manifestly different and are sometimes at odds with one another .
However , it is precisely on the ability to manage these necessary and healthy conflicts of ideas , whilst respecting everyone , that the holder of a high office such as yours is judged .
Now , I can say that , as the chairman of a minority group which , in many people 's opinion , expresses ideas outside the current mainstream , I felt at ease under your presidency .
Better still , whilst our political differences naturally remain unchanged , our relationship as people has been noticeably enriched .
Mr President , we have known each other for 30 years .
We have really got to know each other in the last 10 years of our excellent cooperation in the Conference of Presidents .
I greatly appreciate your personal ethic , which has enabled you to recognise - at least I think so - that it is possible to be simultaneously a communist , a democrat , a European and a humanist .
Thank you .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Wurtz .
Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of you all I should like to thank Mr Wurtz , who has been a Member since 1979 and will now leave Parliament .
Our thanks also go to three other fellow Members , who have been here since 1979 and will now leave : Klaus Hänsch , a former President , Ingo Friedrich , former Vice-President and Quaestor , and Karl von Wogau , former Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and currently Chairman of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence .
I should like to extend my sincere thanks on behalf of you all to these four and to all other departing fellow Members for their huge commitment . Thank you very much .
( Loud applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Independence and Democracy Group has tried to be helpful , positive and constructive right through this parliamentary term .
( Mixed reactions )
Yes , because we have been providing the voice of opposition and , in a democracy , opposition is essential .
It is vital .
But sadly , as President Václav Klaus pointed out when he came here , you do not actually think there should be any alternative view and , as a result of that , your presidency has been marked by your deeply prejudicial manner in the way in which you have treated the Members of this House who have stood up and opposed the Constitution / Lisbon Treaty .
The defining moment for me in this House was when we had the French say ' no ' , we had the Dutch say ' no ' and then we had the Irish say ' no ' , and this Parliament wilfully carried on ignoring the wishes of the people .
You just do not get it , do you ?
' No ' means ' no ' , and it is truly incredible that 499 Members of this House voted to ignore the Irish ' no ' vote and to continue with the Treaty .
What kind of a Parliament is this ?
If you believed in democracy , you would not just bulldoze aside those three referendum results .
Worse still , you are now so fearful of public opinion - you know that you are losing the argument - that you have sunk to abuse .
I have had Mr Watson saying that I behave like an English football hooligan , when all I did was to gently point out that Commissioner Barrot is a convicted embezzler .
Gary Titley said that I was a paranoid reactionary living on the fringes of society .
Well , he may have a point , I do not know ; but Danny Cohn-Bendit , that great champion of free speech , said that opponents of the Treaty were mentally ill , and Martin Schulz , the leader of the Socialists , said after one of the ' no ' votes that we must not bow to populism and that the ' no ' votes opened the door to fascism .
I hope in the next four weeks , in this campaign , that the voters of Europe can see the real face of this project .
You are nationalistic ; you are bullying ; you are threatening ; you are anti-democratic ; you are a complete shower !
( Applause )
That you can make such a speech shows that this is a free and democratic European Parliament !
( Applause )
Mr President , some colleagues may find this hard to believe but I am going to miss you .
In all the time I have known you , first as leader of the Christian Democrats and then as President of this Parliament , you have been a model of dignity , restraint and courtesy .
You are an Anglophile as well as a Europhile and you represent all that is best in the integrationist tradition .
You will be very relieved , no doubt , to hear that I cannot recall ever having agreed with you .
( Laughter )
But in the career that we have both chosen , we know that ideological commitment is a rare commodity and we value it even when we find it in an opponent .
You will remember how we clashed over your interpretation of this House 's Rules of Procedure .
Those of us who wanted referendums on the Constitutional Treaty had made our point in peaceable explanations of vote .
Our right to do so was set out unequivocally in the Rules of Procedure .
You chose arbitrarily to disapply those rules - you did not seek to change them , which would have required a certain amount of time , you simply disregarded them .
This is not the time to have that argument all over again .
Instead , let me say this : the President of this Chamber is meant to embody the entire House , including those who espouse minority views , and when you treat us differently you open the door to despotism .
For example , virtually every month there are demonstrations here about something or other and they are tolerated , but when we held up placards with the one word ' referendum ' you sent in the ushers to snatch away our banners and several of us were later fined .
I can understand why the word ' referendum ' causes so much disquiet in this Chamber : the electorates of three nations had rejected your constitutional model .
It made you feel vulnerable and that made you tetchy and , since you could hardly attack the voters directly , you took out all your frustration on us , the visible Eurosceptic minority in this Chamber .
Colleagues , I do not expect to change your minds about the desirability of centralising power in Brussels .
But , from your own point of view , I would urge you to be a bit more even-handed in your dealings with those of us who are the minority .
If only you could conquer your reflexive dislike for us , you might find that it would bolster your own democratic credentials .
All organisations need their critics .
Your insistence that the EU is an absolute good and that any criticism of it is either dishonest or xenophobic has done you no favours , because without critical scrutiny the Brussels institutions become bloated , self-serving and corrupt .
My friends , I hope that there will be many more of us souverainistes here in July .
For the first time in 50 years , this Parliament will have something in the nature of an official opposition .
It will be up to your successor , Hans-Gert , how to deal with that opposition , but I hope he will live up to the value of tolerance which this Chamber keeps claiming to espouse .
( Applause )
We have taken note of it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am grateful to you for this opportunity to say a few words on behalf of the Presidency and on behalf of the Council , in response to you and to the interventions from the representatives of the political groups .
It is particularly significant for us that the five years of this legislature have coincided with the first five years of membership of the European Union for the Czech Republic and for the other countries which joined at that time .
All the more so , given that the Czech Republic has had the privilege of holding the Council Presidency as this legislature draws to a close .
I would first like to pay tribute to you , Mr President , for the exemplary manner in which you have led this institution throughout the last two and a half years .
It is a powerful witness to your qualities , in particular of fairness and integrity , that you are held in such respect by this Parliament , a respect which clearly cuts across party political divisions .
As one of the relatively few Members first elected back in 1979 , you have been able to bring your considerable experience , wisdom and knowledge to this office .
Speaking in particular on behalf of the Presidency , I can only say that we have very much appreciated all your qualities in the contacts we have had both before and during our Presidency .
On behalf of the Council , may I wish you all the best for the future .
I hope you will allow me , since we are looking back over the past five years , to pay tribute also to your predecessor , Mr Borrell , who manifested the same qualities of impartiality and leadership .
You have both ensured that this office of President is one which is held in respect and esteem .
This Parliament and the Union more generally have good reasons to be grateful to you both .
During the course of the last five years , this Parliament has made effective use of its powers and prerogatives , not least in the important area of codecision where the Council and Parliament find themselves on opposite sides of the table , sometimes with very different views and objectives .
Despite these differences , both institutions work together to ensure that the system delivers .
We can disagree and we can argue constructively , but we do so within a framework of agreed rules and procedures .
I think both institutions can take some pride in our shared commitment to making the system work , and the last five years have provided plenty of examples that it does work and work very effectively .
Mr President , Honourable Members , in less than three months ' time a new Parliament will take up office .
There will be many new Members .
You will elect a new president and a different Member State will be seated here as the presidency representing the Council .
I am sure that all of them will , during the course of the next five years , look back with gratitude and respect at the legacy which you , Mr President , have left this institution . Thank you for your attention .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , under your presidency relations between the European Parliament and the Commission have developed very well , not to say smoothly .
It is to your credit that , even during election campaigns when , as is generally known , the potential for conflict is at its greatest , at no time did the normal political debates turn into a crisis among the institutions .
If I may be permitted to make a personal comment , I should like to thank you warmly for your , at all times , friendly and courteous approach to your work .
You not only acted politely but also took corrective action when necessary .
And you were always gentlemanlike .
I should also like to emphasise how important it was for this Parliament and for the entire European Union that you had the courage and the willingness to defend the democratic principles and privileges of this Parliament , even against Heads of State where necessary .
( Applause )
I should also like to congratulate you on 30 years as an elected Member of the European Parliament .
Your personality has very much left its mark on these decades and you have made a significant contribution to shaping the development of Parliament .
President Barroso would very much have liked to come himself but , as you know , he is attending the EU-Canada Summit in Prague .
On behalf of the President of the Commission and the entire Commission I should like to thank you warmly for your successful presidency .
Thank you .
( Applause )
Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly thank you for your largely favourable reviews .
I wish all my fellow Members who are not standing for re-election all the best for the future and I hope that we will meet again .
To all my fellow Members who are standing for re-election and who are re-elected , I should like to say that I hope that we , provided of course that I am re-elected , will continue our good work .
What the chairmen of the political groups have said today has encouraged me to continue along the path towards a unified Europe .
Many thanks to you all and I hope we will all see each other again .
( Loud applause )
( DE ) Madam President , I have a question on order in the Chamber .
Shortly before we were able to vote , when the sitting was suspended for just a short time , a Member of our honourable House apparently succeeded in smuggling in a parliamentary candidate , having a few cheeky promotional photographs taken with her and , in my view , abusing our Body .
Is it not necessary to hold these candidates to account ?
Thank you , Mr Mann .
It will be investigated .
1 .
Electronic communications networks , personal data and the protection of privacy (
Before the vote :
Madam President , I have one thing to say regarding the vote that we are about to hold .
It seems , from the voting list , that we are voting on the compromise text from the committee , instead of the amendments , first .
Normally I would have thought that we would vote on the most far-reaching amendments first , so I would ask you to use the power that you have according to Rule 19 in the Rules of Procedure and change the order of the vote so that we vote on the amendments .
This concerns the citizens ' rights amendments .
This is very important for both the Harbour and the Trautmann reports .
Mrs Dahl , as far as I am aware there is no problem .
I see no problem with the voting order on the Harbour report .
We will proceed as it is on the order paper .
2 .
Electronic communications networks and services (
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I have asked for the floor because I do not agree with the voting order on the Trautmann report .
I request that I be given the floor before the vote on Compromise Amendment 10 to explain why the voting order should be changed .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I should like to request that the voting sequence be changed and that Compromise Amendment 10 be put to the vote after we have voted on a number of other identical requests by various Groups that were due to be voted on after Amendment 10 .
My reason for this is that , in my opinion , the amendments proposed by the various Groups go far beyond the Compromise Amendment regarding the item ' Protection of citizens ' rights against intervention in Internet access or capping of Internet access ' .
I believe that it would be a good thing for Parliament , which so clearly declared its support for the infamous Bono / Cohn-Bendit Amendment , to speak out once again in support of the highest protection of citizens ' rights .
I regret that , at the end of a very good consultation with Mrs Trautmann I am unable to request this , but this friendly consultation , the good result of the telecoms package , should not ultimately mean that we curtail citizens ' rights en passant .
( Applause )

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , on the basis of Rule 154 and Rule 155 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe would like to endorse the request by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to change the voting order of the amendments and to put Amendments 1 c , p , 2 , 5 , 6 and 9 to the vote before Compromise Amendment 10 .
This also relates , among other things - perhaps there is something else on your voting lists - to the fact that , following the motion adopted by our Group yesterday , Compromise Amendment 10 will no longer be supported by the ALDE Group .
As regards the voting procedure , Rule 154 explains which amendment is to be dealt with first when there are corresponding or conflicting requests .
It is important to us that a court ruling be issued before any intervention in the behaviour of individuals can take place .
That is why we have withdrawn the amendment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am not speaking in my capacity as Committee Chairman but as rapporteur for my Group on the Trautmann report .
I urge the House to reject the procedural motion and to allow the voting to take place in the order proposed by you on the voting lists .
Mrs Harms , no one in this House wishes to curtail the right to free Internet access .
We have incorporated this aspect into the compromise , which we discussed with the Czech President-in-Office of the Council over many months .
All political parties were heavily involved in these discussions .
I request that the proposed order be kept and that the change to the voting order now being proposed by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe be rejected .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would first of all like to point out that , in relation to the request for a change on the voting list , if I have understood rightly , if the compromise was included by the services , using their common sense , before groups tabled the amendment , it is because it goes further than Amendment 46 .
It includes clauses that are not limited merely to restricting access to the Internet but that also include all devices that may adversely affect users ' rights .
Secondly , I would also like to tell the Members that this compromise has been tabled in Article 1 , which relates to the scope , and that it therefore has an across-the-board effect , whilst the amendment tabled by the groups concerns Article 8 , which affects the objectives of the national regulators .
Throughout the negotiations on this compromise , I have worked faithfully and harmoniously with all of the political groups .
I note , Madam President , that at this very moment one of the groups has withdrawn its signature from this compromise .
I would therefore like to say to you that , as rapporteur , I continue , of course , to support this compromise , and that I have also voted in favour of Amendment 46 .
I would like to say that , in the circumstances in which we are holding the debate , it is wiser for our House to decide on the voting order , rather than leave it up to you or the rapporteur alone to take this decision .
However , I would like to present this request to you very directly , as it must be understood what happens next if the vote is reversed .
If the vote is not reversed , the list stays the same .
If the vote is reversed , Amendment 46 is adopted if it obtains the qualified majority .
In that case , Madam President , I would also ask you to put the compromise - which goes further than Amendment 46 - to the vote after this vote is taken .
If Amendment 46 does not obtain the qualified majority , at that stage we will vote on the compromise and , therefore , our House will have made its choice .
I have heard from several people and I take very carefully into account what our rapporteur has said .
I took the step before this vote of taking advice from the services , and I have listened very carefully to what has been said .
I have the power as President under Rule 155 ( 2 ) to decide on the order of vote .
It seems to me that this issue is of such importance , both within and outside this House , that it would be appropriate to vote on the earlier amendments , but I do this also on the basis procedurally that , as I understand it , Amendment 10 was a compromise that came forward only after the committee vote .
So it seems to me that there are both procedural and other reasons why we should reverse the order of the vote .
( Parliament accepted Rebecca Harms ' request . )
( Applause )
3 .
Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications ( BEREC ) and the Office (
Madam President , I asked that we also be able to vote on the compromise , as it has a broader scope than Amendment 46 alone .
You decided not to put this compromise to the vote without giving us any explanation and without giving any reply to the rapporteur .
I wanted you to be aware of this and to tell you that I regret that our recommendation has not been followed , just like the rapporteur 's recommendation on our House 's vote .
I would also like to say - to explain the vote that has just taken place - that when any part of the entire compromise is not adopted , it is the whole package that is subject to conciliation .
That is the consequence of the vote that is being taken today .
Thank you , Mrs Trautmann , I think the House understands the consequences of what it has done , but I thank you , nevertheless , for pointing that out .
It would not have been appropriate to take the other compromise and , indeed , the vote was more than clear .
4 .
Frequency bands for mobile communications (
5 .
Equal treatment between men and women engaged in a self-employed capacity (

Madam President , I agreed with Mr Cocilovo , who was the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , to insert the following clause into this important Article 6 : ' If the legislation of a Member State does not stipulate obligatory affiliation to the social security system for the self-employed , affiliation is granted on request to the assisting spouse . '
I shall explain what I mean by this .
We insist that assisting spouses be compulsorily insured , as is the case for the self-employed .
However , if , in a country , the self-employed are not compulsorily insured , we cannot require that this be the case for their spouses , as the latter cannot be affiliated to an insurance scheme that does not exist .
That is why this additional paragraph has to be adopted .
I am also acting on Mr Cocilovo 's behalf in this matter .
6 .
Pregnant workers (
Madam President , I should like to ask the services to take into account that the Portuguese version is authentic for all amendments .
Secondly , I should like to ask that the order of voting be changed , and that Committee Amendment 43 be voted on before Amendment 83 for the sake of coherence .
Finally , I would point out that this directive that we are going to amend is 17 years old and is clearly out of date .
The revised directive will not enter into force before the end of the next legislative term .
In other words , we are legislating for the future , not for today .
In particular , we are legislating for the good of the citizens , thereby giving them more reasons to vote in the June elections .
I will therefore end by asking my fellow Members to support my report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , as things stand at present , there are 89 amendments to this report .
It is totally chaotic , and the vote that we are going to take will not allow us to hold a truly objective debate with the Council and the Commission .
These 89 amendments are all totally at odds with each other .
I propose we refer this report back to committee because , as Mrs Estrela said , we have plenty of time to do so .
( Loud applause )
Ms Lulling , could you kindly confirm to me whether or not you make that request on behalf of your political group ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Yes , Madam President , I never make anything not on behalf of my political group !
( Laughter and applause )
( PT ) Madam President , it does not make sense to refer this report , or this proposal , back to committee , because it was discussed with all the groups .
It is presumably supported by a majority in this House .
It was also discussed with the Commission and with the Council .
Naturally , people have different opinions .
We know that , regrettably , the Council under the Czech Presidency has adopted a very conservative attitude to the promotion of gender equality .
I therefore call on the House to vote for the proposals and to support my report , because it will give the citizens more reasons to go out and vote in the European elections .
7 .
European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (
8 .
Economic Recovery Programme : energy projects (
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , after consulting briefly with the rapporteur , we agreed that paragraphs 2 , 3 and 5 of the legislative resolution should be adjusted .
I would suggest the following English text for paragraph 2 :
' Considers that the reference amount indicated in the legislative proposal is compatible with the multiannual financial framework as the latter has been revised ; '
In paragraph 3 , the first sentence should be deleted , the rest remaining unchanged : ' Recalls that any redeployment that would lead ... ' and so on .
Paragraph 5 : ' Recalls that the legislative process has been completed after the financing of the programme has been agreed ; ' .
9 .
Credit requirements directives : Directives 2006 / 48 / EC and 2006 / 49 / EC (
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , this report was strongly disputed in several Groups and , to guarantee the fairness of the vote , I would ask you to give me the floor before the vote on Recital 3 so that I can give my opinion on the voting order .
Madam President , the report presents different ideas on how to regulate core capital and Amendments 91 and 92 go somewhat further in that they present a clearer and more precise definition of core capital , which will make less work for us in future .
I therefore request that they be voted on first and that Amendment 89 to Recital 3 is then voted on .
I hope that my fellow Members agree and I also ask you to accept that the vote on Amendment 89 to Recital 3 be taken by roll-call vote .
Madam President , I should like to point out that we made it quite clear in the debate that the amendments are clearly taken into account in the compromise in a sufficiently detailed form .
I therefore request that we keep to this order .
I have no objection to a roll-call vote .
10 .
Community programme for financial services , financial reporting and auditing (
11 .
Protection of animals at the time of killing (
rapporteur . - Madam President , I have two or three short technical , but important , points .
Firstly , we have a block of amendments proposed by the Agriculture Committee , among others Amendment 64 .
This amendment should be voted separately .
It focuses on the issue of creating the National Reference Centre , which is a very important part of the whole regulation .
The Agriculture Committee has proposed to remove the obligation to create the Reference Centre at a national level .
My opinion , as the rapporteur , is that this is against the general logic of the whole regulation .
I suggest voting on Amendment 64 separately .
Secondly , please note Amendment 28 , which focuses on the controversial and emotional question of ritual slaughter .
Voting in favour of this amendment will eliminate the possibility of a total ban on ritual slaughter at national level .
Voting against Amendment 28 will preserve the possibility of this ban .
The third point concerns Amendment 85 .
The Commission has proposed to reduce the time of transport of animals from farms and waiting in slaughterhouses to 24 hours .
Voting in favour of Amendment 85 will eliminate this reduction of transport time .
Voting against Amendment 85 will support the Commission proposal to reduce the transport time .
12 .
Renewed Social Agenda (
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , very briefly , I hope the House will forgive me for this last-minute oral amendment to paragraph 14 .
Colleagues may be aware that this is a sensitive issue and in some languages and for some Member States this does give difficulties .
It is important that we try to get the maximum support for this report at the end .
The suggestion is that , instead of paragraph 14 as written , we replace the whole paragraph with a paragraph that has already been accepted by the House .
This was paragraph 23 of the Parliament resolution of 11 March 2009 concerning the Spring 2009 European Council on the Lisbon Strategy , and which covers exactly the same ground .
I will read it ; it is just a few sentences :
' Notes that some Member States have introduced the concept of a minimum wage ; suggests that other Member States might benefit from studying their experience ; calls on the Member States to safeguard the preconditions for social and economic participation for all and , in particular , to provide for regulations on such matters as minimum wages or other legal and generally binding arrangements or through collective agreements in accordance with national traditions that enable full--time workers to make a decent living from their earnings ; ' .
As I said , this has been approved by political groups in the past .
My apologies for tabling it now .
The rapporteur is OK by this , and I hope the House will at least allow the oral amendment to be tabled .
( SV ) Thank you very much .
I would just like to say something briefly about the Swedish translation .
In paragraphs 13 and 36 , ' minimum income ' has been translated by the Swedish word ' minimilön ' , which means ' minimum wage ' .
It should be ' minimiinkomst ' .
There is a difference between ' minimiinkomst ' and ' minimilön ' , and so there is an error in paragraphs 13 and 36 of the Swedish translation .
13 .
Active inclusion of people excluded from the labour market (
Exceptionally , colleagues , and those who are waiting to give explanations of vote , you will appreciate that it is now very late .
We have all been here some time , as , particularly , have our interpreters .
There are a very large number of explanations of vote , and I suspect we would not get through them by 15.00 .
That being the case , I am taking the decision , as we have done before , that they will be dealt with at the end of business tonight .
Madam President , the rules are very clear that , after the vote , every Member has the right to make an explanation of vote for up to 60 seconds .
I am conscious that our interpreters have been here for a long time .
I am conscious that we are keeping a lot of people from their lunch .
May I suggest a compromise that was used by your fellow Vice-President , Alejo Vidal-Quadras , the last time that this happened , which is to allow people to make explanations of vote one person after another , which speeded up proceedings very considerably .
Thank you , Mr Hannan .
We did consider that formula .
There are so many that I do not think it would work .
You will be able to make your explanations of vote after the vote , in the sense that it will be tonight .
I am sorry for that , but it really is too late - and you know how I enjoy your contributions !
Written explanations of vote
The European Commission 's Communication COM ( 2007 ) 281 set all the European institutions a challenge : ' The time has come to look at Brazil as a strategic partner as well as a major Latin American economic actor and regional leader ' .
This partnership was established on 4 July 2007 in Lisbon during the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union .
On 12 March 2009 the European Parliament adopted a recommendation to the Council which stated that ' the Strategic Partnership should provide for the establishment of a regular structured dialogue between the Members of the Brazilian National Congress and Members of the European Parliament ' .
Despite this statement of principle and my calls to the President of this House , I note with sadness that Parliament is sticking with the anachronistic option of making Brazil the only BRIC economy without an independent parliamentary delegation .
This contradicts Parliament 's own decision and demonstrates a deplorable inertia and short-term attitude , given Brazil 's real importance in the world .
I hope that future Members of this Parliament , particularly Portuguese Members , will help to change this regrettable state of affairs and establish direct and productive communication with the Brazilian National Congress .
I voted against .
in writing . - The GUE / NGL Group has abstained in the vote on the number of interparliamentary delegations , due to the reference to ' Kosovo ' in the formation of a ' Delegation for relations with Albania , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Serbia , Montenegro and Kosovo ' .
The formation of a delegation for relations with a self-proclaimed state that is a result of violation of international law constitutes in itself a de facto violation of international law .
This abstention does not concern all other delegations referred to in the same decision , which we support .
in writing . - I am delighted to vote here today on this report to repeal a directive and 11 obsolete decisions and note that our next report from Mr Morillon will repeal a further 14 obsolete regulations .
I congratulate my colleague on a move that we would do well to replicate across all our committees and all our spheres of competence .
I would certainly favour some regulations and directives having a fixed lifetime that would stop the continued acceptance of laws and regulations and the burdens that consequently fall on us all .
in writing . - ( EL ) The PASOK parliamentary group voted in favour of the Stavreva report , because it gives Member States the facility to choose support measures for rural development at a particularly crucial time for the countryside and for farmers .
The original text of the Commission proposal was also improved on the basis of the amendments which I tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
However , under no circumstances can opportunistic reductions in the financial limits of the common agricultural policy be accepted on the pretext that it has unused resources .
The Community budget cannot be recycled using the flexibility mechanism .
Instead of this practice , it would be politically and materially expedient to debate an increase in the Community budget , so as not to affect existing Community policies , including the CAP , which will be called on to cover the financing of new policies to deal with the crisis and improve the competitiveness of the EU .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) .
I support this document as it is allocating an additional EUR 250 million to supplement the funds earmarked for 2009 and it offers greater flexibility in terms of allocating and using the financial resources for developing broadband Internet in rural areas and for tackling the new challenges in the agricultural sector .
This top-up to the EAFRD is necessary , especially at a time of crisis .
Romania must access this fund through the implementation of viable projects , with the aim of developing our villages and raising the standard of living of those inhabiting our rural areas .
The report on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) .
The European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development represents a great opportunity for historically underdeveloped regions .
The fund is also an opportunity to reduce the disproportion between old and new European Union Member States .
When administering the fund we must remember that the common agricultural policy is full of injustices and inequalities .
Differences in subsidies , and so in the incomes of farmers , lead to the maintenance of these disproportions , and even to their increase .
These disproportions concern not only the economic situation of residents of rural areas , but also the entire infrastructure , including access to the Internet .
We must , therefore , remember that German farmers , for example , receive subsidies which are twice as much as Polish farmers receive , and three times more than Romanian farmers .
We must also remember that the regions which most need help are found in Romania , Bulgaria and the Eastern Wall of Poland .
I voted in favour of this report , presented by my British fellow Member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mr Corbett , on the general revision of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
I support the initiative by the Socialist Group President , Mr Schulz , who sought to use this revision to prevent the French leader of an extreme-right party from having the honour of chairing the inaugural session of the new parliament .
Under the new provisions , Parliament 's inaugural session , to be held on 14 July , will be chaired by the outgoing president , if he is re-elected , or by one of the 14 vice-presidents in order of precedence if re-elected .
European democracy in fact holds principles of respect and tolerance among peoples that Mr Le Pen wilfully disregards through his determination to make revisionist remarks .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , and in particular Amendments 51 and 52 , which replace the oldest Member taking the chair at the opening of the new Parliament by a ' provisional choice ' .
I do not understand why we have ever had this bizarre rule .
Maybe the ' father or mother ' of the House has a logic .
The longest serving Member at least has experience to fall back on , rather than merely age .
We have already had this system abused by Mr Le Pen and his Front National when in 1989 Claude Autant-Lara was parachuted into this Parliament and made a farce of the opening of the institution with a lengthy and highly offensive intervention .
Within months he had stood down , having performed his function of bringing ridicule upon the European Parliament .
We cannot , 20 years on , allow Mr Le Pen a second opportunity to bring Europe into disrepute .
Mr Corbett 's report aims at bringing Parliament 's Rules of Procedure into line with the current practice of general consensus and prior bargaining in small groups , which turns the plenary into nothing more than a meeting that records texts cooked up previously by a handful of experts .
As a result , the institutionalisation of a final public vote on each text is merely the minimum level of transparency that the citizens can expect of the work of this House .
However , this report is above all an unexpected opportunity to adopt in extremis a mind-boggling amendment , despite it having been rejected in committee , and drafted exclusively to prevent a single individual from performing a duty that is , moreover , recognised in all the world 's parliaments : that of the oldest Member chairing the election of the President at the inaugural session .
A real exceptional act , the crime of a real political scoundrel !
Unheard of in a democracy !

The signatories are none other than Mr Daul and Mr Schulz , who should definitely try to become known and recognised in Germany , rather than in France .
This is extra proof , if such were needed , of the ongoing collusion between the soft right and the sectarian left , which vote together on almost all of the texts adopted in this House .
After the amendment on the oldest Member was rejected by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Schulz and Mr Daul , those two liberal-social-democrat cronies , reintroduce the same amendment in plenary .

The Classics used to teach that to err is human ; to persist in error is diabolical .
The lesson has clearly not been learned .
Focusing the work of the European Parliament on my humble self borders on the pathetic .
In fact , flouting our own Rules of Procedure to such an extent is to sow the seeds of latent totalitarianism .
When will the minority groups be eliminated ?
When will recalcitrant Members be eliminated ?
From Claude Autant-Lara to Jean-Marie Le Pen , we have come full circle .
In 1989 , after the great filmmaker 's remarkable speech , the oldest Member 's speech was abolished .
Twenty years later , the oldest Member is to be got rid of to prevent that devil Le Pen from presiding over the election of the President of the European Parliament .
Such democratic progress , ladies and gentlemen !
Mr Schulz and Mr Daul are unwittingly giving me remarkable free publicity , which I will not fail to exploit .
Alone against the world , I will take up the gauntlet and take as witness the true democrats and sincere Europeans : this masquerade and this denial of democracy serves not Europe but the hidden , partisan interests of a small coterie of politicians .
As a French Member of the European Parliament and a member of the Independence and Democracy Group , I chose not to support Amendments 51 and 52 to Mr Corbett 's report .
It is , in fact , unreasonable to change a general rule to suit a specific case .
Moreover , these manoeuvres will undoubtedly have the opposite effect to that intended , in other words , they will highlight the disrespect in which many Members hold some of their fellow Members and candidates .
Moreover , there is nothing to prevent a political party unhappy with the current oldest Member from presenting an older candidate .
I did not vote for the general revision of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure because , in seeking to avoid having an oldest Member by the name of Le Pen in the chair , an inelegant , indeed counter-productive solution has been found , despite there being a solution that would have been acceptable to all those here who are in favour of the policy of gender mainstreaming .
We could therefore have replaced Article 11 with the following text : ' Alternately , the oldest male Member or the oldest female Member from amongst the Members present will , as oldest Member , take on the role of President until the proclamation of Parliament 's choice .
The alternating order will begin with the oldest female Member . '
In this way , we could have avoided having a Le Pen as the presiding oldest Member without this House murdering the Rules of Procedure and adopting a procedure that exists in no other parliament of a democratic country .
That is a shame .
Personally , I have more confidence in the French electorate .
I hope it will prevent the election of Mr Le Pen and that this exercise will thus prove pointless .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Union in particular , which takes up the cause of democracy , tolerance and freedom of opinion , would itself appear not to take them so precisely .
Whether it is in terms of the right of peoples to self-determination , accession criteria or solutions to present-day problems , two different EU standards are applied depending on what is convenient .
Anyone who does not meet the requirements of political correctness , who is an inconvenience to the EU establishment , who depicts uncomfortable realities in the EU establishment , is excluded and all of a sudden subject to other rules .
The principle of idem ius omnibus- equal justice for all - must be strictly applied if the EU does not want to slide into politically correct hypocrisy .
Personal animosities must not be cited as backing for quasi ' knee-jerk legislation ' .
The amendments proposed by the rapporteur make the rules on the register of European Parliament documents more flexible , and they simplify the Rules of Procedure .
In addition , some of them aim to adapt the Rules of Procedure to new rules and to present practice .
One of the most important changes is to give the President of the European Parliament the authority to invite national parliaments ( of States which have signed a Treaty on the accession of a State to the European Union ) to designate from among their own members a number of observers equal to the number of future seats in the European Parliament allocated to that State .
Those observers shall take part in the proceedings of Parliament pending the entry into force of the Treaty of Accession , and shall have the right to speak in committees and political groups .
They shall not have the right to vote or to stand for election to positions within Parliament .
Another change to the Rules of Procedure regulates the procedure for joint committee meetings and joint votes .
The respective rapporteurs shall draw up a single draft report , which shall be examined and voted upon by the committees involved at joint meetings held under the joint chairmanship of the committee chairs concerned .
Important changes from the point of view of the progress of parliamentary proceedings concern allocation of speaking time and drawing up the list of speakers , and also amendments concerning taking the final vote on a piece of legislation .
Roll call votes increase MEPs ' accountability towards citizens .
in writing . - ( SV ) In the European Parliament 's first reading of the telecoms package , a majority of Members voted in favour of Amendments 138 and 166 , which have been under discussion .
By doing so , the European Parliament made it clear that a court ruling should be required in order for someone to be excluded from the Internet , and that users have the right to free expression and to privacy .
However , the Council chose to ignore the wishes of the European Parliament and deleted Amendments 138 and 166 .
The European Parliament and the Council have now agreed on a compromise .
This compromise does not contain Amendments 138 and 166 in their original form .
We therefore voted against the compromise in today 's vote .
The June List and the Danish June Movement are keen for Amendments 138 and 166 to be included in the telecoms package and have therefore tabled a number of amendments which have been referred to as ' Citizens ' Rights Amendments ' by Internet activists and which have received the support of a couple of other political groups within the European Parliament .
If our proposals had won the support of MEPs there would have been a good chance of the European Parliament and the Council finally agreeing on a telecoms package that seriously protects the rights and privacy of Internet users .
in writing . - ( DE ) We are trying today to support economic interests by hook or by crook .
A flurry of copyright laws is suddenly to be introduced in a framework law for the provision of telecommunications .
It is sufficient for the EU to introduce a duty to warn customers of the dangers of violating ' intellectual copyrights ' ; the sanctions could then be regulated at national level .
Afterwards , each can then lay the blame on the other person .
In this report , major software developers have also tried to incorporate a stumbling block for smaller developers .
There may well be rights violations on the Internet , such as child pornography , which we must oppose , but this must not get out of hand to the extent that data protection is sacrificed at the altar of the economic interests of a few large companies and multinational corporations .
The original idea behind the telecommunications package was perfectly sensible , but with the huge number of amendments , one or more amendments criticising the package could have slipped through .
I voted in favour of Amendment 138 , which I tabled in September last year and which was adopted by 88 % of MEPs .
I am pleased that it has again been upheld by an overwhelming majority of Members , who have thus reaffirmed their commitment to defending the rights of Internet users .
One month from the European elections , that is a strong sign .
Contrary to what the UMP and its minister of culture seem to think , the European Parliament 's opinion does matter .
This is another blow to Sarkozy and the French Government : Parliament has said ' no ' to Sarkozy on both form and content .
MEPs have said ' no ' to the flexible response and ' no ' to the inadmissible pressure exerted by France on the primary democratic body of the European continent !
Millions of Europeans rely on the Internet , whether directly or indirectly , in their daily lives .
Limiting , restricting or conditioning the Internet would have a direct and negative impact on the day-to-day lives of the general public and many of the micro-enterprises and SMEs which depend directly on this resource to carry out their business .
It was therefore important that our group 's proposal be adopted , through our vote in favour , as this will maintain the freedom of exchanges between users , without these being controlled or sponsored by intermediaries .
However , it seems that the Council is not ready to accept this amendment , which is supported by a majority in Parliament who are against the limitation agreement reached in negotiations with the Council .
However , this is a small victory , given that it has prevented the adoption of a bad proposal .
All those who defend freedom of movement on the Internet and free software are to be congratulated .
This is a struggle with which we will continue in order to ensure the protection of citizens ' rights and unrestricted access by end-users to services .
Firstly , the amendments that best protect citizens ' rights and freedoms have not been adopted by this House in the Harbour report , which complements this report .
Next , an issue with the voting order , which fortunately has been resolved , has put a question mark over the way in which a major political problem can be settled here : by sly , petty political manoeuvring , and then laying the blame on an administration that can do nothing about it .
Finally , because the displeasure of Mr Toubon , a visibly ardent defender of the Hadopi law , when Amendment 1 , known to Internet users as the ' Bono ' amendment , was adopted , was succeeded by his joy and approval when Mrs Trautmann made it known that this text would go to third reading , the overall compromise having been amended , the clearly demonstrated will of the majority of this Parliament risks being trampled over , as were the results of the referendums in France , the Netherlands , Ireland ...
Mr Sarkozy and his friends in the ' majors ' have some respite .
The citizens , for their part , will have to remain alert .
It will be the Parliament elected on 7 June that will negotiate for the third reading .
It is not certain whether , once their seats have been secured , the socialists will remain on the side of freedom .
in writing . - ( EL ) The ' telecommunications package ' requested by the Commission and the Council constitutes a potential threat to civil rights .
The amendments which we tabled called for the safeguarding of civil rights , universal access and transparency and freedom on the Internet as an area in which ideas are exchanged and not as a resource controlled by politicians and businessmen .
Internet users are customers , but they are also citizens .
We shall continue to fight for the protection of the individual freedoms of all European citizens .
Today during the vote on the electronic communications package , this parliament showed that the protection of consumer rights really is its number one priority .
Regardless of the fact that a relatively acceptable compromise in positions was reached at second reading , a majority in Parliament was not afraid to go against the arrangements and persuasively insist on its initial position against the possible introduction of restrictions on Internet access , unless they are imposed by a court judgment or public security is under threat .
In fact , the whole package has been reduced to a conciliation procedure and its introduction has been delayed .
However , after today 's parliamentary vote , we cannot fail to send a powerful signal to the Council and Commission .
However , let us acknowledge that what has happened today is down to the active involvement of people representing the Internet , who used every means available to express their position to MEPs and demand that they protect their rights .
This type of behaviour can only be encouraged .
This is why we should also come to the conclusion that we must always listen closely to what people are saying so that EU legislation focuses on their needs too , while ensuring the maximum possible protection for the interests of European citizens .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting against this report , as guarantees should be given that parts of the available spectra will be used for nonprofit-making purposes and not go to the large telecoms companies .
in writing . - British Conservatives support ending the pay gap and other forms of discrimination between men and women .
Equal treatment in all forms of employment is crucial for a fair and equal society .
However , Conservatives believe that national governments and parliaments are generally best placed to act in ways that are most effective for their own societies and economies .
Conservatives support the sentiment that spouses of self-employed workers should have access to sickness pay and pensions and maternity rights .
However , we believe these decisions are best determined by the Member States .
As the request for a new legislative proposal on equal pay based on Article 141 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty is covered by the Conservative Party 's pledge to opt-out of the social chapter , which we are not supportive of , we have chosen to abstain .
in writing . - This report improves the way the principle of equal treatment applies to self-employed workers and assisting spouses in the EU .
However , Ireland already provides that the spouses of self-employed persons may become self-employed PRSI contributors in their own right if a commercial partnership between the spouses is demonstrated .
A person may , for example , choose to pay voluntary contributions which allow them to remain insured once they leave the compulsory PRSI system .
Social insurance is a matter of national competence and for this reason I voted against Amendment 14 .
Since this Amendment to Article 6 of the report was passed , I along with the rest of my Irish colleagues in the EPP-ED decided to abstain on the final vote .
I voted for Astrid Lulling 's report on equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity , although I feel that it should have gone much further in reinforcing the rights of women and the protection of motherhood .
Self-employment remains a minority form of employment in Europe , accounting for 16 % of the working population .
Only one-third of selfemployed workers are women .
This proposal should have removed the obstacles to women 's access to self-employment , by providing for measures or specific advantages designed to make it easier to engage in self-employed activities .
I believe that assisting spouses should have a very clearly defined professional status and social security protection equivalent to that of self-employed workers .
in writing . - ( SV ) Social security systems differ depending on where you are in Europe .
This is not a problem , as many seem to think .
Instead , it is a natural result of the fact that the countries are different and public democratic elections have resulted in different political systems being voted through .
As advocates of intergovernmental EU cooperation , it is therefore natural for us to reject the wordings in both the Commission 's proposal for a directive and the report from the European Parliament which seek to give the EU more power over the national social security systems .
However , it is worth pointing out that the stringent proposals made seek primarily to ensure minimum levels .
Thus , the wordings do not prevent the Member States from going further if they so wish .
This is a positive thing , not least from a Swedish perspective .
This flexibility and the fact that the equal treatment of women and men is so clearly emphasised as a fundamental principle of a well-functioning democratic society have led us to vote in favour of the report as a whole .
Selfemployed people currently make up only 16 % of the working population .
Barely one third of the 32.5 million self-employed are women .
The proposal to tackle the obstacles to women 's access to self-employment , among others by adopting measures providing for specific advantages in order to make it easier for the under-represented sex to engage in selfemployed activities should be supported .
Directive 86 / 613 / EEC has led to little progress for assisting spouses of self-employed workers in terms of recognition of their work and adequate social protection .
The new directive should , above all , provide for compulsory registration of assisting spouses so that they are no longer invisible workers , and place an obligation on Member States to take the necessary measures to ensure that assisting spouses are able to take out insurance cover for health care and retirement pensions .
Despite the fact that the Member States are far from unanimous about the need to improve the legal framework in this area , I hope that it will be possible to reach a reasonable consensus quickly , so that this directive can be adopted at first reading , before the European elections in June 2009 .
Let us support initiatives for equality .
By putting people first we can build a fairer society .
I voted in favour of Gabriele Stauner 's report as I feel it is necessary to extend the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund 's remit to also cover redundancies caused by the economic and financial crisis .
The purpose of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is to offer effective support to workers made redundant as a result of globalisation .
After adopting this piece of legislation , the money from this fund can also be used for redundancies resulting from the economic and financial crisis .
The cofinancing rate for this fund is 50 % and this figure may be raised to 65 % by 2011 .
The maximum annual financial package available to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is EUR 500 million , which is intended to be used to help people look for work or to finance professional training courses or mobility allowances .
I hope that Romania too will access the money from this fund to help people who are losing their jobs .
This partial improvement of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund falls short of what is needed in this serious crisis that we are experiencing .
It takes no account of the proposals that we made to increase the Community contribution to 85 % of the amount to be allocated to the unemployed , or even to double the amount of said Fund in order to cover more people who may fall victim to company closures .
That is why we decided to abstain .
The amended rules of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , adopted today , are intended to allow this Fund to intervene more effectively in terms of cofinancing the training and job placement of workers made redundant as a result of the economic crisis .
The new rules extend the scope of the Fund and provide for a temporary increase in the cofinancing rate from 50 % to 65 % , in order to provide additional support from the Fund during the financial and economic crisis .
However , countries facing financial difficulties will have little recourse to the Fund , given that they will still have to support a high rate of cofinancing .
We are currently facing an unprecedented crisis .
It has affected not only financial affairs , but also economic and social affairs , and has hit not just several Member States , but the entire European Union and the world .
Leaders of the Party of European Socialists have adopted a joint declaration calling on States ' For an ambitious recovery plan to safeguard employment and prevent mass unemployment ' .
The only way to have a real effect on the economy is to give it a budgetary stimulus which is adequate to the problem being faced and is coordinated across the whole of Europe .
Our priority , which guides everything we say or do , is to make jobs secure and to fight unemployment , while also promoting sound ecological development .
If we do not make fresh efforts to combat the crisis in Europe , unemployment will rise to 25 million at the beginning of 2010 , and the condition of public finance will worsen considerably .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was established in 2006 and will function until 2013 .
The purpose of the EGF is to provide support for workers made redundant as a result of globalisation .
The Fund 's maximum annual budget is EUR 500 million and it is used to support active labour market measures , such as assistance for people seeking work , in the form of further training grants and mobility allowances .
I support the idea of a reduction in the number of redundancies ( to 500 ) required to trigger intervention .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted for Eugenijus Maldeikis ' report on the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on EU financial support to projects in the field of energy .
I am delighted that a huge majority of Parliament ( 526 votes ) voted in favour ; they supported this document .
I would once more like to underline the importance of our decision .
Like Latvia , Estonia and Poland , my country , Lithuania , has already been part of the European Union in a political and economic sense for five years .
However , in terms of energy it was and still is like an island , with no bridges linking it to the Community 's energy market .
With today 's decision the European Parliament allocated EUR 175 million towards the construction of an energy bridge , which will link Lithuania and Sweden .
Once this project has been realised , the countries in our region , which became EU Member States in 2004 , will finally connect their energy markets to the Scandinavian states , and so to the EU market .
This is a fantastic project , a good beginning , and I would like to thank all of my colleagues who voted for it .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a programme to aid economic recovery by granting Community financial assistance to projects in the field of energy .
The European Economic Recovery Plan provides investments amounting to EUR 5 billion for energy projects , broadband Internet and rural development measures .
EUR 3.98 billion will be invested in infrastructure for electricity , natural gas , wind power and for the capture and storage of carbon dioxide .
The European Parliament supports the allocation of EUR 1.02 billion for rural development projects .
The economic recovery plan is allocating EUR 200 million to the construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline which will transport natural gas from the Caspian Sea region to the EU .
Romania supports this project .
The key items of interest to Romania include funding in this recovery plan for gas interconnection projects between Romania and Hungary ( EUR 30 million ) and Romania and Bulgaria ( EUR 10 million ) , as well as for developing the equipment infrastructure enabling the gas flow to be reversed in the event of short-term disruption to the supply ( EUR 80 million ) .

I voted for the programme granting financial assistance to projects in the field of energy .
The European Parliament 's proposal for investment , based on an agreement reached with the Council , is built on three pillars , namely : interconnection of gas and electricity networks ; carbon capture and storage ; and offshore wind projects .
As such , the proposal sets out procedures and methods of providing financial assistance to stimulate investment in the creation of a European integrated energy network , whilst enhancing the European Union 's policy of reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
There is a need for immediate action to stimulate the European economy and it is therefore vital to have measures ensuring an adequate geographical balance and speedy implementation .
In Portugal , gas network interconnection projects ( infrastructures and equipment ) are eligible , as too are projects to improve the electricity network interconnection with Spain .
The Commission 's ambition to increase investments in energy infrastructure is the latest in a long line of examples of the arrogance that has infected the officials in Berlaymont .
The proposed investments are both extensive and costly , and it has yet to be demonstrated that all of these investments should be dealt with at EU level .
In total , investments amounting to EUR 3.5 billion are proposed for 2009 and 2010 - money that is to be provided from the Member States ' budgets .
As far as Sweden is concerned , this will mean a significant increase in the membership fees by an additional SEK 1.4 billion .
The fact that the Commission does not believe it has had time to carry out a thorough impact assessment of such a comprehensive proposal is utterly appalling .
The rapporteur for the European Parliament 's report does not seem to be particularly concerned by these objections .
Instead , an increase in assistance from EUR 3.5 billion to nearly EUR 4 billion is proposed !

Our mandate to work towards less costly EU cooperation leads us to reject this frivolous treatment of taxpayers ' money .
However , it should be pointed out that there are very good reasons for continuing to look for ways to improve and develop techniques for separating and storing carbon dioxide .
We have voted against the report as a whole .
in writing . - ( SV ) The proposal to set aside around EUR 4 billion for projects in the field of energy within the European energy programme for recovery is a good one .
However , the content has become far too focussed on fossil fuels .
In addition , there is a complete lack of support for projects for improving the efficiency of energy use .
At an early stage , the Commission proposed that EUR 500 million be set aside for ' sustainable cities ' - a proposal that was , however , withdrawn .
The assistance for ' sustainable cities ' would have enabled wide-ranging projects to develop district heating and combined heat and power as well as improvements in housing .
Such projects would be cost-effective and would reduce emissions and create new jobs .
It is deeply regrettable that the opportunity is not being taken , in connection with the economic crisis , to breathe new life into this type of measure .
in writing . - ( DE ) The SPD Members of the European Parliament have rejected the report for two reasons :
First , the retention for the securitisation of loans is an important and correct instrument for involving financial institutions in the business risk of the loans in question .
However , this requires a significantly large retention .
The 5 % retention agreed in the trialogue does not meet this requirement .
The European Commission originally called for a 15 % retention in the consultation process but then bowed to pressure from industry and proposed 5 % .
Conservatives and liberals in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs wanted to declare even this low-level participation in the business risk unnecessary through the submission of a guarantee by the financial institutions .
The SPD Members of the European Parliament support a much higher retention and will also emphasise this demand in future reforms of the Capital Requirements Directive .
Second , the definition of core capital given in the Karas report violates the competitive neutrality of the regulation .
It provides that , in future , silent capital contributions will no longer fully count as core capital , although they can be fully absorbed in the event of liquidity .
This opens the floodgates to unfair competition against public banks in Germany .
We note that silent capital contributions are a proven refinancing instrument , which is compatible with EU law .
As the outcome of the trialogue does take account of the explanatory amendments we have proposed , we reject the report .
I congratulate the rapporteur for his diligent work , both on the substance of the text and in the subsequent negotiations .
The exceptional circumstances require us to take fast , appropriate action .
I can accept the result proposed to us in the area of securitisation .
The systematic introduction of standardised Colleges of Supervisors is a major advance .
Since the autumn , the draft report has opened the way with its idea of a decentralised European supervisory system .
The de Larosière group 's report and the Commission communication of 4 March have usefully developed this idea .
I am delighted that these ideas meet with general approval .
As for the scope , one thing must be said .
Instead of taking the somewhat simplistic criterion of cross-border banks , it might be wiser to target the banks that have a systemic importance .
The latter would be directly subject to the new banking authority .
The other banks would be supervised by a college or , in the case of purely national banks , by their national supervisor .
For crisis management purposes , the systemic banks should also be subject to financial stability arrangements at European level .
in writing . - I congratulate Mr Karas .
This vote is an excellent outcome for many reasons .
First , among them is the fact this is a package which Parliament recommended and negotiated .
I have been in such negotiations and I know how difficult such talks can be .
Second , is the substance , which is to say this legislation delivers better protection for British and other citizens across the EU .
Securitisation was the method by which the so-called ' toxic assets ' were spread between banks , leaving huge debts in many private and public banks .
The idea of retention of the originator asset by as much as 5 % , subject to a review after impact assessments and international changes , is vital .
Reducing the ' leveraging ' and ensuring the proper capital adequacy of banks is the guard against behaviour by banks which has brought us to the very edge of financial disaster .
Mr Karas can be satisfied with his work in the negotiations .
I know how difficult it is for Parliament to get improvements to texts , but this first reading deal is a sensible one .
If anyone had any doubts about the real objective of this proposal , you would only have to quote the words in the text adopted today with regard to ensuring ' the dismantling of remaining barriers to the smooth functioning of the internal market ' .
Furthermore , Article 2 clarifies that ' the general objective ... is to improve the conditions for the functioning of the internal market ' .
Once again it must at the very least be paradigmatic that , following the failure of the so-called ' European economic recovery plan ' and the proclaimed ' European solidarity ' , the first and , up to now , only proposal to create a Community support programme is aimed at the financial services !
It almost seems like we are not facing one of the biggest crises in capitalism , with worsening unemployment , destruction of productive capacity , increasing inequalities and growing difficulties for workers and the general population .
The proposals that we tabled - such as increasing the Community budget , creating Community support programmes for the manufacturing sector and protecting jobs with rights and public services - were rejected .
Yet when it comes to supporting the financial market and the ' smooth functioning of the internal market ' , there is no lack of Community funding .
This is unacceptable .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Eurosceptics are always seeking to make EU cooperation less costly .
Taxpayers ' money must be used wisely .
It is important , particularly during these turbulent times , for us to be careful with our common resources .
Budget restrictiveness must remain a guiding principle for us as elected representatives .
However , the present report leads us in a completely different direction .
The Commission 's original proposal for financing was deemed to be inadequate and in no time at all the large political groups within the European Parliament proposed that the appropriations for the financial supervisory bodies be doubled .
On what grounds , we might ask ourselves .
We are dealing with a full-scale global financial meltdown in which international efforts need to be made at a global level .
Supervision of the financial institutions within the EU is not a task for the EU at the present time .
It is important to bear this in mind .
However , the present proposal gives an indication of the ambitions of the powerful political elite .
With vague references to the financial crisis and its conceivable consequences for supervision and scrutiny , this is nothing more than a brazen attempt to advance the EU 's position .
We , of course , have no choice but to vote against the report and the alternative motion for a resolution .
in writing . - Although I am a strong proponent of animal welfare I am hesitant to ban practices such as the import of seal products provided it can be shown that the suffering of animals is kept to a minimum when they are killed .
Nevertheless , there are some practices which give great cause for concern , not least ritual slaughter traditions for certain religious purposes .
Given Europe 's cultural diversity , some of these practices , which are alien to the EU 's respect for animal welfare , have begun to take root .
As a result , animals are suffering needlessly .
I accept that some religions attach fundamental importance to the way in which an animal is slaughtered in order for its meat to be consumed .
However , the development of a culture of animal rights and animal welfare has been hard-won in Europe over the past 30 years , and we should not sacrifice it on the altar of political correctness .
Animals killed by ritual slaughter methods must first be stunned in order to minimise suffering and further promote the values of animal welfare that we hold dear .
I voted for the report on the protection of animals at the time of killing .
Every year in the European Union , millions of animals are killed .
Many animals are subject to treatment which involves unnecessary suffering , not only during their rearing and transport , but also at the time of slaughter or killing and related operations .
The suffering of animals at slaughterhouses must be avoided , including animals reared for the production of food and other products .
In my opinion , the proposal is balanced and consistent with the Community objectives of ensuring the protection and welfare of animals .
I agree that the largescale slaughter of animals should be carried out with due regard for humanitarian standards , limiting the suffering experienced by animals .
As a result , I did not vote for the amendment removing the ban on using systems for restraining bovine animals by inversion or any unnatural position because , in my opinion , this practice compromises the welfare of animals .
Ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the Wojciechowski report on the protection of animals at the time of killing .
Many people wonder how it is possible to protect animals while they are being killed .
This may sound paradoxical , but it is possible .
Everyone who has experienced the killing of an animal or observed such an act is aware of how painful the death of an animal may be .
Introduction of new legislation in this area will limit the unnecessary suffering of animals , and this is why the legislation is needed .
By affirming that animals must be slaughtered without unnecessary suffering , except in the case of religious rites , the majority of our House has demonstrated both its hypocrisy and its cowardice .
' Religious rites ' mainly refer to the ritual slaughter practised in particular during the Muslim festival of Eid-al-Adha , when hundreds of thousands of sheep have their throats cut .
Legal recognition of such a practice is part of a much wider phenomenon , that of the Islamisation of our societies .
Our laws and customs are changing progressively to accommodate Islamic Sharia law .
In France , more and more local authorities are indirectly funding the construction of mosques .
School menus are drawn up to meet Islamic dietary requirements .
In some cities , such as Lille , the swimming pools have womenonly sessions .
By creating the Conseil français du culte musulman in 2003 , Mr Sarkozy , then Minister of the Interior , introduced Islam into France 's institutions .
To put an end to these developments , we have to reject the Islamically correct , reverse the flow of nonEuropean migration and create a new Europe , a Europe of sovereign nations , without Turkey , affirming the Christian and humanist values of its civilisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is regrettable that the European Parliament should have chosen a schizophrenic approach at the end of its term and on such a sensitive issue , because it really is schizophrenic , on the one hand , to project oneself into the future even when the latter introduces technologies used to teach violence and rape and , on the other , to plunge back into the past in order to return to tribal rites and to placate those who need to see blood spilt and more pointless suffering in the eyes of the victim .
We firmly oppose tribal butchery that does not take into account the consensus and the free choice of individual Member States .
We approve of the desire to replace the 1993 directive in a way that improves and standardises conditions of slaughter throughout the European Union .
We also approve of the principle according to which animals should only be slaughtered using methods which ensure instant death or death after stunning , but we are totally against the idea of permitting exemptions in the framework of religious rites .
Public opinion is very sensitive and completely opposed to unnecessary , painful practices .
Why tolerate them , then , in the name of religion , irrespective of whether or not the animals are immobilised prior to being killed ?
Strict legislation that provides for verification of the procedures must be introduced to ensure that animals are stunned and cannot regain consciousness before dying , but it would be even better to prohibit such practices completely .
They are from another age and can be rightly termed barbaric .
in writing . - Protecting animals from cruelty is a very important responsibility .
However , some of the proposals put forward in order to prevent cruelty , I believe , will actually cause more cruelty .
I particularly refer to the proposal to have all slaughter at slaughter facilities .
Famers would be forced to load and transport animals , even if they are sick or old , and such action would cause them pain and distress .
This proposal also carries risks in terms of contagious disease and infection .
Sometimes it is better to contain sickness by slaughtering an animal on its own farm , as long as this is done in a humane manner .
I did not make my oral explanation .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to vote in favour of the report on the renewed social agenda .
It is a good report , which , among other things , stipulates that economic freedoms and competition rules should never prevail over fundamental social rights .
However , the report also contains requirements for minimum wage systems .
We Social Democrats believe that it is important for everyone to be guaranteed a decent wage that it is possible to live on , and we think that the EU should encourage this .
This is particularly important to enable us to deal with the problem of the ' working poor ' .
How Member States then choose to guarantee their citizens a decent wage and whether they do this by means of legislation or by leaving it to the social partners to regulate via collective agreements must continue to be decided by the Member States themselves .
in writing . - Conservatives support the principle of a minimum wage in the United Kingdom .
However , we believe that social security schemes and the minimum wage should be determined at a national level .
Therefore , Conservatives have abstained on this report .
I voted for the Silva Peneda report on the Renewed Social Agenda .
In the framework of the current economic crisis , it is crucial that social policy goes hand in hand with economic policy , aiming at a recovery of the European economy .
The European social models are facing several challenges , namely demographic change and globalisation , to which they cannot stay immune .
Therefore , they need to be modernised with a long-term perspective , while also preserving their original values .
Europe must be ambitious with regard to social policy , all the more so now that we are facing a serious crisis .
However , I believe that the Commission 's Renewed Social Agenda is very unambitious , has come too late and is not really up to the challenges posed by the financial and economic crisis .
Social and employment policies must be strengthened to reduce or avoid job losses and to protect Europeans against social exclusion and the risk of poverty .
This report contains many contradictions .
However , in essence , it insists on the existing guidelines of neoliberal capitalism , albeit mitigated here and there , but without altering the basic policies which are at the root of the current economic and social crisis .
The guiding principle is the same as always .
The ' crisis ' is now being used to once again ' sell ' the recipe of ' more of the same ' : flexibility , internal market , public-private partnerships , and so on , ignoring the fact that the EU 's policies are also at the root of the crisis and have made it worse .
The correct ' concerns ' included in the report do not tackle or respond to the main causes of the problems identified , particularly with regard to economic policies , job insecurity , liberalisation and privatisation of public services , and so on .
There are no alternative answers , particularly with regard to reinforcing the role of the State in the economy , in strategic sectors and in the expansion of high-quality public services , or even in the defence of higher wages and pensions .
However , the report does consider the need for a fairer distribution of wealth , but without indicating the ways to achieve this or calling for a break with those policies that have worsened social inequalities .
The social record of your Europe is a resounding failure .
In France , dreadful figures have just come out : poverty has risen by 15 % in two years , the number of poor workers has increased dramatically , and the number of highly indebted households , whose resources have for a long time been insufficient to cover day-to-day living costs , has grown exponentially as a result .
Furthermore , we are just at the start of this profound crisis .
You urge citizens to be ' open to change ' when , for workers , change equals losing their jobs and the certainty that they will not find new ones , thanks to your policies .
You speak of ' social ' whilst the Court of Justice tramples over workers ' rights in the name of competition and the freedom to provide services .
You add in flexibility , when this is merely Eurospeak for ' insecurity ' .
You even pretend to pay special attention to women and mothers , when your idiotic ' gender ' policy results in the loss of their specific social rights , such as the ones they used to have in France in the areas of retirement and night work .
It is not a renewal of the social agenda that is needed , but a thorough change of your perverse system .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report insists that Member States need to modernise and reform their national social security systems , introduce minimum wages and review the curricula in schools .
Moreover , there is to be higher financial participation of employees in companies ' proceeds , and a European year of volunteering is to be introduced .
These are unusually extreme examples of how the EU intends to take over national selfdetermination .
In addition , the report contains two references to the Treaty of Lisbon , which has still not entered into force .
This is a brazen expression of the arrogance of power !
The implication is that the democratic debate on the Treaty is seen as merely playing to the gallery and is not considered to have any significance for the outcome .
We therefore voted against the report in the final vote .
In general , this is a very good report with many good aspects , but on account of repeated demands for growth and for Member States to introduce minimum wages in conjunction with legally binding social conditions , which would involve a huge transfer of power to the EU , I am abstaining from voting .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European social models are facing major challenges during the current financial crisis .
The German conservative group ( CDU / CSU ) is therefore speaking out in favour of a social Europe .
For this reason , we endorse Mr Silva Peneda 's report on the Renewed Social Agenda .
We also welcome both the fact that job creation and promotion are being accorded priority in this time of crisis and our willingness to press ahead with measures relating to education and training .
Europe must create a social framework and establish standards at a European level .
We must certainly take into account the competences of Member States in that regard .
For this reason , we oppose the blanket call for the introduction of a minimum wage in all the Member States , as originally expressed in paragraph 14 of the report .
The introduction of a minimum wage is a decision which should be left to the sole discretion of Member States .
We are , therefore , pleased that the oral amendment to this paragraph has been adopted .
Sufficient benefits must be ensured to enable every person to lead a dignified life , but different options are available to Member States in this regard .
We have made it clear in our oral amendment that , in addition to the minimum wage , consideration should also be given to collective agreements and generally binding regulations , or a state-guaranteed minimum income .
In this way , we pay due regard to the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to vote in favour of the report on the active inclusion of people excluded from the labour market .
It is a good report , which is particularly important in the current economic crisis , where active labour market measures are needed to ensure that the weakest in society do not permanently remain outside the labour market .
However , the report also contains requirements for minimum wage systems .
We Social Democrats believe that it is important for everyone to be guaranteed a decent wage that it is possible to live on , and we think that the EU should encourage this .
This is particularly important to enable us to deal with the problem of the ' working poor ' .
How Member States then choose to guarantee their citizens a decent wage and whether they do this by means of legislation or by leaving it to the social partners to regulate via collective agreements must continue to be decided by the Member States themselves .
in writing . - British Conservatives support much of the report and the provisions made for adequate income support , inclusive labour markets , and access to quality services .
We also encourage a positive and inclusive approach to mental health , disabilities , and older people 's rights to work , as well as a tough stance on the fight against human trafficking .
However , Conservatives do not support the concept of an EU Discrimination Directive .
Furthermore , Conservatives cannot support the call to establish a legal framework for equal treatment in employment to combat discrimination in employment and occupation and for an EU target for minimum income schemes and contributory replacement income schemes providing income support of at least 60 % of national median equalised income .
For these reasons we have abstained .
These issues should be matters of national competence .
in writing . - The EPP-ED Group is generally supportive of the thrust of the original report by Jean Lambert .
However , in committee another political group injected extraneous points into the report which were not only outside the intended scope of the report but which were known to be unacceptable to our group .
They did this deliberately , for shabby party-political reasons , to make it impossible for us to support the report as presented to plenary .
We have therefore tabled an alternative resolution which contains all the elements of her report which we do support .
in writing . - This report poses the question : how do we include people in labour markets who are currently excluded from them ?
The answer is patently obvious .
We need to create more jobs and more capacity in our labour markets .
The fact that the EU even needs to ask itself this question demonstrates one of the fundamental problems with Brussels .
Far too much attention is given to job protection and not nearly enough to job creation .
The European social model is primarily responsible for the fact that so many Europeans are unemployed .
The European social model does exactly the opposite of what it 's supposed to : it creates a two-tier labour market economy , bringing benefits for those in work and limiting the possibility of those without a job to get one .
The social cost of endless EU regulation is also huge , dissuading employers from taking on new workers .
So much for the EU 's vaunted plan to be the world 's most competitive economy by 2010 .
In order to create jobs for unemployed people , the European economy needs the EU needs to go in a fundamentally different direction .
British Conservatives are committed to accelerating that change of direction .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report addresses a number of important issues which in principle should be dealt with by the Member States and not by the EU .
For example , the European Parliament insists that there is a need to introduce EU targets on minimum income guarantees and minimum wages .
The report also contains a reference to the Treaty of Lisbon ( which has still not entered into force ) .
We have therefore voted against this report .
Voting time ( continued )
We now continue with the vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 14.40 and resumed at 15.05 . )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Conclusions of the UN Conference on Racism ( ' Durban II ' - Geneva ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and the Commission statements on the conclusions of the United Nations Conference on Racism ( Durban II - Geneva ) .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking you for this opportunity to take stock of the Durban Review Conference , which I know has been followed closely by many Members here today .
The preparatory process leading to the conference was particularly complex , with a significant number of countries having serious misgivings about the process in the light of what happened in 2001 .
Because of their concerns that the conference would be used as a platform for expressions of hatred and intolerance in its most extreme form , several Member States , including my own , decided to withdraw from the conference .
These concerns were confirmed by the intervention of one member of the UN at the very beginning of the conference .
Not only did we find this totally unacceptable , but it was directly contrary to the very spirit and purpose of the conference .
It is unfortunate , although perhaps inevitable , that this incident and the subsequent walk-out of all Member States as well as other UN members , made the news headlines , overshadowing the consensual adoption of the outcome document .
At the same time , I think that the very constructive and solid EU contribution through the preparatory phase of the conference should be fully acknowledged .
This was particularly the case in relation to the drafting of the outcome document , in which the EU played a critical role .
Despite the distractions to which I have referred , the fact that the final outcome document of the conference respects all the EU red lines represents a considerable achievement .
The outcome document fully respects the existing human rights framework , particularly with regard to freedom of expression , and complies with many of our demands , such as the need to avoid any reference to the defamation of religions and to refrain from any singling-out of Israel .
In addition , the paragraph on remembering the Holocaust was maintained in the text .
We now need to reflect on the implications for the EU of both the conference itself and the outcome document .
We will need , in particular , to define how we support implementation of the commitments which have been undertaken .
The Council remains extremely concerned by the phenomena of racism and xenophobia , which we consider to be among our most important human rights challenges today .
I know that this Parliament fully shares these concerns and that you have been instrumental in helping create much of the legislative basis and the practical tools to help combat this scourge .
Fighting racism and xenophobia is an ongoing process which requires both political will and practical measures , not least in the area of education .
There is also a continuing need to enhance dialogue and mutual understanding and to promote tolerance .
Whilst there are signs that the EU 's anti-discrimination legislation is having a positive impact , the overall global progress in the fight against these phenomena remains regrettably slow .
In fact the trend in a number of countries is even negative .
We have seen cases where the current economic crisis is starting to fuel racist and xenophobic intolerance across the world .
Against the background of the economic crisis , strong anti-racism policies are more important than ever .
Both within Europe and more widely , we are facing an upsurge in violent attacks targeting migrants , refugees and asylum-seekers , as well as minorities such as the Roma .
The EU has a strong acquis on the fight against racism and xenophobia .
Both these phenomena are incompatible with the principles upon which the EU is founded .
The EU has repeatedly rejected and condemned all manifestations of racism and will continue to do so .
The EU , within the limits of the powers conferred on it by the Treaties , will continue to tackle racism and xenophobia , both within the Union itself and in the context of our external actions .
Internally , we have adopted legislation prohibiting direct and indirect discrimination , on the basis of racial or ethnic origin , at work , education and with regard to access to goods and services .
Legislation also prohibits discrimination on other grounds , including religion , age , sexual orientation and disabilities , particularly in the workplace .
The EU has also adopted legislation to ban hate speech from TV channels , as well as to criminalise ' publicly inciting to violence or hatred directed against a group of persons or a member of such a group defined by reference to race , colour , religion , descent or national or ethnic origin ' .
The same piece of legislation makes it a crime to publicly condone , deny or grossly trivialise crimes of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
Externally the EU regularly raises racism and xenophobia issues in its bilateral political and human rights dialogues with third countries such as Russia and China .
We have also ensured that racism and xenophobia are mainstreamed into our cooperation strategies such as the European neighbourhood policy action plans .
Much is happening within various multilateral fora .
Within the OSCE framework , Member States coordinate their work so as to ensure that the commitments made by the 56 OSCE participating states in this area are respected and implemented .
This is also the case within the Council of Europe and within the wider UN framework .
These examples demonstrate our collective commitment to work on this issue both internally and more widely with partners worldwide .
The Durban Review Conference was part of those wider efforts .
It was not easy and quite clearly was marred by those who thought to deviate the results of the conference for their own narrow political ends .
But for all that , we should welcome the fact that , in the end , it has focused attention both on the continuing need to tackle racism and xenophobia and on the commitment which we have , and which is shared by very many others , to eradicating this scourge .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to have the opportunity to take part in this debate .
The European Commission has followed closely the preparations for the Durban Conference and the search for a common European Union position on participation in this conference .
In this regard , we have taken into account the call by Parliament - by your Parliament - committing the European Union to active participation in the Durban Conference review in the framework of the resolution on the progress of the United Nations Human Rights Council - and especially the role of the Union - a resolution that you adopted on 19 January .
As you are aware , five Member States have decided against taking part in this conference .
The Commission has decided to confirm its participation as an observer , as it shares the view of the majority of the Member States that the European Union 's red lines have been retained in the conference document .
The final adopted document , which is the result of a compromise , is not an ideal text , but this document contains no defamation of an anti-Semitic character , no defamation of any specific country or region in the world , or of any religion .
The consensual adoption of the final document by 182 Member States of the United Nations confirms the commitment made by the international community to fight against racism and discrimination .
This is in response to the deplorable attempts by some to manipulate the conference for anti-Semitic ends , attempts against which the European Commission has reacted strongly .
In any case , the events at the review conference in no way lessen the Commission 's long-term commitment to do its utmost to fight against manifestations of racism and xenophobia in all their forms .
The Commission remains determined to pursue its policies of fighting racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism - both within and outside the European Union - to the full extent of the powers conferred on it by the Treaties .
I must say , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that I will personally monitor the Member States ' implementation of the Framework Decision on Racism and Xenophobia very closely .
I will undertake personally to monitor the transpositions of this framework decision , and I must stress that our Fundamental Rights Agency will henceforth also be a tool for us to observe all these phenomena , which call for a great degree of firmness on our part .
We can indeed hope that the next United Nations conference on racism will no longer be tainted by unacceptable speeches that are veritable incitements to hatred and racism .
That said , it is also the case that the final compromise from the conference gives us a glimpse of a brighter future .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , Iranian President Ahmadinejad recently asserted at the UN Conference on Racism in Geneva that Israel is a racist country .
It is tempting to dismiss him as a populist demagogue courting publicity , but he has in the past outrageously called for Israel to be wiped off the map , and Israel would undoubtedly be the first target for the nuclear weapon he so much wants to build .
We should therefore see his intervention in the light of his implacable hostility towards the Jewish state , which is , quite rightly in my view , the EU 's ally and strong partner .
Regarding the accusation of racism , it is hard to find a more ethnically diverse and less racist county than Israel , which includes Arab , Armenian , Druze and other minorities in its society .
The image is still strong in my mind of the airlift of Ethiopian Jews to Israel in the 1980s .
Israel still of course maintains an open immigration policy based on its status as a home for the Jewish people the world over , but we should also consider the position of Israeli Arabs in society .
They enjoy democratic rights and a standard of living that are rarely accorded by Arab countries to their own citizens .
My suspicion is that Ahmadinejad is actually seeking to distract attention from the appalling and abhorrent human rights record of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
In Iran , journalists who dare criticise the regime are locked up , but Israel has a free press .
In Iran , adulterers , homosexuals and juveniles are executed , including by stoning to death , while in Israel gays and lesbians have the full protection of the law .
In Iran , minorities such as Christians and Bahá 'ís are regularly persecuted , but in Israel minorities are valued and their rights safeguarded .
Yet still , despite all this evidence , many Members of this House would sooner criticise our democratic ally Israel , than denounce a barbaric and potentially catastrophic regime in Tehran .
Israel should know that it does have friends in this Parliament , friends like me who cherish human rights and reject fanaticism .
Frankly , in my view , it is shameful that EU Member States sent delegations to Durban II , knowing full well that President Ahmadinejad would be present and come out with these outrageous comments .
There are some who regard the Durban Review Conference as a success .
In fact , the final document respects the five red lines set out by the European Union and reflects a true global consensus , unlike the previous versions which led to so much and such intense debate .
However , unfortunately it is not this document that will remain engraved on the memories of those who , from around the world , attended the debates in Geneva .
They will primarily remember the deep divisions caused by a conference dedicated to an issue of universal vocation , namely the fight against racism , and which grabbed the world 's attention .
Europe has once again shown the fragility of European unity on the most politically polarising issues , as was definitely the case at this conference .
Nothing would have been more symbolically significant than the collective exodus from the conference hall of all the EU countries in response to the provocative and unacceptable proposals made by an Iranian president who , despite the change of tone in Washington , insists on putting his country on a collision course with the West .
Regrettably , some European countries were not even in the conference hall to express their displeasure at a speech whose sole objective , as underlined by the UN Secretary-General , was to accuse , divide and even incite .
Union means strength , and the European Union , in presenting a divided front , showed weakness .
The fight against racism and against the incitement of hate by President Ahmadinejad and others deserved better .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I wish to begin by making a general remark .
Countries are not racist : people are racist .
There are many people in Iran , I am sure , who do not share the views of their President and I think it was in fact a missed opportunity that Europe was weak , silent , divided and absent and did not speak on behalf of those people in Iran and that it left the podium to the likes of Mr Ahmadinejad to speak his racist language .
I personally was against the boycott of the conference , but I think what was even worse is that there was no European strategy .
Why was Europe divided ?
Why ?
I would like an explanation from the Council - and I have tabled an amendment to this effect to the Obiols i Germà report that we will be discussing later - why there was no European strategy ?
Why are 27 European countries unable to agree on a strategy ?
If and when the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , which is something that the Council has supported , then the 27 countries will have to make a stronger effort for a joint strategy .
Concerning the issue of the defamation of religion , I am extremely worried that it is a UN body that is able to adopt resolutions calling for a total ban on the defamation of religions or on offending religions .
In the end , I understand that it has been watered down in the final resolution , but I still think it is worrying that something like this can come out of the UN .
However , I also see the irony in the fact that in this House it is also still very difficult to even criticise - not offend , criticise - religions , and one main European religion in particular , and there is another amendment tabled by myself and my colleague Cappato to the Obiols i Germà report criticising the Vatican for its position on condoms in the fight against AIDS .
Again , I would like to ask the Council to explain what has been done to get to a European strategy .
Madam President , I want to stress once again that the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference was adopted by consensus .
Even though the text is not ideal , representing the result of complex negotiations , as far as the new position is concerned my understanding is that it is important to continue discussion of the new document and of often disputed issues such as racial discrimination , xenophobia , stigmatisation and stereotyping of people based on their religion or belief .
We should engage in further discussion in a non-confrontational manner , but with a strong reaction to unacceptable statements and attempts to use the Durban process for the expression of racist ideology .
My firm belief is that , without a strong position of the European Union on protecting human rights and fighting against racism and xenophobia , the Durban process might take a wrong direction .
( FR ) Madam President , what is obviously a pity is that the victims of racism and discrimination have not been the focus of the Durban Conference .
This is of course because of the President of Iran 's scandalous hijacking of the conference , which was - and I must voice my dismay at this - a trap into which several EU Member States fell .
That is the problem .
Personally , I would like to thank the Member States of the European Union that nevertheless made and continue to make a commitment ; we have conclusions that are wholly honourable , even if they are imperfect .
I would also like to hear the Presidency speak about the efforts made or not made by the Member States to ensure that the European Union did not appear disorganised at this conference , a state of affairs that was particularly pitiful .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , the EU was also fully engaged throughout the run-up to the conference and actively contributed to the drafting of the outcome document , with a view to making it as balanced as possible and ensuring that it respected the existing human rights norms , notably with regard to the freedom of expression .
The EU also succeeded in ensuring that Israel was not singled out in the text .
It was to a large extent due to the EU 's unified efforts that in the end we produced a text respecting our red lines , and this independently of the fact that some EU Member States decided not to participate in their national capacity .
It should also be added that the countries that did not attend the conference did not prevent the European Union , as such , from speaking at the conference .
The Presidency continued the internal coordination of the EU 's participation , including the preparation of two statements on behalf of all the EU Member States which were delivered by Sweden , the incoming Presidency .
The final statement was delivered on behalf of 22 states .
The EU will analyse , in the aftermath of Durban , how it will continue to support the Durban agenda .
The fact that five Member States out of 27 decided in the end not to participate in the conference itself by no means puts into question the EU 's commitment to the fight against racism and discrimination in the future .
We have a solid acquis on these issues on which we will continue to build .
As was rightly pointed out - and I take it as a kind of criticism - at the end of the preparations for the conference we were not really able to find a common ground .
There was never any common ground , so there was never an EU position before the conference .
It was decided by consensus that there were national positions , so the delegations left the room in their national capacities .
I repeat that the ministers discussed this issue at the last meeting and lessons will be learned .
We will have to reflect and come back , because the EU did not take the ' heroic ' path at this conference .
That must be noted .
I am grateful for all your speeches .
Last Monday , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner received a letter from Mrs Pillay , the United Nations ' High Commissioner for Human Rights , which was also sent to all of the Union 's foreign ministers .
In this letter , Mrs Pillay recalled what she had already said in Brussels on 8 October , in a conference jointly organised by the European Parliament on the protection of human rights activists .
Mrs Pillay considers that it is important to restore a certain unity in relation to the protection and promotion of human rights in the world , especially in terms of the fight against racism .
She invites all the Member States of the United Nations to join in implementing the United Nations programme to combat racism , especially as it is defined in the final document from the Durban Conference .
I think that the European Union must reflect on the response to be given to this invitation .
In any case , the European Union has adopted a policy of actively fighting racism .
The Union must remain vigilant and committed so that international efforts on this issue can remain demonstrably effective .
I personally share the view expressed here : a Europe with a strategy and which did not act in a disorganised manner would surely have been able to take real advantage of this opportunity to express , with one voice , its opposition to unacceptable statements .
Let this be a lesson to us .
I am grateful to the Presidency for having said that this should serve as a lesson and that - fortified , I trust , by the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon - we must be able to make the European Union 's external human rights policy , and thus European action in multilateral bodies , more effective .
I can only add my voice , on this issue , to the speeches made by a number of Members , to whom I am grateful .
Once again , this must encourage us to reflect in order to prepare more effective strategies in the future .
The debate is closed .
Human rights in the world 2008 and the EU 's policy on the matter ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Obiols i Germà , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2008 and the European Union 's policy on the matter .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to make some brief comments on the content of this annual report on human rights in the world and the role of the European Union in that field .
Firstly , I would like to point out that the report has two different scopes : the first is to describe and assess the situation , which is unfortunately a negative one , of human rights in many countries and regions of the world , often bordering on or entering into the territory of human tragedy ; the second is an assessment based on the past experience of this Parliament in the adoption of positions in response to various problems , and also based on a wish on the rapporteur 's part for the report to be situated within the mainstream of the positions and acts of the various European Union institutions , not seeking to emphasise elements of disagreement , but rather , at heart , aspects of agreement .
This is because the rapporteur believes that achieving convergent positions produces power and effectiveness in this slow and difficult task of improving the state of human rights in the world .
There is also a second aspect on which I have placed particular stress , and that is to try to identify specific priorities , or , in other words , to produce a summary of what the basic guiding elements of action by the European Union with regard to human rights throughout the world might be .
I would set out nine points on this issue which have been clearly picked out by all the contributions made by my fellow Members and by the report 's general framework .
The first places an urgent priority , if you like , using a term which is a little grandiloquent in historical terms , on the struggle for the definitive abolition of the death penalty throughout the world .
Just as our forebears succeeded in the past in their goal of eradicating slavery everywhere , our perception is that today , for our generation , it is perfectly possible to achieve the historic goal of the universal abolition of the death penalty worldwide , and that the European Union must be in the vanguard and play a key role on this issue .
Secondly , special emphasis is placed on what the report calls ' the feminisation of the struggle for human rights ' .
In other words , it points out that women are the section of humanity that suffers the most from attacks on human rights and that the EU ought to pay special attention and give particular priority to that fact .
Also forming part of this priority is the issue of children 's human rights , on which the report contains several points that I believe are quite interesting .
Thirdly , the report calls for synergy between the Community institutions .
It is not a given that there is a specialisation of roles - more realpolitik at the Council or , possibly , at the Commission , and more principles at Parliament - but there needs to be consistency between their positions in order to improve efficiency .
Fourthly , there is mention of the need to broaden and deepen the very positive trend of development of dialogue on human rights with non-EU countries .
Finally , the report mentions the need to seek alliances within international institutions in order to avoid situations such as that of the United Nations Human Rights Council , where at times the European Union 's presence is , in a certain sense , in the minority .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I would like to express the appreciation of the Council for the work of the rapporteur , Mr Obiols i Germà , and Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights .
Mr Obiols i Germà , you have been a tireless and valuable partner in our collective work on human rights issues throughout this parliamentary term .
Your report offers us an opportunity to scrutinise the Union 's overall policy in the field of human rights .
We are very well aware of the challenges we continue to face in this area .
The strengthening of relations between the EU institutions helps us face these challenges together .
The report provides us with a valuable tool to look back at what has been achieved .
The European Parliament report underlines the relevance of the European Union Annual Report on Human Rights .
Our attempt to make the report more interesting , readable and useful has been partly successful , but there is clearly room for further improvement .
We will continue to work on this .
Your report will certainly help us in our reflections on how to increase coherence generally across the EU 's human rights policies .
Discussions are under way on this issue and I would like to assure you that , whatever the outcome of these discussions , we will make every effort to bring greater visibility to our work on human rights issues .
This could be through more effective use of web sources or by better publicising the annual report .
You have also underlined that more attention needs to be given to the role of the UN in this area .
We have continued to undertake coordinated efforts in international fora , most particularly the UN Human Rights Council , as recommended in the Andrikienreport , as well as at the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly .
Efforts are being made to improve our efforts at outreach in an increasingly difficult environment .
This is not easy , but I would like to draw your attention to a number of successes .
We have worked hard to ensure that the UN Human Rights Council gains greater credibility .
2009 can be regarded as a key test year for the functioning of the Human Rights Council .
The EU played an active role at the 10th session of the Human Rights Council and secured the adoption of a number of important initiatives , for example the extension of mandates on Burma / Myanmar and the DPRK and the EU-GRULAC resolution on the rights of the child .
More disappointingly , we failed to reintroduce the mandate of an independent expert on the DRC .
In the General Assembly , the role of the Third Committee in protecting and promoting human rights has been confirmed , and the EU took an active role at the 63rd Session of the UN General Assembly .
This has led to positive results , in particular the follow-up resolution on the death penalty .
A significant part of your report is dedicated to this issue .
We have raised it constantly , including at the highest level , with partners who share our views , in order to support the global trend towards abolition .
These efforts will continue .
Let me now say a few words on the EU guidelines .
Following revision of the European Union human rights guidelines and the adoption of new guidelines on violence against women , the focus is now on effective implementation .
As part of this , the Presidency put forward some proposals , such as arranging for guidance notes to be sent to Heads of Missions and Commission delegations .
We also intend to raise these issues in our dialogues and consultations with third countries .
The report draws attention to the issue of women 's rights , and I know that Mr Obiols i Germà pays particular attention to this issue .
This is one of our top priorities .
We are working on the implementation of the UN Council Resolution 1325 , which we are using as a guiding principle for ESDP operations and which has allowed us to develop a framework for gender mainstreaming .
On human rights defenders , the EU will continue to cooperate with civil society organisations .
Work at official level within the Council on the possibility of expanding the issuing of visas for human rights defenders is continuing .
In dialogues with third countries , freedom of expression and raising individual cases will remain central to our agenda .
As far as dialogues and consultations with third countries are concerned , the EU will make every effort to ensure that these instruments become ever more effective tools for the implementation of our human rights policy .
We have in particular agreed to hold local dialogues with five Latin American countries - Brazil , Colombia , Argentina , Chile and Mexico - and will continue to establish dialogues with the remaining central Asian countries .
I would like to say a few words about the 27th EU-China human rights dialogue to take place on 14 May in Prague .
It is important to ensure that our dialogues are as productive as possible and that they deliver substantive results .
The EU-China human rights dialogue is the longest-standing dialogue .
It needs to be able to adapt and reflect progress made in the way we address human rights issues .
Both of our institutions are following closely developments in China .
Various events scheduled throughout this year will enable us to maintain a close channel of communication with our Chinese counterparts .
This dialogue is valuable .
We look forward to seeing increasingly tangible results from these talks .
To conclude , I would like to underline that promotion of and respect for human rights across the world is one of our main priorities in external policy .
Through the use of démarches and statements , and through our various political dialogues and crisis management operations , the EU is working for improved respect for human rights worldwide .
To achieve results , we have to adopt a consistent approach .
This Parliament has been at the forefront in pushing for greater consistency at all levels and we very much welcome this .
I am very grateful in general for the work of this Parliament and its support on human rights issues .
The value of the Sakharov Prize as an instrument for the promotion of our shared values is widely recognised .
We will continue to review the extent to which the instruments of human rights clauses , sanctions and dialogue - all of which have been scrutinised extensively by this Parliament - can play an effective role as part of our overall external policy , whilst ensuring the highest standards of respect for human rights .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with great pleasure that I am participating in this debate in plenary on your report , Mr Obiols i Germà .
I am replacing my colleague Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , who is detained in Prague , attending the European UnionCanada summit .
I first wish to thank Mr Obiols i Germà for the quality of his work .
Thank you for giving a positive tone to your report which thus demonstrates the efforts expended over the years by the Commission and the Council to implement Parliament 's recommendations .
Whether in the framework of dialogues on human rights or in that of political dialogues within international bodies , the institutions have striven to advance , to give the European Union the image of an ambassador - a fervent and credible ambassador - for the protection and promotion of human rights , fundamental freedoms , democracy and the rule of law .
Last year , 2008 , was marked by the celebrations for the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which all the European institutions commemorated together .
It was also the year in which the Commission was able to single out two priorities , namely women and children , and in which an interinstitutional approach was promoted .
We have tried to implement several general recommendations that appeared in previous reports and which have been recast very well in the report that we are studying today .
We have agreed to focus our actions on certain countries as regards the application of the guidelines on the rights of the child , and we have mobilised the embassies of the Member States of the European Union and the European Community 's delegations to monitor these actions .
We have thus taken the lead in the fight against one of the worst forms of violation of human and children 's rights , in other words the enrolment of child soldiers and the sufferings inflicted on children in armed conflicts .
Allow me to give a few examples .
The Union adopted new guidelines on the rights of the child on 10 December 2007 .
In the first phase of implementation , it will focus its attention on violence against children .
We are launching a pilot programme aimed at 10 countries on different continents .
These countries have been chosen because their governments have already committed to combat violence against children , and also because their governments need additional international aid to continue to combat violence against children .
In June 2008 , the Council of the European Union revised the guidelines on children affected by armed conflicts in order to deal more effectively and more globally with the short- , medium- and long-term effects of armed conflicts on children .
Special provision is made in the Commission 's communication for children within the European Union 's external actions , and a consistent approach is recommended in order to advance the rights of the child and to improve the situation of children around the world .
The communication has been the subject of very broad consultation .
Special attention is paid in it to nongovernmental organisations .
On the basis of this communication and its related action plan , in May 2008 the Council of the European Union adopted conclusions aimed at strengthening the Union 's external policy on the rights of the child .
In 2009 , we are continuing down this path with the following initiatives .
In June the Commission will stage the European Forum on the Rights of the Child in Brussels .
This Forum will focus specifically on child labour .
We will strive to bring together all the stakeholders .
I personally place a great deal of importance on this forum .
In July , the future Swedish Presidency and the Commission will organise an NGO forum in Stockholm to deal specifically with violence against children .
Finally , during the autumn we will publish a report on the measures , especially those relating to trafficking , taken by the Union to combat child labour .
That , then , is a year which should further develop the European Union 's commitment to children .
I will now turn to women 's rights .
In recent months , the European Union has strengthened its external policy on women 's rights .
The new guidelines on violence against women and the fight against all forms of discrimination against them recommend a certain number of actions .
These actions will benefit from the commitment and support of the Union 's missions and the Commission 's delegations .
I wish to point out the recent adoption by the EU foreign ministers of the Union 's global approach to the implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1325 and 1820 .
We should also recall the positive response of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral to the joint appeal launched in 2008 by Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and 40 women who occupy prominent positions at international level .
This appeal called on the United Nations to organise a ministerial conference dedicated to the review of Resolution 1325 .
This ministerial conference is now planned for 2010 .
Evidently , we will work with the future Swedish Presidency in the preparation of the positions that we will have to take when reviewing this resolution .
That is all , Mr President ; there is no doubt more to be said , but I would again like to stress that strengthening European policy in favour of democracy and human rights does , of course , demand a high level of synergy between the institutions .
The Commission is prepared to act along these lines .
It wishes to establish close cooperation so that our three institutions can really offer each other mutual support .
In this respect , the European Parliament can play an essential role since , by definition and by vocation , it is best placed to speak on behalf of the oppressed and those who are suffering .
Those are the items that I wished to share with you following the Presidency 's speech , and I am now going to listen carefully to the Member 's speeches .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank our colleague , Raimon Obiols , for his report and resolution .
The draft of the resolution we voted on in the Foreign Affairs Committee was balanced .
Compromises have been reached .
A long list of important issues on human rights are covered by the report and I hope that the resolution will be voted tomorrow with a big majority in favour .
Having said this , I would like to highlight some issues and point out a very controversial amendment tabled before the plenary session .
I speak about the amendment tabled by our ALDE colleagues .
As we all agree that our Union is based on values , including Christian values , how can anyone imagine that this Parliament will finish its term condemning the Pope , Benedict XVI , for his declarations ?
My position is that the wording used by the signatories of the amendment is absolutely unacceptable and should be declined .
Human rights defenders , I suggest that in the resolution we , the European Parliament , should reiterate our demand that all winners of the Sakharov Prize and , in particular , Aung San Suu Kyi , Oswalda Payá Sardiñas , the Cuban Damas de Blanco and Hu Jia be given access to the European institutions .
We regret the fact that none of them were allowed to participate in the 20th anniversary ceremony of the Sakharov Prize .
Last but not least is the fight against terrorism and human rights .
I suggest that the European Parliament call on the European Union and its Member States to carry out the fight against terrorism in full respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms as one of the main priorities of the Union and a key element of its external actions .
Mentioning specific names in our resolution would be counterproductive .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , can I congratulate my friend and colleague Raimon Obiols i Germà on this report .
As one of this Parliament 's annual human rights rapporteurs earlier during the mandate , and also as the Socialist Group 's Vice-Chair of our Subcommittee on Human Rights , in this debate nearing the end of the five years of this European Parliament , I want to commend to the House what we have achieved .
I believe that we have coordinated well with the Parliament 's delegations so that MEPs across this House have asked hard questions of governments in our representations worldwide , a process that I have been proud to take part in myself : from Columbia to Turkey , Georgia to Croatia .
I am deeply proud of the work of the committee and of MEPs in relation to building democracy and election monitoring .
Indeed my own experiences in Afghanistan , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , the Palestinian Territories and Angola have been some of the most special experiences for me during the last five years .
I am deeply proud of the fact that we have engaged and represented this Parliament - I think excellently - in relation to the Human Rights Council in Geneva .
I think we have had real influence there .
We have tried to move Europe away from a block mentality to reach out to other regions of the world , and of course we have worked closely with the special representatives and rapporteurs , including the recent visit I helped host of the UN Special Representative on business and human rights , an issue which is a passionate one for me .
I am delighted that we campaigned and were at the forefront of the campaign for the European Communities to sign up for the first time to a human rights instrument , the UN Convention on the Rights of Disabled People .
I am delighted , Commissioner , that , despite opposition initially from within the Commission , this Parliament insisted that we maintain a separate initiative on democracy and human rights , so that our funding for human rights is visible , is prominent and continues even in countries with regimes that wish to resist human rights .
We are often commended for our work on human rights in this House but I commend the bravery and the courage of the human rights defenders whom we meet and talk to daily , who put their lives on the line for values and standards that are universal in our world and are precious to us all .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , it is always difficult to highlight a few points in a resolution like this one , because it can so easily turn into a Christmas tree .
However , the rapporteur has done an excellent piece of work and the points he has just raised , such as the death penalty , must , indeed , remain an absolute priority in all of our efforts in the field of human rights .
He is quite right to say so , therefore .
I also think that the subject of women 's involvement in human rights issues has been paid too little attention for far too long , certainly if we consider women in their role as ' human rights defenders ' .
As regards this point , my group will not go as far as addressing issues concerning the use of sexist language .
I do not believe that you can solve such problems with a kind of newspeak or political correctness , but it is only right that this problem has been placed on the agenda .
The same holds true for children .
The resolution says some very good things about children and , I refer , in particular , to the text about child sex tourism .
As regards this particular topic , we , together with a few other MEPs , have launched a campaign which more than 37 000 people have now signed up to on the Internet .
Unfortunately , we still have a situation where hundreds of European men are flying to South-East Asia , Latin America and Africa every week in order to abuse children there - sometimes very small children - and it really is high time that Europe took action on this front .
I am pleased to see that Commissioner Barrot is here with us today because he , in particular , has stuck his neck out and put forward some very good proposals .
I think that sends out an important signal .
Human rights are still somewhat the Cinderella of European foreign policy .
If you look at our foreign policy , you will see that it is still very much dominated by trade facilitation and similar things .
I think that human rights must be given a much higher priority .
In addition , I would call on the Commission , in particular , to pay more attention to the issue of Internet censorship because , on this score , Members of the four large groups of this House have launched an initiative for a Global Online Freedom Act based on the proposals put forward by the US Congress .
I understand that some commissioners , Mrs Reding and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , for example , have shown an interest in this .
I hope that we are really going to come up with some concrete proposals on this score because , although paying cash on the nail is important , we must also be prepared to promote our European approach to human rights and democracy .
Madam President , once again we are dealing with a report on human rights which has been written under the dictates of ideology .
Today 's left-wing ideology is completely blind to issues of religious freedom in different parts of the world .
Christians are persecuted in China , India , Iran , Vietnam , Russia , and recently also in Pakistan .
In spite of the clear provisions of Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 9 of the European Convention , the Left is not interested in religious freedom .
Instead , left-wing ideology concentrates pathologically on the principle of non-discrimination against sexual minorities , which is not so strongly enshrined in international law .
The proposal of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to attack the Holy Father Benedict XVI for statements he made in Africa is a real curiosity .
It seems the liberals have forgotten the principle of the separation of the church from public life , of which they often used to remind us .
It turns out that today the liberals are demanding subordination of religious institutions to the State and public authority .
This demand is directed against the freedom of the church and freedom of speech , and adoption of that proposal means that we will vote against the report .
Madam President , the annual report prepared by Mr Obiols i Germà is excellent .
Its aim , like that of all of the activities carried out in this parliamentary term by the Subcommittee on Human Rights , is to fill the gap between word and deed in Europe 's external action and to root out any inconsistencies and weaknesses in our policy , beginning with the Member States , which are too often at odds with international law .
It is enough to mention the treatment inflicted on migrants , the cooperation with the CIA 's secret flights or the failure to ratify international conventions .
The Council 's requirements too are inconsistent .
How does one explain that the Council has not yet given the go-ahead to implement Article 2 of the association agreement with Israel after the persistent violations that we are observing ?
Our policies are compartmentalised .
They therefore often lack a global perspective and are not integrated , and our instruments are not optimised , are not put in sequence .
Imagine this : the Council has published a communication to welcome its human rights subcommittee with Tunisia , even though with that country we are still unable to support human rights activists because of the barriers it is putting up .
In our successive own-initiative reports , we have put forward specific recommendations , such as the drafting of human rights strategies by country and the more direct participation of Members in the policies , and we have succeeded in shifting the boundaries .
I am thinking of the guidelines on torture , for example .
Today , human rights activists are better protected , and I welcome the fact that human rights clauses are now being studied in the Council and the Commission .
Moreover , I wish to point out on this occasion that we would like this clause to be reworded .
We would like a mechanism regulating the opening of a dialogue to be implemented and to appear systematically in all European Union agreements .
For five years we have been ready to start work with the Council and the Commission to improve the Union 's policy .
The task is under way , today at least , and I would like warmly to thank them , since their receptiveness , and that of all my fellow Members , has been essential to this success and to the increased credibility that we have , today , in this area .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , we continue to witness the fact that , in the world outside Europe , governments are killing people for acts which we do not consider liable to punishment , or which merit , at most , a light punishment .
We still have regimes which attempt to cling on to power by resorting to violence , we still have people who are being discriminated against and there are still people living in miserable and humiliating conditions below the poverty line .
There are still population groups without their own state who feel that the government of the state in which they find themselves would prefer it if they left the country in order to make room for people who belong to the majority group .
There are governments which take no interest in certain sections of their population and which refuse to tackle their problems .
In Europe , we agree that this is unacceptable , but we continue to operate double standards .
Countries whose friendship we want to maintain , because they are large and economically powerful , or those which are important trading partners or whom we see as our allies , are able to get away with more than small , powerless countries .
We have to put a stop to that .
Otherwise , the reliability of our statistics on human rights abuses will be called into question .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , as the rapporteur responsible for monitoring relations between the European Union and China , it pleases me enormously to see that paragraphs 80 and 87 of the present report dedicate substantial attention to the seriousness of the human rights situation in China .
However , there is one serious violation of human rights in the People 's Republic of China which has not be included in the report , and by this I mean the political misuse of psychiatry against dissidents .
This perversion of healthcare goes under the name ankang , which , distressingly enough , means ' health through rest ' , and it is true enough : if you knock people out with tranquilisers , they will be tranquilised .
Officially , China has always strenuously denied all the allegations about the ankang system mentioned in my report .
What I very much look forward to , however , is receiving information from the Commission about the political misuse of psychiatry by Beijing .
I was very interested to hear that the Czech Presidency has just announced that a human rights meeting will be taking place next week .
I would , therefore , ask the Czech Presidency to enter the issue of political psychiatry in China on the agenda for this meeting .
I would be grateful if you could do so , especially in the light of the Chinese denials .
Madam President , I would like to conclude by saying that , one year ago , I visited China personally and experienced the kinds of things that members of Protestant home churches have been going through .
Any of them who show any intention of speaking to a foreigner are punished with lengthy police detention or preventive intimidation .
Fortunately , the three Chinese people whom I later spoke to were released relatively quickly .
Occurrences like this can be prevented when the Commission and Parliament take adequate action , as Mr Jarzembowski has said .
I thank him for mentioning that .
For me , this is conclusive evidence that the European Union can be effective when it comes to protecting human rights .
That gives us hope for the future .


( ES ) Madam President , the report presented to us by Mr Obiols i Germà on human rights in the world demonstrates this Parliament 's total and permanent commitment to the cause of human rights in the world ; as I have said on other occasions , this cause must not just apply to one region , country or continent , but must be of a global or universal nature .
The report on the state of human rights presents us with a situation , in countries such as Iran , China or Russia , in Guantánamo and in other countries , such as Cuba , where the exercise of a fundamental right was not permitted .
The issue in question was not permitting the group known as the ' Damas de Blanco ' ( Ladies in White ) to come to accept the Sakharov Prize , to enter and to leave their own country ; similar abuses occur in other countries , as is the case in Nicaragua and Venezuela , which will be the subject of a separate resolution , to be voted on tomorrow .

This situation shows us how far we are from achieving respect for human rights in all the regions of the world , despite our efforts .
Madam President , I would like to refer to the amendment tabled by some of my fellow Members asking this Parliament to condemn the head of an institution which , with all the errors that may have been committed in over two millennia and for which apologies have been made on many occasions , has been distinguished by a truly determined defence of human dignity .
The fact that the Pope , as the spiritual leader of hundreds of millions of people , and as the head of a sovereign state , cannot give his opinion on a sensitive current issue , honestly , without being condemned , seems to me , to be frank , an act of intolerance .
Madam President , I believe that the amendment is grotesque .
I have worked with the authors of this amendment on other occasions , but I believe that , at the present time , in tabling this amendment they are confusing adjectives and nouns , what is accessory with what is fundamental .
I believe that the fundamental thing is to have respect for the opinions of others , even if they are not the same as ours , without condemning anyone , and , Madam President , that also means not confusing the shadows cast by a picture with the picture itself .
( EL ) Madam President , the debate in the European Parliament on human rights in the world is one of the high points in the political process .
However , the Union can exert its influence , as regards the defence of human rights in the world , only if it sets an example in this sector from within .
The inclusion of the human rights clause in all negotiations is a major victory , but the results must be evaluated at regular intervals so that policies and initiatives can be adjusted .
In a general context , the abolition of the death penalty and of torture is still our basic priority and the Union must step up its activities in these sectors .
Finally , we must not forget that 2008 ended with the tragic events in Gaza , where human rights were blatantly infringed and experimental and banned weapons were used by the Israeli forces .
As the European Parliament , we have an obligation to call for full light to be shed on this issue , to closely monitor research and to push for responsibility to be apportioned for any infringements of international humanitarian law .
The international community should not demonstrate the slightest tolerance of war crimes , wherever and by whomever they are committed .
Finally , I should like to thank our rapporteur for his excellent work .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Obiols i Germà , on his very good report .
Things look very bad for respect for human rights in many countries worldwide .
This is also of relevance for Europe - when we think of Belarus for instance .
The European Union must therefore redouble its efforts by implementing its human rights policy in all areas and by setting clear standards .
It is our understanding that human rights are indivisible .
This can be taken into consideration for example during the negotiations for a new agreement with Russia through a binding human rights clause , which will influence all areas of the negotiations .
I should also like to suggest once again that the Subcommittee on Human Rights be made a standing committee .
Madam President , the human rights situation in the world looks grim , and several large countries - important partners of the EU - are being mentioned .
Therefore , it is important that Parliament 's resolution insists on greater attention being paid to human rights , especially political rights , in the negotiation and implementation of bilateral trade agreements , even when concluded with important trade partners .
So the question is : what can we do in practical terms to improve the situation ?
Maybe we should start with attempts to ' de-Schröderise ' Europe .
However , democratic countries cannot avoid their part in responsibility for this grim situation in large parts of the world .
Let us take Russia .
On the EU-Russia human rights consultations , Parliament 's conclusion is devastating .
The EU has not succeeded in bringing about any change of policy in Russia , particularly as regards the independence of the judiciary , treatment of human rights defenders and political prisoners .
The Khodorkovsky case is just symbolic .
One month of his second trial has shown the scope of change that has happened in the last six years .
The judiciary in criminal cases has been totally subordinated to state power .
Finally , I would like to stress Parliament 's message to the Council to respond in a substantive manner , especially to Parliament 's urgency resolutions .
The European Parliament embodies , in the best possible way , the democratic conscience of our planet .
It reacts rapidly and resolutely to the human tragedies all around the world .
However , to have a real impact on the human rights situation , we expect the Council 's rapid and positive reaction .
It is often also the problem of values versus economic interest .
( DE ) Madam President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats calls on the Government and the Communist Party of China to conduct the upcoming human rights dialogue in a constructive manner .
This would significantly ease relations between the EU and China .
We have a genuine interest in improving bilateral relations .
However , this dialogue must be conducted honestly .
We will therefore have to uphold our legitimate demands on China .
In our view , the civil rights campaigner , Hu Jia , must be released immediately .
Talks with the Dalai Lama , the religious leader of the Tibetans , must be resumed .
The Chinese region of Tibet must be opened up to journalists and UN human rights experts .
In my opinion , the People 's Republic of China demonstrated in the run-up to the Olympic Games that it could , for example , grant more press freedom while preserving the stability of the country .
Now , it should have the courage to initiate reforms relating to reeducation camps , the rights of defendants , the death penalty , religious freedom and freedom of assembly .
It should genuinely tackle these human rights and hold talks with us .
Madam President , my congratulations to the rapporteur and to other colleagues .
But this report has to be more than just words in a document .
It has to be a report for action .
Paragraph 1 says : ' Considers that the EU needs to move towards a coherent and consistent policy of upholding and promoting human rights around the world ' and to do so ' more effectively ' .
I want to address my remarks to the situation in Sri Lanka , and several points in this report are applicable there .
Paragraph 63 refers to the recruitment of child soldiers , which I , and I am sure other colleagues , deplore .
I think it is paragraph 48 that refers to the death penalty .
Since the beginning of the year , some 5 000 civilians have been killed by attacks by the Sri Lankan Government on their own territory : tantamount , I would suggest , to the death penalty and the death of innocent citizens .
The Sri Lankan Government and their military stand accused of a string of human rights abuses of their own people , from bombing of hospitals , the use of illegal weapons to denying humanitarian and medical ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( FR ) Madam President , I well understand the motives of my colleagues from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe for tabling Amendment 2 on the fight against AIDS , and I would stress that , in general , I share these motives .
However , I oppose this amendment .
The Catholic Church is independent of the Member States and has the right to fight against AIDS in its own way , even if we believe that this could be done better .
In essence , it is not fair and not reasonable to launch a fierce attack on the Pope just before the European elections .
Doing so could cause deeper divisions in our societies and lead many people to call into question the value of their participation .
Harsh condemnation by Parliament of the spiritual leader of millions and millions of believers would be a serious mistake .
- ( SK ) As someone who is very familiar with the Cuban situation I would like to point out some facts relating to Cuba .
I consider it essential to keep Articles 84 and 96 in the report .
In Article 84 the European Parliament again confirmed its position in relation to the Cuban holders of the Sakharov Prize , Oswaldo Paya Sardinas and the Women in White group .
Article 96 welcomes the start of dialogue on human rights with Latin American countries , requesting the release of political prisoners and the observance of human rights .
I would also like to point out that the table of the report includes only two cases of human rights ' violations in Cuba , whereas dozens more could be added .
For example , 49-year old Librado Linares Garcia , ' Black Spring ' victim and husband of one of the Women in White , is suffering from multiple diseases in prison , including an eye infection which has caused the gradual loss of sight in one eye and is now in the second eye as well .
This man has been given no health care in prison .
Madam President , to be critical of others in a credible way , one has first to be critical of oneself .
In this respect , as we condemn human rights violations around the world , we must always bear in the mind the human rights violations that take place within the EU .
Let me remind you of two examples .
Firstly , Turkey , a candidate Member State , for the last 35 years has kept the northern part of Cyprus under military occupation , having violently expelled around 200 000 people from their homes .
In Turkish-Army-occupied Cypriot territory , more than 500 Christian churches and monasteries have been subjected to destruction and hundreds of Christian cemeteries have been desecrated .
Today 1 600 EU citizens are still missing since the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus .
Secondly , Britain .
A Member State keeps under the sovereignty of its crown two colonies in Cyprus : the areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia .
Thousands of civilians - EU citizens - living in these areas are subjected to ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , I am a bit surprised at the qualifications of my amendment as ' grotesque ' and ' unacceptable ' .
I think nobody is above criticism - not even the Pope - and in this House we have always strongly criticised the US gag rule under the Bush Administration , which does not go as far as the Pope 's statements .
The Pope should know that he is a very important , influential religious leader and that his words carry weight and may directly and indirectly lead to thousands , even millions , of AIDS deaths .
I think it is only right that this House should criticise it .
Secondly , the EU has always been a driving force for human rights but we are losing credibility .
Over the last eight years we have lost our moral authority because of our support for the way in which the US has fought terrorism .
I think it is high time that the EU follows the example of the Obama Administration and comes clear on our role in the fight against terrorism .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , before I start my concluding remarks I would like to inform the honourable Members of the outcome of the discussion in the Czech Senate on the Lisbon Treaty .
I am glad to announce to you that the majority of the Senators voted in favour of the Lisbon Treaty .
( Applause )
Thank you very much .
This is a small moment of joy in our Presidency .
Continuing with the subject , let me once again thank the rapporteur for his work and for the difficult exercise carried out in drafting his report .
He identified several priorities , on which I would like to spend a few moments in my remarks .
On the death penalty , it is clear that we must make abolition the achievement of our generation .
On women 's rights , I see this issue as being of particular relevance , especially in the light of the growing involvement of the EU in ESDP operations and missions in areas where women remain under threat and victims of the worst human rights violation .
I am thinking in particular of the DRC and Afghanistan , where we have EU missions and where we definitely need to do all we can do to improve the situation .
One of the key challenges we face internally is the greater mainstreaming of human rights across the ESDP and CFSP , which was also mentioned during the debate .
The Presidencies , together with the Personal Representative for Human Rights of the Secretary-General 's High Representative , have continued to mainstream human rights into relevant geographical and thematical working parties and into political dialogue .
The Presidency continues the efforts of previous presidencies to promote the mainstreaming of human rights into the activities of the Special Representative , as well as into ESDP operations .
In this context , Mr Solana 's personal representative , Mrs Kionka , organised a workshop with EU special representatives and high representatives on focal points intended to provide a toolbox to help them in their daily work of promoting human rights .
Last but not least we have identified the fight for universal human rights as one of the main challenges we face in international fora .
I believe we have to double our efforts in reaching out to governments .
We must support emerging civil society organisations and human rights defenders who , internally , are the best advocates of the protection of human rights .
Democracies owe a lot to the emerging movements of citizens who , like Charter 77 in its time in my country , can be instrumental in bringing about change .
I should first like to welcome this good news , after these setbacks , as it opens the way to this Treaty of Lisbon which we so want and which includes - and I am not forgetting it in this debate - the Charter on Fundamental Rights .
I am also extremely grateful that the European Parliament has , in some way , become a sounding board for all the legitimate demands that fall under the defence of human rights .
I must say that we are proud in Europe to have a Parliament as sensitive as yours to all the problems in the world which involve human rights , the rights of the child and the rights of women subject to violence and acts of discrimination .
You mentioned all these ongoing tasks following on from the excellent report by your rapporteur , Mr Obiols i Germà , whom I wish to thank once more .
I wish to say how much we want this cooperation with the European Parliament to continue , and Mrs FerreroWaldner would perhaps have expressed better than I the extent to which this European Union external policy should be inspired by a number of values , these values that the European Parliament has just recalled in the various speeches .
You will allow me in turn to speak of my absolute hostility to the death penalty and also to torture .
On this point , I would like all the same to stress that the European Union is pleased today to see the United States , with President Obama , closing the book on certain excesses that may have been committed in the fight against terrorism .
This is important news and should further strengthen our determination to fight against all forms of torture in the world .
This is a personal commitment that is very dear to my heart .
I also want to stress the European Union 's role in the many election assistance and observation missions , which also , of course , helps to defend and promote democracy around the world .
We know about the relationship between democracy and respect for human rights .
This too , I believe , is to the credit of the European Union .
I could have responded to more specific questions about children .
I have had the Commission adopt the review of the framework decision on the sexual exploitation of children , so that , among other things - since a speech referred to this issue - our Member States will be able to prosecute sex tourism , even if the acts were not committed in Europe .
This will open the way to a highly desirable clean-up operation in this area .
I cannot provide all the answers that your excellent speeches deserve , Madam President , but I must thank the European Parliament for being so vigilant in this area , which ultimately shows the best of our European Community - our attachment to common values .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to make two very rapid points .
The first is that , with regard to human rights , the best policy is undoubtedly one that is able to unite people ; therefore , if the report contains one message more important than the rest , it is the message of unity .
This means , first of all , unity between the EU Member States , since recently we have had problems in that regard that ought to be resolved as quickly as possible ; secondly , it means unity between the institutions ; and , thirdly , it means unity or convergence between approaches and focuses .
Between realpolitik , which looks the other way when there is an infringement of human rights , in sway to other interests , and half-heartedness , there is a path of political will and political intelligence which is the one we must follow .
The second point is that , naturally , if we are in favour of the effectiveness that is gained through unity , then the majority in the vote on this report , tomorrow , will be all the greater , and its future implementation will be all the more effective .
On this point , I would like to say that when voting on the amendments the fundamental priority ought to be a quest for the broadest possible majority in the House ; not for personal reasons , since reports are not subject to copyright , but through a desire for political effectiveness in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Before coming to the next report , I would like to take advantage of the fact that I am in the chair for the last time , and that this is in fact a report that involves my own committee , and , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take advantage of your presence to tell you how much I have enjoyed working with you over the last 10 years , and the last five years have been extraordinary .
I wish especially to thank Commissioner Barrot , who has supported us with kindness - I should say with his kindly authority - and I am also especially grateful to the chairman of our committee , Mr Deprez , and to all my colleagues .
I am not going to mention you all , but Mrs HennisPlasschaert is here , Mrs in 't Weld is here , Mrs Lambert is here , and Mr Busuttil , Mr Masip Hidalgo and Mrs Dührkop Dührkop are too ; I would really like to thank you all and , well , to say goodbye .
Perhaps I will have the chance to see you again .
It is not I who will be in the chair this time .
I think I will just take responsibility for the introduction and then Mr McMillan-Scott will take over .
If you do not mind then ...
Thank you .
( Applause )
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
European Refugee Fund for the period 2008-2013 ( amendment of Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC ) - Minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers ( recast ) - Application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by third-country nationals or stateless persons ( recast ) - Establishment of ' Eurodac ' for the comparison of fingerprints ( recast ) - Establishment of a European Asylum Support Office ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC establishing the European Refugee Fund for the period 2008 to 2013 by removing funding for certain Community actions and altering the limit for funding such actions - C6-0070 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Masip Hidalgo , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers ( recast ) - C6-0477 / 2008 - ,
the report by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person ( recast ) - C6-0474 / 2008 - ,
the report by Mr Popa , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the establishment of ' Eurodac ' for the comparison of fingerprints for the effective application of Regulation ( EC ) No [ ... / ... ] [ establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person ] ( recast ) - C6-0475 / 2008 - , and
the report by Mrs Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Asylum Support Office - C6-0071 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I have the honour of starting this joint debate on five very important reports on establishing a common European policy on asylum .
Mine is limited to the amendment of the European Refugee Fund , the ERF , with a view to reallocating funds in order to create a European Asylum Support Office , which will have the institutional status of a regulatory agency .
One of the agency 's responsibilities will be to promote and enhance practical cooperation between Member States in order to assist with the implementation of the common European asylum system .
Since some of the tasks currently assigned and funded under the ERF will now be carried out by the Office - this applies , for instance , to the promotion of good practices , the interpretation and translation services and support for the development and application of common statistics , with the aim of transparency and sound management of resources -some of the ERF funds need to be transferred to the Office .
Current rules stipulate that 10 % of the Fund 's resources be allocated to these tasks .
The Commission is proposing to us that this percentage be reduced to 4 % and that the balance of the resources be transferred to the new Office .
In this way , the Fund 's financial allocation for the 2008-2013 period would be reduced from EUR 628 million to EUR 614 million .
We agree with the Commission that these amounts are sufficient for the first phase of the Fund up until 2013 , which is when a revision is scheduled .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has seen fit to entrust to me the welcome task of arguing for the advisability of creating this Office .
The proposal has been approved unanimously by the two committees concerned : the Committee on Civil Liberties and the Committee on Budgets .
Although Parliament , as we know , is reluctant to see new agencies created , as a budgetary authority its principal concern is the correct , reasonable management of the resources allocated , in this case to ensure practical cooperation between the Member States on asylum .
We all know that the acceptance rates for asylum applications vary considerably among the Member States , resulting in multiplemanagement difficulties for the host Member State .
This is particularly true for states situated at the southern borders of the European Union , which regularly find themselves overwhelmed by large numbers of people suddenly arriving at their borders , in view of the fact that it is also necessary for them to identify , from among all these people , those that require protection .
Offering support in relation to resettlement and the internal , voluntary transfer of asylum seekers are the best evidence and expression of solidarity which the Member States ought to display .
This is , and also should be , the main objective of creating this Office .
Madam President , that is the end of my speech on the subject we are dealing with at the moment and , like you , I would like to dedicate a few minutes , which are my last , to saying some words of farewell .
This is my last speech in this plenary session .
Like you , Madam President , I would also like to thank all the Members of this House , my group colleagues , the Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties and my fellow Members on the committee for the collaboration we have enjoyed over the past years .
We have had debates , and we have not always been in agreement , but I believe that in the end we have always produced good work to bring to the plenary session of this Parliament .
Madam President , when I first came here 22 years ago , I arrived at the European Economic Community with its 12 Member States .
I am happy that what I am leaving now is a European Union with 27 members .
It has been a true privilege to be in the very engine-house of European integration .
It has been a unique , magnificent experience .
Madam President , I also believe that one of the greatest successes has been to achieve the ' never again ' which was at the root of the creation of European unification ; I think that we can congratulate ourselves on this .
As I leave , I am very happy to have had the opportunity of having this experience and I do ask for your understanding , because I am now going to absent myself from this debate .
I am returning to the Basque Country , where we are experiencing some historic events : after 30 years of a Basque nationalist government , we are going to have a socialist president of the Basque Country , Patxi López , and I would like to represent my political group tomorrow when he takes office .
Thank you very much , and goodbye for the last time .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has visited centres for immigrants in various parts of Europe - as have you yourself , Madam President , with particular eagerness - and has observed hugely differing conditions and intolerable situations that must be put right .
Asylum seekers , however , are not comparable to illegal immigrants .
Asylum seekers are fleeing situations of persecution ; they are not attracted by economic factors , but are expelled by regimes that are opposed to freedom .
We Spaniards are well aware of this , since so many of us , as Republican exiles , were taken in by Mexico , France and other countries .
When the Return Directive was debated , it was made very clear that that piece of legislation would not apply to the future legislation on the reception of asylum seekers ; fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats said the same thing .
In my view it is vital for asylum seekers to be given information in a language that they understand .
Restricting the provision of information to an asylum seeker to a language he understands or may be presumed to understand lowers the existing requirements and would not be acceptable , I believe , from a legal viewpoint or in terms of the interpretation of human rights .
The right to be properly informed is fundamental , because it forms the basis of all other rights .
I have studied the financial cost of my proposal on material assistance .
My proposal asks that assistance to asylum seekers should guarantee adequate living standards , providing them with sustenance and protecting their physical and mental health .
To ask for less would be , in my view , to insult the dignity of asylum seekers .
My proposal clarifies the second ground for detention ( Article 8 ( 2 ) ( b ) ) , placing it within the framework of a preliminary interview in accordance with the guidelines for detention laid down by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
I also propose , in Article 9 ( 5 ) ( 1 ) , an ex officio review by the judicial authorities of the detention when there is a change of circumstances or fresh information becomes available , at the request of the asylum seeker or , as I was saying earlier , in the absence of that , automatically .
Oral Amendment 2 and Compromise Amendment 5 , adopted in committee , raise the issue of establishing legal assistance only in so far as necessary , and free of charge , at the request of the asylum seeker .
I am asking for split voting on these two points , to go back to legal assistance which is closer to being free of charge , as I believe to be right .
Finally , if the initial proposals for social benefits to immigrants are reduced , as other groups have achieved in the voting in committee , then I think it is necessary , even though we are currently in a period of crisis , to ensure effective access to the labour market .
In this way , asylum seekers will gain independence , integrate into the host society and reduce the social expenditure allocated to them .
I would also like to extend my warm thanks to Mr Barrot and his Commission for all the efforts he has made throughout the course of this directive .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , allow me , first of all , to make a few general remarks .
I have been heavily involved in drafting European asylum and immigration policy over the past few years on behalf of my group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
I am sure that virtually everyone can see the usefulness and necessity of such a policy .
After all , what a Europe without internal borders is crying out for is a common approach in this field .
Having said that , I would point out that the standards we have agreed on and the results we have achieved to date contrast greatly with the ambitions set out in the Tampere Programme , the Hague Programme and , most recently , the French Asylum and Immigration Pact .
The problem is that , every time the Council has to take a concrete decision , the highest common denominator suddenly seems to become the lowest one , and so the desired harmonisation effect fails to materialise .
In addition , when it comes to transposition into national legislation , many Member States have failed to live up to the agreements we have struck , both in terms of timing and accuracy .
What this has led to , in practice , is enormous differences between the Member States .
This is not only causing confusion , but also playing into the hands of those who are abusing the system .
It seems that the Council has either completely or partially failed to grasp the fact that improving quality and ensuring greater consistency and solidarity is not only in the interests of the asylum seeker , but also in the interests of the Member States themselves .
As far as my own report is concerned , I would like to say the following : the existing Dublin Regulation is also the product of a fragile political compromise reached in the Council .
As a result , we now have a text which contains too many ambiguous passages and gaps .
I wholeheartedly support the Commission 's aspiration to create a uniform and efficient Dublin system .
In my view , Article 31 is the most important political element in the proposed recast .
As I more or less said just now , I see the lack of consistency and solidarity on the Council 's part as the biggest stumbling block to achieving a common asylum and immigration policy .
From that perspective alone , I can very well understand the provisions of Article 31 of the Commission 's proposal .
However , the fact remains that the Dublin system was not developed as , nor is it intended to be , an instrument for burden-sharing .
Another thing that is patently obvious is that the Dublin system did not emerge , in its own right , as a response to exceptional asylum pressure or to an excessive burden on certain Member States .
Therefore , I fear that , despite its good intentions , the Commission proposal will fall short of generating greater consistency and solidarity amongst Member States .
May I also point out that those Member States which are now struggling with excessive burdens because of their demographic situation or , perhaps , their geographical position , are not being helped by this proposal , or are being helped only to an inadequate degree .
This means that the issue of solidarity must be addressed in a broader context .
Over the last few years , it has become crystal clear that what Member States need is a carrot-and-stick approach .
As far as I am concerned , this means that it is also time , high time at that , that we achieved a breakthrough , because solidarity amongst Member States will have to be enforced in one way or another .
I know that certain Member States have responded rather negatively , to put it mildly , to the proposals adopted by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I am also aware that I am treading on dangerous ground here , with regard to the Commission 's right of initiative .
Fair is fair , however , and , to be quite frank , I am fed up with merely hearing fine words on this matter .
I am sure that the Stockholm Programme of the incoming Swedish Presidency will also most likely contain the most wonderfully phrased provisions , but , if I may say so , esteemed President-in-Office of the Council , I would advise having nothing to do with it because , in practice , the Member States will once again turn their backs on it soon enough .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) The Community Eurodac IT system began operating in January 2003 and is designed to compare the fingerprints of asylum seekers and certain third-country nationals or stateless persons .
This system ensures the correct , accurate and rapid application of the Dublin Regulation , which is intended to create an effective , operational mechanism for determining responsibilities for asylum applications in one of the European Union Member States .
Eurodac is a computerised database containing the fingerprints of all the applicants for international protection , aged 14 years and over .
The purpose of this report is to make the system run more efficiently and resolve the problems which have been detected following an assessment of its first few years of operation .
We have produced a number of effective , practical solutions to the problems concerning the collection and transfer of fingerprint data by Member States .
The first stage involves collecting the fingerprints within 48 hours of submitting the application for asylum , while in the second stage , Member States send the data obtained in this way to the Eurodac central system within 24 hours .
The report contains provisions allowing the 48-hour deadline to be extended in the following exceptional cases : when a quarantine period needs to be applied due to a severe contagious illness ; when the prints are destroyed ; as well as in cases of force majeure which are properly substantiated and proven , and for the period during which these circumstances prevail .
The report supports the idea of setting up as soon as possible a decentralised agency for managing Eurodac , VIS and SIS II to ensure that these systems operate as efficiently as possible .
This management agency will draw up a common set of requirements which must be met by anyone authorised to have access to the Eurodac infrastructure and data .
In addition , provisions have been introduced which are aimed at banning the provision of data input in the Eurodac system to the authorities of any unauthorised third country , especially the country of origin of the applicants for protection , in order to protect the members of the asylum seekers ' families from the serious consequences to which they could be subject .
When drafting the report , we set out some regulations which will ensure that the system will operate as efficiently and effectively as possible , while also protecting personal data and fundamental human rights .
Last but not least , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs with whom we enjoyed excellent cooperation and our colleagues from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs who voted for the report by a large majority .
I must also thank the authors of the amendments .
I would like to mention the exceptionally good cooperation with the representatives from the Council and European Commission , whom I would also like to thank .
rapporteur . - Mr President , we heard earlier from Ms Dührkop Dührkop in terms of the European Refugee Fund and the changes proposed in that in order to support the setting-up of the European Asylum Support Office , and I am the rapporteur for the regulation which deals with that particular proposal - the Asylum Support Office .
The idea is that this is an office which is there to support Member States in improving - we would say the quality ( we know some Member States have a difficulty with that concept of improving the quality ) of delivery of decision-making on asylum requests , but also this office aims to assist in developing consistency across Member States , as well as supporting those countries which find themselves under particular pressure at various times , either through continuing mixed flows of people coming to those countries or for other reasons .
We have heard already from some about the problems caused by the lack of consistency between Member States in their decision-making on asylum claims , and this has certainly been part of the background to the difficulties which are there with the Dublin system .
But what we want to see is this improvement , and part of what this is about is providing training .
We are advocating that UNHCR guidelines should be involved in that - maybe the starting point , even if they do not lead - and that Member States should be able to draw on experience , that the office should be able to deliver joint training or , indeed , specific training to Member States as the need arises , drawing on expertise from within the Member States themselves but also from the UNHCR and , indeed , relevant NGOs .
We thought at one point we might have got a first-reading agreement on this , but time and , indeed , our desire to pull together the package of measures looking at the European common asylum system mean that we have not got that far .
But we have had considerable discussions between the shadows and also with the Council on this , and this explains certain of the amendments before us at the moment , certain of which are technical in terms of bringing in things which are normally in the regulation , which were omitted in the original proposal .
For Parliament , the role of UNHCR within this Asylum Support Office is absolutely crucial .
We also wish to see NGOs closely associated with the office in the consultative forum and , indeed , involved in delivering training or receiving it where they are part of the delivery of an asylum system in a Member State .
However , the role of Parliament is proving a little more difficult to find agreement on with the Council .
We are looking at Parliament being involved quite closely in the appointment of the director , looking at the Fundamental Rights Agency perhaps as our model on that .
The other sticking point is , as Jeanine has indicated in her introduction on the Dublin system , the question about how much we can actually look at Member States cooperating , as it were , from a starting point which makes that obligatory rather than voluntary .
So those are certainly the two big issues at the moment .
We are pleased that the Council has indicated it could well accept our amendments concerning training itself and , indeed , bringing in external expertise , for example in terms of interpretation , where necessary .
So we think we are moving forward on this , but we will see - when we get , maybe , an indication from the Commission about how we are going to increase cooperation between Member States - just how far we will be able to get with this proposal .
Mr President , the objective of the legislative proposals on which you have just given your verdict is the establishment of a truly common asylum system that affords greater protection , is more effective and is more united .
I heartily thank the five rapporteurs for their considerable and excellent work .
This is the first time that Parliament has given its verdict , as colegislator , on asylum issues .
It has to be said that a fruitful working relationship has just begun .
I am pleased to see that Parliament largely supports the objectives in the Commission 's proposals .
This support is essential if we are to overcome certain shortcomings in the legislative instruments from the first phase .
At the time , they were adopted merely after consultation of Parliament .
I would , however , like to comment on some of the proposed amendments , which are giving some cause for concern and are worthy of particular attention .
I will first turn to Mr Popa .
As regards Eurodac , I broadly agree with his proposals .
Now let me turn to Mr Masip Hidalgo and talk about access to reception conditions .
I will accept an amendment on the sensitive issue of the equivalence of the material support offered to asylum seekers and the minimum social assistance guaranteed to national citizens .
For the Commission , however , there must be a reference indicator .
This indicator will not oblige the Member States to provide social assistance to asylum seekers , but it will allow the introduction of clear rules in order to maintain asylum seekers ' dignity and to help us , and consequently the Commission , to monitor the application of the common standards in each Member State .
The same is true for the principle of equality with national citizens as regards access to health care for people with specific needs .
Here too , I can accept the amendment , but I would also like to see a reference indicator retained , as the Commission 's proposal aims to overcome the current shortcomings in relation to protecting the health of vulnerable persons .
That is all for the reception conditions .
I thank Mr Masip Hidalgo once again for his excellent presentation .
I turn now to the Dublin Regulation .
I am also grateful to Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert for giving us a very good presentation of her report on the revision of the Dublin Regulation .
I wish to stress an issue that is of major importance for me : family reunification and the problem of unaccompanied minors .
The Dublin system has often been criticised for the negative impact that it may have on asylum seekers , especially in the case of families or vulnerable persons .
In its proposal , the Commission wanted to ensure that , in practice , families are not separated and that minors are not transferred , except to rejoin their families .
The amendments that change this approach cannot receive our support .
I wish to stress the question of solidarity , which is the subject of some of the amendments tabled in the framework of the Dublin Regulation .
I would firstly like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , and also Parliament for introducing the option of suspending the transfers of asylum seekers when a Member State encounters difficulties .
However , it is difficult to go further in the framework of the Dublin Regulation , as this regulation , Mrs HennisPlasschaert , cannot be an instrument as such for the distribution of asylum seekers among Member States .
I have indeed heard your call for solidarity , and the Commission can accept an amendment in the preamble to the regulation , in order to give a political signal along the lines of creating improved , formal solidarity mechanisms .
In fact , I am determined to propose , at a later date , concrete instruments to increase solidarity at European Union level and to relieve the pressure on the asylum systems in some Member States .
We need to arrive at a fairer distribution of the beneficiaries of international protection among Member States .
The Union has already allowed the European Refugee Fund to support pilot projects in this area .
Moreover , once it is operational , the support office will be able to give expert support to those Member States that request it .
However , you have put your finger on the problem , namely the need for more solidarity and more consistency among the various Member States .
I will turn now to the support office .
Thank you , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mrs Lambert , for your remarkable , quick and effective work , since the Commission only tabled its proposals on 18 February .
In this case , I really need Parliament 's support to implement the office quickly , and I note with satisfaction that the proposal for the amendment on the European Refugee Fund is endorsed .
Some aspects of the support office issue should be commented on .
The question of solidarity is evidently at the heart of Parliament 's concerns , as it is of mine .
I note the draft amendment calling for the office to support the implementation of a compulsory mechanism to distribute those receiving international protection .
The Commission 's proposal reflects the text of the Pact on Immigration and Asylum , providing for a voluntary system .
However , as I said just now in a previous reply , whilst the Commission is working on a more coordinated mechanism , the solution will not be easy .
The office , meanwhile , will support the internal redistribution mechanisms as they are defined , whatever they are like .
The regulation to establish the office is not the right place to legislate on the founding principles of these mechanisms but , once more , as with the Dublin Regulation , the Commission will accept an amendment in the preamble .
The Commission , moreover , believes that the office 's external mandate should not be limited to resettlement activities and regional protection programmes .
Amendments restricting the support office 's mandate must be avoided .
There are amendments with the aim of radically changing the procedure for appointing the director of the future office .
Beware !
The procedure proposed by these amendments could considerably delay the director 's appointment .
We do indeed need this office to be established quickly and effectively .
The formula the Commission is proposing is the horizontal formula currently used for 20 regulatory agencies coming under the first pillar .
We would find it regrettable to depart from a harmonised formula when horizontal discussion is conducted within the interinstitutional group on agencies , in which Parliament participates .
I shall conclude .
I have already taken up quite a lot of time , but the work of Parliament is such that I wish to provide a detailed response .
Some have criticised the proposals on Dublin and on reception conditions for being too generous .
Some say : ' Yes , but this Europe of asylum will be a beacon for unfounded asylum requests . '
Others , obviously , have invoked the principle of subsidiarity .
Frankly , I do not share these criticisms .
Only the true harmonisation of European asylum provisions around clear standards promoting fairness and effectiveness will enable Europe to put into practice its desire to protect those who actually need such protection , while avoiding abuses encouraged by ambiguous , unevenly applied standards .
Experience shows that where Member States handle asylum requests in an objective , professional way , no beacon effect has been created , far from it .
I believe there is no incompatibility between fighting against the abuse of procedures and raising the standards of protection .
To conclude , I would like to thank Parliament for its involvement as colegislator in the sensitive issue of asylum .
I say this very simply but genuinely , even before the Presidency : we really need the European Parliament in order to gain acceptance for this asylum policy .
It is a policy in line with our European values which , sometimes , in fact , can awaken fears and criticism , even though all this forms part of the humanitarian spirit and humanitarian tradition of our continent .
This is why , Mr President , I am extremely grateful to all the Members and especially to the five rapporteurs for their excellent work .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , this new phase of our work , intended to establish a common European asylum system , will require a substantial effort on the part of both Parliament and the Council .
The Council fully endorses the need to achieve further harmonisation in the field of asylum .
The European Council , when adopting the European pact on immigration and asylum , welcomed the progress made in the area of asylum to date but , equally , recognised that important disparities remained between Member States concerning the grant of protection and the form that protection takes .
The European Council , while reiterating that the grant of protection and refugee status is the responsibility of each Member State , also indicated that the time has come to take new initiatives to complete the establishment of a common European asylum system provided for in the Hague programme , and thus to offer a higher degree of protection , as proposed by the Commission in its policy plan on asylum .
The Council therefore welcomes the four important legislative proposals which the Commission tabled between December and February 2009 for this purpose and which represent the focal point of our debate today .
These proposals deal with reception conditions for applicants for international protection , the so-called Dublin regulation , and Eurodac , which were all presented in December last year , as well as the proposal for establishing a European Asylum Support Office , presented in February this year .
These proposals have already been subject to intensive discussions within the Council bodies within the short period since they were presented .
The nature of the proposals and the complexity of the issues they deal with mean that the examination is not yet complete at all levels of the Council .
I cannot , therefore , indicate a firm position on the part of the Council in relation to the amendments which Parliament is proposing in the draft reports .
All I can say is that the Council will look closely at all elements of Parliament 's report with a view to making progress on these important measures in the shortest possible time frame .
I would , in particular , hope that we can make early progress on two proposals whose scope is more limited .
These are the proposals directed to the establishment of the European Asylum Support Office and the amendment of the Eurodac Regulation .
These are also , consequently , the proposals on which discussion within the Council bodies is most advanced and on which it is already possible to say that there is a significant degree of convergence between the views of the Council and Parliament .
The establishment of the European Asylum Support Office will facilitate the exchange of information , analysis and experience among Member States and will help to further develop practical cooperation between the administrations in charge of examining asylum applications .
It will also use the shared knowledge of countries of origin to help to bring national practices , procedures and , consequently , decisions into line with one another .
Both the Council and Parliament favour the establishment of such an office .
The Presidency believes that the proposal can , and should , be the subject of an early agreement between Parliament and the Council on a basis acceptable to both institutions .
As the honourable Members know , this proposal is accompanied by a proposal for modifying the European Refugee Fund .
Since its purpose is to ensure its financing of the Support Office , both instruments should be adopted at the same time .
The Council also hopes that an early agreement could be possible concerning the Eurodac Regulation , since only some technical improvements are being proposed by the Commission , and these should contribute to a better functioning of the system .
The discussions which have taken place until now in the framework of the Council concerning the other two proposals - the amendments to the Reception Conditions Directive and the so-called Dublin Regulation - indicate that the issues raised by those proposals are undoubtedly more complex and difficult .
The Commission proposals in relation to the Reception Conditions Directive , as the honourable Members know , are intended to amend the existing directive with a view to addressing the deficiencies identified by the Commission during recent years .
The Commission considers that the margin of discretion left to Member States by the Directive in force is too great , and that this has undermined the objective of ensuring adequate reception conditions for asylum seekers in all Member States .
That is why the Commission has proposed a number of amendments concerning such matters as access to employment by asylum applicants , enhanced material reception conditions , better addressing of the needs of vulnerable persons and recourse to detention .
The Dublin Regulation , that is , the regulation establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application , is intended to prevent abuse of asylum procedures in the form of multiple applications submitted by the same person in several Member States .
The Commission is now proposing a number of amendments aimed at increasing the efficiency of the current system and also in order to ensure better protection standards for asylum applicants .
The proposal also contains a mechanism for suspending transfers in cases when a Member State is experiencing particular pressure on its asylum system which does not allow it to offer asylum seekers adequate standards of protection and reception conditions .
The detailed examination of the Commission 's proposals on reception and Dublin is ongoing in the Council .
The Council has yet to define its position on a number of the issues dealt with in the two proposals , and a discussion is still ongoing on certain key issues .
These include the question of access to employment and detention in the context of the Reception Conditions Directive , and how best to respond to the needs of Member States facing particular pressure in the context of the Dublin Regulation .
It is already clear to the Presidency that more work will be necessary at the level of the Council in order to achieve the necessary level of agreement among Member States on these proposals , which would enable it to engage in discussions with Parliament with a view to an agreement between the two institutions .
That , of course , remains our aim , and Parliament can be assured that the Council will fully take into account the views of Parliament as represented by amendments proposed in the relevant draft reports .
Both the Council and Parliament are committed to the establishment of a common European asylum system which offers a high level of protection and functions effectively .
We are , therefore , faced with an important challenge in finding the right solutions which will enable us to achieve that objective .
I am confident that the will is there on the part of both the Council and Parliament to make that possible and , against this background , the Council will now undertake a detailed examination of Parliament 's proposals on all four of these instruments .
As my colleague Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert rightly said , and here , I wish to congratulate her , this package is built upon the principle of solidarity .
Solidarity needs to go out to those who deserve protection but also , for the first time , solidarity with those countries bearing a disproportionate burden .
This solidarity is being introduced upon agreement to the Commission 's proposal to suspend the Dublin Regulation in the case of countries that are carrying a disproportionate burden .
This same solidarity is also inherent in the European Parliament 's proposal to introduce a burden-sharing mechanism which will no longer be voluntary but legally binding across the board .
However , our efforts in favour of solidarity are being undermined by what is going on in the outside world , and people cannot understand how we go on about solidarity in here , whilst out there everyone tries to brush off their responsibilities onto others .
At this very moment , while we are discussing all this within this Chamber , a serious incident is taking place between Malta and Italy , which is the third of its kind in the space of a few days .
Two boats heading towards Lampedusa , carrying 130 immigrants , are currently just off Lampedusa , however Italy is refusing to go out and rescue them .
According to international law , these persons must be escorted to the nearest port , and as VicePresident Barrot said at the time of the first incident , the closest port of call in this case is that of Lampedusa .
Mr President , Italy 's behaviour , or rather , that of Italian Minister Maroni , is illegal in the face of international law , is overbearing with regard to Malta , and is inhumane with respect to all the immigrants involved .
This kind of behaviour does not pay tribute to Italy , and this situation , Mr President , is also serious because it is sending out a dangerous message , implying that one should not rescue immigrants because if you do , the burden of keeping them will fall on your shoulders .
This is an extremely dangerous message .
Therefore , I here turn to the Vice-President of the European Commission , Jacques Barrot , and ask him to intervene without delay in order to unblock this situation .
I would also ask him to insist that Italy honours its international obligations , and I also ask him to make it clear to all Member States of the European Union that this is not simply an issue between Malta and Italy , but that it is everyone 's responsibility and , consequently , should be borne by all of us.Mr President , if we refuse to show solidarity in practice then we will erode the trust that lies between us , and we will also eat away at the trust of all European citizens .
If we truly believe in solidarity then we cannot allow national egoism to take over .
Everyone has to play their part . Thank you .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs HennisPlasschaert , on her willingness to enter into dialogue and negotiation on this report .
I would remind you that asylum is a moral duty for the more fortunate countries .
We must not forget that , despite the serious economic circumstances that we are experiencing now , solidarity is an essential element that must govern our policies on asylum and immigration ; solidarity with those who , with good reason , ask for our protection , and solidarity with those of our Community partners who , through their geographical circumstances and their size , are faced with the greatest migratory pressures .
In this sphere , the ' asylum package ' is an instrument that is both necessary and crucial for the future development of immigration policies in the European Union .
However , I would like to point out that measures as important as those that we are dealing with today require more time for reflection and consideration ; the tight margin for manoeuvre that we have had as a result of the deadlines imposed is totally inadequate .
The proposal contains several aspects that will certainly need to be reviewed in the near future .
I am referring to the situation of asylum seekers , the cases in which they may be detained , the fundamental difference between the concepts of ' custody ' and ' detention ' , the facilities in which they may be detained , the formulation of exceptions to transferral , the existence of exceptions to the general principle establishing which country is responsible for considering the application , the specific details of who forms part of the ' nuclear family ' , and the assistance that ought to be given to Member States having to deal with a greater weight of applications .
Despite these questions and in view of the speed with which we have worked , we can say that , in general , a balanced report has been adopted .
This is a balanced package which reflects the majority of my political group 's concerns , particularly those aimed at guaranteeing the rights of people seeking international protection and those designed to support those Member States that have greater numbers of international applications .
I would like to conclude by reminding you that the right to effective legal protection is a fundamental right enshrined in European constitutions and , specifically , in Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
The judiciary ought therefore to be the highest guarantor of the individual rights of people seeking international protection ; to achieve this , it will be necessary that applicants who might require it are provided with legal assistance .
Mr President , I will end by urging the need for the European Asylum Support Office and the aid that may be granted through the European Refugee Fund .
Mr President , as shadow rapporteur on the recast of the Dublin Regulation , I wish to thank the European Commission for the quality of the text proposed to us .
It does in fact bring significant improvements to the Dublin system , in particular from the viewpoint of respect for the fundamental rights of those seeking international protection .
Highlights of these advances include the strengthening of the principle of family unity ; the additional attention paid to minors and the concept of the best interests of the child ; the guarantee of better information and of means of appeal for those seeking international protection ; the strict limitation of the use of detention ; and the option of temporarily suspending transfers to Member States whose reception facilities are under particular pressure or do not provide an adequate level of protection .
When the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs voted , we succeeded in blocking the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which wanted to get rid of some of these provisions , including the one for managing the holding in detention of asylum seekers .
This is in fact an essential guarantee for us , since those seeking international protection are not criminals , and there is therefore no reason to put them behind bars .
However , some of the points in the report remain problematic , not least the question of which language should be used to give information to the applicant .
In our view , it must be a language that the latter will understand and not one that he or she is thought to understand .
I would add that , where a person is held in detention , this is what is provided for by the European Convention on Human Rights .
We also wish to see requests from minors with no parent on Union territory examined by the Member State in which the latest request was submitted , to avoid minors being transferred from one State to another .
This was provided for in the Commission 's initial text , but the PPE , with the rapporteur 's support , opposed this proposal .
Finally , as the Dublin Regulation is not aimed at ensuring a fair distribution of responsibilities as regards the examination of requests for international protection , it seems essential , in my view , for other instruments to be created in order to strengthen solidarity , as you said , Commissioner Barrot , with the Member States located at the Union 's external borders .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) As I have already indicated in my first address to the House , there are still enormous differences between the Member States and the desired harmonisation has , in fact , been a failure in this respect .
We cannot deny that any longer .
What directives provide for are a number of procedural standards , rather than for a standard procedure .
Given the many differences which we are now trying to reconcile , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is quite clearly opting for a pragmatic approach .
As far as we are concerned , further approximation of the laws of the Member States , naturally also including guidelines for correct enforcement , is the only way forward , but , again , this needs to be coupled with the necessary reality checks and pragmatic conviction .
We consider the establishment of a European Asylum Support Office and the carrying out of the proposed recast of the Reception Conditions Directive and the EURODAC Regulation to be crucial in this context .
It is a pity , therefore , and I address this little aside to the Commission , that we still have to wait for the publication of both the recast procedure and the Recognition Directive .
Their publication is scheduled for 24 June .
However , from the point of view of greater coherence and better law-making , it would have been more logical if these two proposals had been added to the current asylum package .
I accept that it is the Council that will have the final say on this .
Allow me , however , to stress again the fact that greater coherence , better quality and greater consistency and solidarity are important for all Member States .
I will not forget our visits to Europe 's external borders , and in particular to the well-known hot spots , in a hurry .
In this regard , the credibility of the European Union has been at stake for some time .
May I therefore urge you to keep your promises !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a short time ago I heard some very serious and even slanderous statements made by a Maltese fellow Member against the Italian Government and Minister Maroni in particular .
The game being played in Malta is actually not very clear , and I will explain myself straight away .
I would not like to call it a dirty game simply because of the respect that should be shown to a European Union Member State , but our fellow Member should have honestly stated that Malta has always sought to maintain its excessive expanse of territorial waters , which stretch as far as the island of Lampedusa .
The Italian Government has asked Malta on many occasions to reduce its huge expanse of territorial waters .
Malta prefers to keep it as it is so that it can keep its request for contributions from the European Union high as well .
The truth should therefore be told in its entirety : the truth about Italy 's ability and willingness to welcome , protect and safeguard the rights of migrants who take part in and are victims of this trafficking is so glaringly obvious and well documented that it is not necessary for me to uphold it .
Coming to the crux of this report , I would emphasise that it is our duty - instead of carrying on these disputes that resemble the cockfights in Manzoni 's famous novel - it is the duty of our Member States not to give in to the siren calls of do-goodery , peppered perhaps with hypocrisy and very specific political and economic interests , but to force ourselves very strictly to apply the sacrosanct principle of asylum , and in so doing not to give up any ground to those who wish to use it for improper purposes that are not in accordance with the noble principles that inspire it , and to prevent its exploitation , which favours precisely those criminal organisations that organise and exploit the trade in illegal immigrants , to which we refer in the context of the current situation .
I repeat : it is our duty not to pretend , not to pick arguments that are open to exploitation but to find a common approach , going so far as to fight and adopt effective measures to ensure that the right to asylum is upheld and does not become the right of exploiters and organised crime syndicates to use noble and good laws to achieve their loathsome goal of exploiting people from developing countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I too am the shadow on this package and I would pick up on what Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra was saying about the moral duty here .
Also , when we are talking about rigorous application , as mentioned by some Members , some of us are more concerned that the application of rules is actually fair and that it does not stop people in need of protection actually getting it .
One of the points about this particular package is how we improve that and make sure that all Member States are operating to the same high standard .
In terms of the reception of asylum seekers recast , we very much welcome the Commission 's initial proposal and want to maintain certain parts of it , not least those concerning labour market access and adequate income support , which we voted on earlier today .
I greatly regret that my own country , the UK , is opting out because of those two particular proposals .
That is a real shame in all senses of the word .
Access to health care is , of course , also crucially important , in terms not only of emergencies but also of ongoing health care , particularly for those who have maybe suffered torture and therefore need support for their own mental well-being .
In terms of the Dublin recast as well , we welcome the initial proposal , we support the suspension mechanism and , indeed , will vote to keep the widest possible definition of family reunion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with a certain amount of emotion that I face making my last speech in this parliamentary term , and I would like to start by dealing with the things that have been said in this Chamber by calling on Commissioner Barrot to intervene and resolve this matter that all too often involves Member States that like to pretend that the fate of asylum seekers is someone else 's responsibility .
Just a few minutes ago , we saw the buck being passed between Italy and Malta , just as a few days ago we heard about the boat Pinar , which was at sea too long , leading to the deaths of those who probably could still have survived .
This is therefore what I believe we are talking about when we talk about asylum ; we are talking about this real need , this commitment that Member States must show to reception policies .
I warmly welcome the proposals put forward by my fellow Members , by Mr Masip Hidalgo , by Mrs HennisPlasschaert , about the amendment to the Reception Directive and the Dublin Regulation .
Both proposals are moving in the direction of improving the European Union reception system for asylum seekers .
I believe that we have a duty to stress the equivalence between European citizens and asylum seekers , because asylum is not something granted by Member States to people who are fleeing from wars , asylum is a duty of Member States and it is the right of those people to be able to stay in our countries with all the rights that European citizens enjoy .
I therefore believe that this is a benchmark for the civilisation of our political initiative and our law-making capacity .
I therefore agree with the amendments to this directive and this regulation , I believe that we must guarantee the right of asylum to all those who ask for it because the future of the European Union depends on the quality of our reception .
I believe that this should be a point that defines the very idea that we hold of the European Union .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , tomorrow , on the last day that this composition of the House meets , we will be taking a vote on a package of proposals for improving our asylum policy .
After five years of debating and visiting asylum centres , it is high time that we came up with concrete measures .
If , after all of this , we are made to wait any longer for implementation , the final reaction will have come really rather too late .
Because of the events of 2005 and 2006 , we have had to tackle illegal immigration , but in that process the asylum-seeker has literally fallen overboard .
Although I am in favour of establishing an agency for cooperation , I do have some concerns about its form and mission .
How do we get a reliable list of safe countries of origin ?
What sources are we going to use to produce such a list ?
How can we provide adequate protection for the sources of information that come from those countries which are not safe ?
Can such sources be publicly disclosed and how credible will such a list be to an independent judge ?
I should like to hear from the Council how we might avoid this problem .
Why is it that we have not delegated practical cooperation to Frontex ?
This agency 's remit is limited and it would be very well-placed to tackle this task , if we increased its funding .
That way , we would also be able to respond adequately to the actual facts on the ground , which Frontex is already facing , anyway .
Based on our experience of asylum-seekers ' and immigrants ' illegal entry , we could then make proper arrangements for providing reception for asylum-seekers .
To me , that seems a very practical solution .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , of the proposals being presented to us I am happy to support the draft regulation for establishing a European Asylum Support Office , the European Refugee Fund and the Eurodac Regulation .
However , I should like to take issue with the Reception Conditions Directive and with the Dublin Regulation - and it would seem that I am the only person to do so in the discussions so far .
The Reception Conditions Directive has been created so that refugees - genuine refugees - can be given the best possible assistance in the shortest possible time .
However , it appears to me that what the proposed amendments will introduce is tantamount to an invitation to encourage immigration through asylum , or an invitation to abuse the asylum system , should you wish to interpret it that way .
Why ?
All asylum seekers should have fast access to the labour market .
I take the view that it is a matter for the Member States to take this decision .
What is being proposed is that the group of individuals allowed to file an application for asylum be extended to individuals with mental health problems - yes , I know many people with mental health problems , but not all of them have the right to asylum - or to all elderly people , for example .
Indeterminate legal concepts are being used .
Nor do I accept that all asylum seekers should be granted social assistance in the same way as own nationals .
As this is not the case , approximately 95 % are simply not granted asylum .
What is being proposed with these amendments is , I believe , the wrong path to follow .
I will therefore be voting against them together with the delegation of the Austrian People 's Party .
The Dublin Regulation is the same in certain respects , as it promotes asylum shopping .
This new clause , which is being introduced as a discretionary clause , makes it possible for an asylum seeker to seek out the country in which he submits his application and - provided it is accepted of course - to this extent , leads to asylum shopping .
I also consider it problematic to temporarily suspend transfers .
I understand Malta 's situation very well , but I believe that to allow support teams to provide assistance quickly is more helpful than to go down the route that is being proposed here .
We must ensure that we help refugees quickly but prevent the abuse of asylum at all costs .
Mr President , if I may , I will immediately take a different view , which is that the asylum package , and the five rapporteurs who have taken great care over it , are worthy of support across this House .
We have a shadow on the Eurodac and Lambert proposals , and I feel that we have had excellent cooperation in building a package which is both realistic and implementable , and which takes great care over transparency .
For example , on the Eurodac issue - the sensitive issue of asylum-seeker fingerprinting - we have had improvements in the way fingerprint data is used , and on enhancing the role and clarifying the powers of the European Data Protection Supervisor .
We would like to see key references to more articles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and to human dignity and children 's rights , and the good resolution of the issue of language and asylum seekers , which has already been so well raised by Antonio Masip Hidalgo and Rosalyne Lefrançois .
On the Lambert report establishing a European Asylum Support Office , we believe this is a critical step forward in making cooperation between Member States relating to the common European asylum system a reality .
The Socialist Group supports this report , but we have also tabled amendments .
We want to see greater transparency and accountability , as I think the rapporteur is also striving to do .
We want to see the appropriate involvement of the UNHCR and NGOs , and I have added amendments which bring forward good levels of European Parliament scrutiny in the system .
I understand what the Commissioner says about the speedy resolution and building of the European Asylum Support Office , but accountability and transparency and quality of asylum information is also very important .
To work well , the European Asylum Support Office must produce the most useful , transparent and objective information , regularly scrutinised .
With these safeguards , we will have a strong addition to a fair and balanced common European asylum system .
( PL ) Mr President , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights contain exhaustive information on rights of asylum .
This is a fundamental right when there is persecution in a person 's country of origin on the grounds of race , religion , ethnic origin , political opinion or membership of a particular political group , and this is fairly common in the world today .
Giving people this right should also mean guaranteeing them the right to develop their lives .
That must be a fundamental condition .
In order to achieve this , we should give people who have applied for asylum access to the job market , because this is the best way to enable the asylum seeker to be selfsufficient .
This also prevents social isolation and helps the asylum seeker to get to know the culture of the host country better .
People who have applied for asylum should be guaranteed access to the widest range of procedural assistance , and this includes the right to highquality legal help in order to make it easier for them to understand their rights .
( EL ) Mr President , the Eurodac system is used to collect fingerprints from asylum seekers .
Although we acknowledge that an attempt is being made to improve the previous operating framework of Eurodac , we still have doubts on two major issues : firstly , respect for the fundamental rights of the people coming to Europe for a better future in that , basically , these are ' Euro police records ' , with which we categorically disagree .
Secondly , whether the measures being adopted are in keeping with the basic principles of the Union itself , such as , for example , personal data protection , and whether the measures provided for are in keeping with the principle of proportionality .
We do not agree with the fingerprinting of children of 14 years of age .
The measures being proposed and with which we disagree prevent asylum seekers from asking another Member State for a second chance if they are rejected by the first one , at a time when , as we all know , asylum procedures always include a degree of subjectivity which may turn out to the detriment of a person who has already been victimised .
Since this is my last speech to this House , I would like to thank you , all colleagues and staff for their cooperation .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , I too am pleased to be able to give my opinion on such a crucial debate as the asylum package , especially on the penultimate day of the parliamentary term .
Through our various efforts , and despite the adoption of the first phase of the European asylum system , we have become aware of the persistent differences between the various Member States when it comes to the recognition of refugee status .
We must also acknowledge , despite the significant advances made by the directive in relation to reception conditions - as mentioned in particular by my colleague Mrs Lefrançois , whose observations I fully support - we must acknowledge that the Member States still have too much room for manoeuvre on this issue .
Therefore I too would insist that , in this area - above all in this area - a way must be found to apply European solidarity .
Finally , now more than ever , I wish to point out that asylum seekers and those who require international protection are vulnerable and , as such , must be given very special attention .
This means , in particular , that they should not be held in detention .
The debate on the Return Directive is closed ; we were all in agreement .
There is no need to re-open that debate when we are discussing asylum .
Mr President , I wish to thank all the speakers and , in particular , to thank the rapporteurs once more .
I will just make one or two remarks , concerning firstly the language issue , and addressed in particular to Mrs Lefrançois .
I must say that the Commission considered that the proposal that asylum seekers must be informed in a language that they are likely to understand is balanced .
The aim of this measure is to enable adequate information to be given to asylum seekers whilst making it possible to combat potential cases of abuse on the part of some asylum seekers .
I should like now to thank Parliament .
However , you will allow me to express my surprise at Mr Pirker 's speech , in particular .
Mr Pirker , I cannot allow you to distort the Commission 's proposal .
When I hear you say that the Dublin revision could lead to a ' shopping ' forum , I cannot allow it , it is not possible and it is not true .
The Commission 's proposal does not change the principles on which the Dublin system is based .
Asylum seekers will not be able to choose the State of asylum , although it is true that the State responsible will be determined on the basis of objective criteria , but with account taken of more humane considerations , and of family reunification in particular .
I cannot believe that , as a member of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , you are not mindful of this problem of family reunification .
I cannot allow you to distort this proposal .
For the Commission as well , it is a matter of establishing clear-cut guarantees in order to avoid abuse of the system .
We have introduced , among other things , a mechanism to identify vulnerable persons .
Obviously , the Member States must ensure the fair , balanced implementation of the principles that we have suggested .
I would also say to Mr Blokland that it is important not to confuse Frontex 's missions with those of the support office .
They are different missions requiring different skills if we really want asylum applications to be dealt with in Europe with the necessary rigour and humanity .
I cannot believe that the European Parliament is unable to find broad agreement on the basis of the work completed by the rapporteurs .
Of course , you belong to different political families with different political and philosophical sensibilities , but let us not forget that this Europe , which has witnessed persecution and sometimes the major risks that put the lives of the persecuted in danger , is not a model in this area .
This is not about idealistic preaching ; it is about being faithful to our values .
I insist on this .
I , personally , need very broad support from the European Parliament .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , in my final remarks I would like to stress that the Council welcomes Parliament 's wish to make early progress in these important files and its recognition of the importance for the proper functioning of the common European asylum system .
I can assure you that the Council will now carefully consider the position which Parliament has taken on the proposals in the work which is ongoing within the framework of the relevant Council bodies .
The Council will in particular examine in detail Parliament 's amendments with a view to establishing whether an agreement is possible on those proposals on which work is most advanced .
Let me also comment on the principle of solidarity .
A few honourable Members rightly point out that some Member States , because of their geographical and demographic situation , really experience particular pressure on their asylum systems .
In that light , the European Council stressed the principle of solidarity in the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum adopted in autumn 2008 .
The Pact clearly calls for solidarity on a voluntary and coordinated basis towards better relocation of beneficiaries of international protection , as well as approved legislation , such as the part of the programme ' solidarity and management of migration flows ' , and provides for financing of such activities in which the Member States can participate , again on a voluntary basis .
It should be noted that the European Asylum Support Office can be instrumental in these intra-Community transfers by facilitating the exchange of information on such transfers .
Moreover , the Office can help by coordinating the deployment of officials from other Member States to Member States under particular pressure .
However , this regulation cannot serve as a legal basis creating an intra-Community transfer mechanism .
Let me say at the end of my remarks that further work is ahead of us in the area , as the Commission has already announced its intention to table further legislative proposals for the purpose of completing the common European asylum system .
These proposals will concern asylum procedures and the standards for qualification and status for the qualification of applicants as refugees , as well as the establishment of resettlement schemes for people under the protection of the UNHCR .
We need to make progress as quickly as possible , while ensuring that speed does not compromise quality .
That is something on which I am confident we can all agree .

rapporteur . - ( ES ) Commissioner Barrot , you have my support ; what you are asking the House for , you have from this rapporteur , at least , and you have it right from the first line of my report .
I would also like to say that this afternoon , in your two speeches , you have given us a legal , moral and historical lesson .
One of the speakers referred to effective legal protection .
Clearly , effective legal protection is a fundamental principle .
That is why I am asking for a requirement for asylum seekers to be informed in a language that they understand , and not in any other language .
If this is not done , there will be no effective legal protection , and please do not contradict this , because you would be going against the very principles of law to which you referred previously .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) The country I come from , Romania , was governed up until 1989 by a totalitarian Communist regime , which you might even describe as criminal .
This regime kept its citizens like they were in a large prison .
Nevertheless , tens of thousands risked their lives by fleeing the country and requesting political asylum .
I know a large number of such people and I know how important international protection is , particularly the protection provided by the institution of political asylum .
However , it is vital for us to be able to identify genuine asylum seekers , those whose application for political asylum is actually fully justified .
By improving the registration system we can obviously resolve these cases much more quickly .
At the same time , however , I would also like to discuss another problem which is to do with networks , more specifically , the criminal activities of the networks trafficking asylum seekers .
These networks obtain huge sums of money from transporting asylum seekers to European Union Member States .
I also think that combating this criminal activity must be a priority concern for us , and a strategy must be devised to tackle it .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I welcome the general support we have heard this afternoon for the European Asylum Support Office and would very much like to thank colleagues for their cooperation and the work that we have been doing on this .
We hope that we can get this office up and running as soon as possible .
Its aim , of course , is to improve confidence between Member States as the delivery of asylum systems improves on the basis of the practical cooperation between experts , the training and everything else involved .
Maybe , as that confidence improves , we will see Member States less worried about the fact that they might have to cooperate in an obligatory way to fulfil obligations .
I welcome the Commissioner 's clarity about the different missions of the Asylum Support Office and Frontex .
They are very different things with very different purposes , although of course the cooperation and the delivery are important within them .
One of the aspects that has been touched upon has been that of information about third countries - the countries of origin of those seeking international protection .
Of course this is one of the things that the Asylum Support Office will be looking at : how to pull together that information from a variety of sources in a more standard format and perhaps a format where people will have greater confidence that the information is not being used politically .
I think it is something of great wonder to many of us how one country will accept people from Chechnya as refugees with quite a high acceptance rate , whereas another country close by will not accept anybody from Chechnya .
Many of us find this absolutely impossible to believe when the same information is out there .
So confidence in the quality of information and the way in which it can then be used by Member States is also an extremely important part of the enhanced cooperation we will be seeing .
We look forward to seeing this coming into being .

Mr President , despite being unable to give a truly satisfactory response , I would not wish to leave unanswered the issues raised by Mr Busuttil , the Italian Members who spoke - Mr Borghezio , Mr Catania - and all the others ; I wish , however , to say that the problem that we face in the Mediterranean is one that cannot concern Malta and Italy alone .


Europeans really must become aware of the increasingly tragic and dramatic situation that has been described here .
I personally have been to Lampedusa and Malta ; I met the two ministers in Brussels when the first incident occurred .
We have , thank God , been able to find a solution .
I will however raise the question again with all of the interior ministers at the next JHA Council at the start of June .
We will try as far as we are able to help Malta and Italy , but it is true that Europe and all the Member States must get to grips with a situation that cannot be left to two Member States alone to deal with .
We therefore need to give thought to this matter ; this has been the whole thrust of this discussion that has taken place and which has shown the need for increased solidarity among Europeans .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 May 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Eurodac is a key tool for managing data on applicants for international protection and immigrants who have either been detained for illegally crossing the border or who stay beyond their period of legal residence in the territory of a Member State .
The reform of the Eurodac Regulation will resolve difficulties linked to the effectiveness of its legislative provisions , such as delays from some Member States in sending fingerprints to the central Eurodac system , exchanging data on recognised refugees in a particular Member State and the inaccurate designation of the authorities which have access to the Eurodac database .
I think that a more effective use of the Eurodac database will only be achieved when Eurodac uses the same technical platform as SIS II and VIS .
The Biometric Matching System must be the same for SIS , VIS and Eurodac to ensure their interoperability and keep costs down .
I call on the Commission to submit the legislative proposals required to establish an agency responsible for managing these three IT systems so that these tools can be brought together at a single location , thereby ensuring , in the long term , optimum synergy between them and avoiding duplication and inconsistency .
in writing . - Mr President , I very much welcome the idea of the establishment of the European Asylum Support Office , as the situation in third countries , especially in Africa and the Middle East , is continuously deteriorating .
I object to any notions of ' Fortress Europe ' that would be isolated from the problems of the Third World , many of which have directly or indirectly been caused by the former colonizers .
Europe cannot turn its back on its commitments to countries that once were recklessly exploited .
The European Asylum Support Office will provide a coordinated approach to the Common European Asylum Policy .
I agree with the principle of solidarity within the European Union when it comes to asylum seekers .
The borders of some Member States constitute the external border of the European Union , and therefore they are constantly affected by flows of immigration .
Hopefully the European Asylum Support Office will help to ease the burden of the Member States concerned .
Bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries concerning sectoral matters and covering applicable law in contractual and non-contractual obligations - Bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries on judgments and decisions in matrimonial matters , parental responsibility and maintenance obligations - Development of an EU criminal justice area ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Tadeusz Zwiefka , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries concerning sectoral matters and covering applicable law in contractual and non-contractual obligations , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a procedure for the negotiation and conclusion of bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries concerning sectoral matters and covering applicable law in contractual and non-contractual obligations - C6-0001 / 2009 -
the report by Gérard Deprez , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries on judgments and decisions in matrimonial matters , parental responsibility and maintenance obligations , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a procedure for the negotiation and conclusion of bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries concerning sectoral matters and covering jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgments and decisions in matrimonial matters , parental responsibility and maintenance obligations , and applicable law in matters relating to maintenance obligations - C6-0035 / 2009 - , and
the report by Maria Grazia Pagano , on behalf of Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on development of an EU criminal justice area , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on development of an EU criminal justice area .

Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to extend my very warm thanks for our successful work together to the rapporteur from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Deprez , all the shadow rapporteurs , and the representatives of the Czech Presidency and the European Commission .
In spite of our fairly distant initial negotiating positions , we have managed to reach a compromise , which , I hope , will allow us to come to an understanding with the Council at first reading .
The proposal for a regulation establishes a mechanism , on the basis of which Member States will be able to renegotiate , negotiate and conclude bilateral agreements with third countries in the area of judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters .
An analogical mechanism is foreseen in relation to bilateral agreements in the area of jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgments and decisions in matrimonial matters , parental responsibility and maintenance obligations .
It is a response to the practical problem which arose in consequence of Opinion 1 / 03 of the European Court of Justice on the new Lugano Convention , in accordance with which the Communities are competent to conclude external agreements to the same extent that they used the mandate to accept legal means in the area of judicial cooperation in civil cases under Article 61 ( c ) of the EC Treaty .
The proposed instrument establishes a special procedure .
For this reason , the legal frameworks of the proposed mechanism must be strictly limited both in terms of scope and time .
The first condition is met by limiting the proposed regulation to bilateral agreements in the areas of jurisdiction and recognition and enforcement of judgments and decisions in civil and commercial matters .
The second condition is met by the ' sunset clause ' , in accordance with which an agreement concluded under this procedure automatically loses force at the moment of conclusion of an agreement by the Communities with a third country .
Admittedly I do see the need to include in the legal frameworks the matter of performance of external competencies in the area which includes the specific law of contractual and non-contractual obligations , and also of matrimonial matters .
However , it would seem to be necessary to make clear that the proposed mechanism will be applicable not only to sectoral agreements determined by the limited scope of this proposal , but also to other agreements such as bilateral understandings and regional agreements between a limited number of Member States and neighbouring third countries - of course only in very limited cases , concerning specific matters , and with the intention of resolving local problems .
I was sceptical as to the need to set the ' sunset clause ' at 31 December 2014 , if , according to the proposed regulation , the European Commission has to present a report on the application of the resolution by 1 January 2014 .
In addition , the process of negotiating agreements with third countries is often complicated and lengthy , and does not leave Member States much time to make use of the new procedure .
Therefore the compromise proposal for the regulation to expire on 31 December 2019 allows a more complete and effective use of the procedure by Member States .
Despite the differing view of the European Commission , I am of the opinion that in its report on the application of the regulation the Commission should present the regulation in the context of other legislative instruments , such as Brussels I. The proposed mechanism , which includes a two-stage control function on the part of the Commission , will undoubtedly serve to ensure cohesion with the acquis .
However , I have tried to achieve the greatest possible flexibility in the proposed procedure and a shortening of the times designated for the Commission to react , and also a reduction in the bureaucratic load .
Democratic authorisation and the role of the European Parliament are not in any doubt , and therefore I also insist that the European Parliament and the Member States be given information at every stage , from the intention of a Member State to start negotiations with a third country through to conclusion of an agreement .
I would like to stress that the procedure for concluding bilateral agreements with third countries gives us a unique opportunity to demonstrate that the European Union is able to solve the problems of its citizens in their interest , which is particularly important in the context of the economic crisis and the growing Euroscepticism in many Member States .
In conclusion , Mr President , in spite of certain differences of approach in a specifically legal sense we must show our pragmatism here , while of course respecting the acquis communautaire .

Mr President , Commissioner , as Mr Zwiefka just said , we are simultaneously discussing two reports which have different scopes , but which form part of the same logic and are subject to identical procedures .
The first , for which Mr Zwiefka is the rapporteur - and I wish to thank him for the courtesy he has shown me and for his patience when faced with some of my demands -relates to a proposal for a regulation under the codecision procedure .
The second , for which I am the rapporteur , involves a proposal for a regulation that merely provides for consultation of the European Parliament .
In essence , Mr President - and I agree on this - the problems that we are trying to solve with these two instruments are serious and very often really tragic .
Each of us has heard of or knows cases where a marriage with a person from a third country has failed and where the father or more often the mother no longer has the right to see the children , who have been taken by the spouse to his or her country of origin or elsewhere , and sometimes is unable to discover their whereabouts .
The same goes for the possibility of receiving maintenance payments .
Clearly , these issues are real , serious and tragic .
There is an urgent , legitimate need to attempt to find a solution to this , in particular by negotiating agreements with third countries .
What , though , is the origin of the issue that we are concerned with today ?
Why is it that the European institutions have to deal with this problem ?
The answer is simple .
For all of these matters , the negotiation and conclusion of agreements with one or more third countries falls within the exclusive competence of the Community .
The exclusively Community nature of these matters is explicitly confirmed by rulings from the Court of Justice and the opinions of the legal services .
This means that what appeared to be very simple is , in fact , a little more complicated and more sensitive .
So the question now is this : is it legally possible , given the current state of the Treaties and the case-law of the Court , to allow the Member States to exercise one of the Community 's exclusive competences and , if so , under what conditions ?
Personally , Mr President , I am not a great legal expert .
I am not a legal expert at all , but I have not found a legal basis in the current Treaties that would explicitly authorise the Community wholly or partially to surrender its exclusive competences for the benefit of the Member States .
This means that I , for my part , remain very puzzled and very doubtful as to the very principle of the mechanism that is proposed to us .
Having said that , I must admit that the opinions of our institutions ' legal services have opened some doors .
That is very clear .
For example , Commissioner , the opinion of your institution 's legal service , and I quote : ' agrees that the exercise of external Community competence by the Member States is legally possible in exceptional circumstances and under specific conditions , both in form and in substance ' .
The European Parliament 's legal service is much less explicit , although it did offer some possibilities .
It is these very precise and restrictive legal principles that formed the basis of the amendments I tabled , and of the negotiations in which I took part , which were held in trialogue with the Council and the Commission .
I am , I repeat , very aware of the tragedies suffered by some of our fellow citizens and I am determined to make great efforts to help them .
That is why , in the end , I agreed to the compromise negotiated with the Council and the Commission , but I wish to make it very clear , Mr President , Commissioner , that the Community 's exclusive competence must remain as such .
The Member States must not , by granting countless derogations and broadening the scope , end up reclaiming what is an exclusive Community competence .
That is the line that I have taken and , in the future , that is the line that I will defend .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by warmly thanking everyone , all my fellow Members and officials who have made a contribution to improving the text we will vote on tomorrow .
My particular gratitude goes to Mr Demetriou , whose previous excellent recommendation provided a starting point for my report .
In my work , I was always very aware of the need to provide useful guidelines for building an authentic European space for legal cooperation and I hope , rather , I am convinced , that my work may again be useful to the forthcoming Swedish Presidency , which will be faced with the difficult task of drafting the Stockholm programme .
I started with two considerations when drawing up the text : the first was that criminal processes have numerous and important implications for fundamental freedoms , both for the victims of crime and also for suspects and defendants .
The priority that this Parliament cannot fail to emphasise and the main crux of my report is therefore a focus on respect for human rights .
Much space was devoted in the recommendation precisely to the defence of fundamental rights , with particular attention given to victim protection , prison conditions , prisoners ' rights and procedural guarantees , including the right to be told one 's rights and to the assistance of an officially appointed lawyer , the right to evidence , the right to be informed of the nature of and the reasons for the charges and to gain access to the relevant documents in an understandable language , the right , then , to an interpreter .
The second consideration on which I based my report is that , as may be seen from the report on the implementation of the Hague Programme for 2007 , the level of implementation with regard to legal cooperation in the criminal field was somewhat low , even though satisfactory developments were registered in other sectors , such as civil co-operation , border management , immigration and asylum policies .
It is therefore clear that something more must be done .
The principle of mutual recognition , the cornerstone of mutual cooperation , is very far from being satisfactorily recognised .
We need to get to the root of the problem , identifying the causes of this disappointingly low increase so that we can prepare the most effective solutions .
I believe that the main causes lie in the lack of reciprocal awareness and trust between States , and in the report I therefore lay emphasis on training , assessment , information sharing and good practice .
When it comes to training , we must certainly not overlook the considerable steps forward , made in particular due to the training contribution offered by the European Judicial Training Network .
In my opinion , we nevertheless need to go beyond the current training model based mainly on national postgraduate schools in order to build a stronger common judicial culture , which is still lacking .
For this reason , I highlighted the need to move towards a well-organised European training institute for judges and lawyers , with adequate resources , yet referred to the need to avoid pointless duplication between existing facilities and highlighted the important role of national schools .
Secondly : we need a more effective all-round assessment mechanism of justice , of judicial authorities and of the implementation of European Union directives .
The report therefore proposes setting up a group of experts to permanently monitor the application of Community law and the quality and effectiveness of justice , on the model of the Schengen mutual evaluation system .
Its purpose is also to identify any weaknesses in the system and legislative shortcomings in the matter of criminal judicial cooperation in order to provide the European legislator with all the information resources required for a proper political and regulatory assessment .
Lastly , the use of new technologies , which are very important for data collection , reinforces existing database systems and the circulation of information .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will be a repeat of the excellent result achieved in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Mr President , I wish , of course , to thank the three rapporteurs , and I will first of all turn to Mr Zwiefka and Mr Deprez .
Obviously the Commission is glad that compromises have been reached .
That said , it is correct that there have been intense negotiations since February and that we have thus reached an agreement at first reading on the two proposals presented by the Commission at the end of 2008 .
This is a very sensitive area for all the institutions involved - Commission , Council , European Parliament - as Mr Deprez has highlighted so well .
I thank all of the parties for having arrived at a text that seems to us to respect the Commission 's institutional prerogatives and , at the same time , seems to be a response to the legitimate expectations of the Member States and of Parliament .
I would , however , point out that this is an exceptional procedure , limited in scope and in time , and that the Community 's exclusive competence in the matters involved must , in any case , continue to be respected .
I am very firm on this and I agree with what Mr Deprez said , when he pointed out that the Member States must not take advantage in this way of the situation to reclaim certain competences and to encourage the Commission to somehow abandon the idea of making proposals .
I believe that we are in full agreement on this matter .
That said , it is also the case that this flexibility will allow the Member States to enjoy , where the Community does not exercise its competence , an institutional framework to help citizens gain access to justice in third countries , especially in the area of family rights .
It is true , too - Mr Zwiefka and Mr Deprez alluded to this - that we must think about the rules relating to divorce , the custody of children , access rights and maintenance obligations , and about the painful situations that can arise for want of legislation that is universally applicable to these areas , at international level .
The proposal on the law applicable to contractual and non-contractual obligations could also have a positive effect on the resolution of very concrete , very specific problems , such as those related , for example , to road and river traffic , or the management of airports located at the borders of several States , such as the Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg airport .
That being said , this is another application of this institutional framework which must , once more , remain the exception .
I would like in any case to thank the rapporteurs from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for the work they have achieved , and I also thank them for their understanding , which has allowed this agreement to be reached before the end of this Parliament 's term of office .
I will now mention the report by Mrs Pagano , with whose approach and content I am in agreement .
I welcome Parliament 's growing involvement in the area of criminal justice , not merely as regards legislative action , but also as regards the design of the future of the European area of criminal justice .
Thank you , Mrs Pagano , for having given your support to the work we are doing at present , since we are preparing the Stockholm Programme and we will be publishing a communication containing recommendations for the period 2010 to 2014 .
I am delighted that your report fully supports the principle of mutual recognition .
It is thanks to the principle of mutual recognition that the Union has achieved major successes , including the European arrest warrant , and all this is a blueprint for a true area of criminal justice .
The report also deals with the issues faced in implementing the principle of mutual recognition , and it is true that the transposition and the full and consistent application of the many existing instruments that are based on the principle of mutual recognition must be monitored .
It is also true , though , that there can be no mutual recognition unless the mutual trust between Member States ' legal authorities increases .
That really is the main ingredient of mutual recognition .
I am therefore grateful to the European Parliament for advocating the creation of a truly common judicial culture , as you have just said , Mrs Pagano .
You have rightly insisted on the development of training for the legal professions , of training in the European mechanisms , of relationships with the Court of Justice , of the use of instruments of mutual recognition , of legal cooperation and of comparative law .
On this point , I fully agree with your report , as I believe that , in the Stockholm Programme , the training of judges and the exchange of judges among Member States will be the key to the future of this European area of law that we so want .
Obviously , the Justice Forum , which is a meeting place for the various networks of legal professionals , will also be used to play an essential role in raising practitioners ' awareness of the European dimension of their activities and , with the Union 's help , these practitioners will have to cooperate to ensure a true exchange of best practice .
The Commission also agrees with the report 's proposal - really , thank you - for an assessment mechanism which will not be restricted merely to the transposition of the Union 's instruments , but which will also cover more generally the state of justice in the Member States .
It will assess its effectiveness , its speed , and respect for guarantees of defence .
On this issue , work has already begun with the idea , put forward by the justice minister of the Netherlands , of creating an assessment mechanism to measure how the judiciary is operating , in terms of respect for the principles of the rule of law , using , of course , the existing apparatus and bringing added value in terms of political monitoring .
These assessments will allow recommendations to be made .
In addition , the Commission is in favour of increased European Parliament involvement in its assessment mechanisms .
Mr Deprez , this would be an opportunity to include Parliament in the work of the expert groups that we will be putting in place this year and in coming years .
Next , you mentioned the transposition of the new Eurojust decision .
Here too we agree with the approach suggested in the report , on the usefulness of an implementation plan and of meetings of experts with the Member States .
It is thanks to these things that we will be able to implement the new Eurojust decision quickly .
Finally the report insists on the judicious use of new technologies .
The European e-justice strategy was launched to exploit the potential of information and communication technologies in the field of justice .
There you have it , I can only thank the European Parliament for its work and for the deliberations it has shared with us in this area .
I am also convinced that , together , we will succeed in building this criminal justice area , this area of law which should characterise a community of citizens which quite rightly have the right to enjoy quality justice , in whichever Member State they find themselves .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I welcome this opportunity to speak on these three important legislative proposals , and am grateful to the rapporteurs for the extensive work which has gone into their reports .
I would like first to comment on the first two proposals , and then to turn to the third proposal on the issue of the further development of criminal justice within the EU .

The objective of the two proposals covered by the reports from Mr Zwiefka and Mr Deprez is to establish a procedure which will allow the Member States to negotiate and conclude agreements with third countries on aspects of judicial cooperation in civil matters falling within the exclusive competence of the Community .
The first proposal , subject to the codecision procedure , covers applicable law in contractual and non-contractual obligations .
The second , subject to the consultation procedure , covers certain matters in the area of family law .
I would like to underline that the procedure put in place by the two future regulations is devised in such a way as to ensure the integrity of Community law .
Before authorising the negotiation of an agreement , the Commission will check that the envisaged agreement does not render Community law ineffective or undermine the proper functioning of the system established by its rules .
The Commission will also check that the envisaged agreement does not undermine external relations policy as decided by the Community .
It could in fact be argued that , by making it possible for Member States to negotiate and conclude agreements with third countries that are compatible with Community law , the range of operation of Community law is extended to countries outside the European Union .
The procedure established by the two proposals will apply primarily to the negotiation and conclusion of bilateral agreements between a Member State and third countries .
It will in certain cases , however , also apply to the negotiation and conclusion of regional agreements between more than one Member State and / or more than one third country .
As far as regional agreements are concerned , the procedure established by the proposal in the area of the family law will apply to the amendment or renegotiation of two already-existing conventions between the Nordic States .
In the proposal in the area of applicable law , only a few regional arrangements will in fact fall within its scope .
These could cover , for example , the operation of an airport situated in a border area , waterways common to two or more countries , or cross-border bridges and tunnels .
The procedure established in the two proposals is based on a high degree of trust and cooperation between the Member States and the Commission .
A mechanism is provided to deal with those situations where the Commission , on the basis of its assessment , reaches the conclusion that the negotiation or conclusion of an agreement should not be authorised .
In such situations , the Member State concerned and the Commission will enter into discussions with the aim of finding a solution together .
The Presidency , on behalf of the Council , hopes and expects that it will be possible to reach a first reading agreement on the proposal in the area of applicable law .
Constructive negotiations have taken place between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council , during which the three institutions have together managed to solve a number of difficult issues .
As the proposal in the area of applicable law is largely identical to the proposal in the area of family law , it goes without saying that the amendments made to the first proposal have been taken over in the second proposal , even though that proposal is not subject to the codecision procedure .
It is , in the interest of good law-making , highly desirable to maintain parallelism between the two texts .
I would like to conclude with a few comments on Parliament 's recommendation on the development of EU criminal justice , which is the subject of the report by Ms Pagano .
The Council very much agrees on the importance of mutual recognition as a cornerstone of judicial cooperation within the EU .
We consider that it should both be broadened - by adopting other legal instruments in the future - and deepened , through a more effective implementation of the mutual recognition instruments adopted so far .
In this context , the Council would like to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that it is in the process of finalising the fourth round of mutual evaluations on the practical implementation of the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between the Member States .
Within the context of this series of mutual evaluations , experts have also been studying the issues related to interaction between , on the one hand , the European arrest warrant , and , more generally , the principle of mutual recognition , and , on the other hand , the proportionality principle .
However , the proportionality principle also has to be balanced with another principle , which is equally dear to Parliament - namely that of subsidiarity .
The reality is that judicial authorities in various Member States have differing views on what constitutes a serious offence .
The Council looks forward to further work with Parliament and the Commission on the establishment of a system of horizontal and continuous evaluation and implementation of EU policies and legal instruments .
On the issue of judicial training , the Council shares Parliament 's opinion that there is a need to foster a genuine EU judicial culture by , inter alia , promoting direct exchanges between judges , prosecutors and members of the judicial staff of different Member States , and to actively develop the European Judicial Training Network .
The Council also shares Parliament 's view on the need for a swift and effective implementation of the new Eurojust and Europol decisions .
By way of conclusion , I would like to thank Parliament for the extensive and detailed work which has gone into the three reports before us this afternoon .
Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( FR ) Mr President , it is certainly not on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , but more so on behalf of my group that I would like to take advantage of this brief moment to express my extraordinarily positive reaction to Mrs Pagano 's report .
Congratulations on your report , Mrs Pagano .
I believe that , in writing this report , you have drawn up an extraordinarily detailed list of items that should figure prominently , Commissioner , in the Stockholm Programme , which I know the Commission is actively preparing .
Allow me , beyond what has already been said about the importance of assessing the training of judges , to highlight two issues that are fundamental to the question of mutual trust and which are at the root of what in future could become mutual recognition .
Firstly , the independence of the judiciary .
At present , a number of the EU Member States do not have a judiciary that is independent of the political power or other powers .
This is a scandal , and this scandal must stop .
Secondly , procedural guarantees .
As long as we cannot be sure that , in some countries , people who are suspected or accused of having committed certain types of offences enjoy procedural guarantees similar to those that exist in other countries , it will be difficult to gain broad acceptance for the principle of mutual recognition .
This is a fundamental issue that I wished to introduce into this debate .
Congratulations , Mrs Pagano .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) The national boundaries drawn after the Second World War divided communities and families .
I would like to tell you about an example of this close to us here in Europe .
Szelmenc was at one time part of Hungary .
However , one part of it , Nagyszelmenc , is currently located on the territory of a European Union Member State , Slovakia , while the other part , Kisszelmenc , is in Ukraine .
Before 23 December 2005 there was not even a border crossing between the two villages .
For 60 years parents , children and relatives lived completely separated from each other so that they could not meet for decades .
The EU gave them the eagerly awaited opportunity to end this situation by opening a border crossing .
The example just mentioned is only one of many hundreds or thousands , providing at the same time a powerful argument as to why we are discussing this report now .
The draft regulation provides a procedure on the jurisdiction to be applied between Member States and third countries in relation to matrimonial matters , parental responsibility and maintenance obligations .
The regulation will not supersede Community laws , but is only to be applied when the relevant Member State demonstrates that there is a specific interest based on economic , geographical , cultural or historical relations , especially between the Member State and the third country in question , in signing a bilateral sectoral agreement with the third country .
At the same time , the Commission states that the proposed agreement only has a limited influence on the uniform and consistent application of existing Community regulations and on the operation of the system implemented on the basis of the regulations mentioned .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Deprez , for taking on this important subject influencing the lives of citizens living both inside and outside the EU , especially because this document achieves a balance between the legal jurisdiction of Community institutions and that of national states .

Mr President , I believe that the proposals for regulations that have been submitted to us by the Commission are important and necessary and , on the other hand , it was also important and necessary for us in the European Parliament to insist on the principle that has been insisted upon by the two rapporteurs , Mr Zwiefka and Mr Deprez , which is the principle of Community competence .


This is an issue of Community competence on which , for practical reasons , it is advisable to maintain certain responsibilities to be exercised by the Member States , but , as Mr Barrot said , these should be restricted in terms of scope and also time .
There is no option to decline to exercise Community competence , and neither the Council , the Commission nor Parliament has the power to waive these Community competences .
Having established this - this is an exceptional procedure - I believe that the amendments that we have debated and tabled , and which I believe will be adopted by Parliament tomorrow , will make it possible to adopt this package of measures at first reading .
I also hope , however , that on the part of the Commission , in the next stage and going forward , we can progress with the development of a real European system of private law .
This is becoming increasingly necessary , as pointed out , for example , by Mr Sógor in the previous speech .
We are talking about problems that affect people most directly and , to the extent that we are able to resolve their problems , people will realise that the European Union has a function .

Finally , Mr President , I would like to congratulate my fellow Members , Mr Deprez and Mr Zwiefka , and to thank the Commission and the Council for their willingness to work together with us on this issue .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Pagano for her excellent report and her cooperation in drafting compromise amendments which took in , for instance , some of my suggestions .
I think the European Parliament is putting down a firm marker regarding its ambitions for a European criminal justice area in the future , with the twin ambition of bringing criminals to justice and upholding the rights of defendants and victims .
The report rightly highlights key issues like the need for monitoring implementation of legislation ; boosting the training of judges , prosecutors and defence lawyers ; and new legislation ensuring procedural safeguards , as Gérard Deprez has emphasised .
The European arrest warrant is an effective instrument for bringing criminals to justice , and I strongly regret that the British Conservatives opposed it .
However , we must ensure - and governments must ensure - that European arrest warrants are not misused for trivial issues , like pursuing people who stole a pig or did not pay a hotel bill .
Nor must it be abused for fishing expeditions for questioning , rather than the proper focus on return for charge and prosecution .
The European arrest warrant - as others have said - and the whole of criminal justice is based on mutual trust .
So the Member States must show they deserve that trust by having high-quality legal systems and respecting , for instance , the European Convention on Human Rights and Strasbourg court judgements .
We cannot have people returned , via European arrest warrants , to an EU country who are then sent back to a third country for torture .
If defiance of Strasbourg happens , then the fundamental rights safeguards in the European arrest warrant must be invoked .
I think EU governments have ducked the challenge of tackling substantive disparities in legal systems and the patchy respect for fair trial and human rights .
We must also try and ensure that the quality of criminal justice legislation is better in the future .
Hopefully , after Lisbon - I am delighted the Czech Senate has ratified the Lisbon Treaty - we will have fewer press launches of Member State proposals which go nowhere and then , even if they are approved , are never properly implemented .
EU-wide justice and high legal standards are crucial for our citizens when they travel , work and set up businesses in other countries and when people have to try and explain themselves in a foreign language .
It is high time that we made sure that anyone caught up in the criminal justice system of another Member State was made aware of their rights and obtained proper legal assistance , interpretation and translation .
Finally , I am very disappointed that the UK Government was one of those that blocked a procedural rights measure .
I hope they are going to change their minds in the future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am partly in agreement with the three reports we are discussing .
Mr Zwiefka 's report is easier to swallow because it makes the procedure for negotiating and concluding bilateral agreements on sectoral aspects between Member States and non-EU countries homogeneous and , all things considered , more transparent .
As for Mr Deprez 's report , I essentially agree with the second half , when it refers to the necessary consistency required of the Commission if we intend to develop a Community policy concerning external relations in the judicial co-operation sector .
However , when it comes the possibility of the Member States concluding the agreements themselves , as a nationalist I am of course pleased with this and hope that it is not a process that is necessarily limited in scope and time .
Lastly , I must honestly say that I have some doubts about Mrs Pagano 's European Parliament recommendation .
I am grateful to her for having pointed out and supported the use of e-justice , all the more so because I was responsible for drawing up the report , and I still owe a debt of gratitude to those who co-operated to ensure its success .
However , my awareness of subjects concerning the fundamental freedoms of victims , and also of suspects and defendants , as well as the need to implement the judicial training of judges and operators , lead me to remark that we still have a long way to go in this area - at least we certainly do in Italy .
Furthermore , when it comes to the European arrest warrant , frankly my doubts turn into outright opposition .
I nevertheless thank the rapporteurs for having worked on these subjects with skill and precision .

( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to take my turn in congratulating the three rapporteurs , Mr Zwiefka , Mr Deprez and Mrs Pagano .
Ι should like in particular to congratulate Mrs Pagano on her report as shadow rapporteur and to thank her for her kind words and , at the same time , to thank her for working in close cooperation with me on the report .
I should also like to express my satisfaction at the fact that , according to the Commissioner , the Commission accepts almost all the points included in this report .
As such , I fully endorse Mrs Pagano 's report and , of course , everything she said in the House today .
Commissioner , 10 years have passed since the European Council announced at Tampere that it had adopted the strategic objective of creating an area of freedom , justice and security in the European Union , 10 years since the announcement that the cornerstone of judicial cooperation is mutual recognition of and trust in decisions by supreme courts .
I must say that little has been done in this direction .
Thus , whereas in the case of civil law , several issues have been promoted , in the case of criminal law , things have remained almost at a standstill .
We hope that , with the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , there will be greater progress in this direction .
Commissioner , even this proposal on minimum procedural safeguards has not been pushed forward and our request - and these words are also directed at the Council - is that you push it forward .
I shall close by saying that there are , of course , differences between judicial systems , but there is also room for convergence .
That is why the recommendation on the creation of a committee of wise persons to study all the differences and similarities in the law needs to be implemented , so that we have specific expert recommendations on the convergence of our laws and mutual trust in judicial systems .
( PL ) Mr President , in the field of civil justice , apart from the acquis communautaire , there are a number of bilateral agreements which were concluded by Member States with third countries .
Pursuant to Article 307 of the EC Treaty , Member States need to eliminate all provisions which may be present in agreements of this kind and which are incompatible with the acquis .
In its Opinion 1 / 03 of February 2006 , the Court of Justice held that the Community has acquired exclusive competence to conclude international agreements with third countries on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters .
The question then arises as to whether all existing or proposed bilateral agreements with these countries and on these matters should be replaced by Community agreements .
Or should Member States remain authorised to conclude these agreements where there is no Community interest involved ?
This procedure , which is an exception to the rule , must , however , be subject to very specifically stated conditions relating to the scope of the mechanism and the time when it is in force .
It is , therefore , important that the Commission establish a strategy and set priorities , bearing in mind the development of Community policy concerning external relations in the area of judicial cooperation on civil and commercial matters .

Mr President , I will be brief because I can only express the satisfaction I feel about the way in which Parliament has helped to shed light on this area of law , justice , security and freedom that we wish to build in the Union ; I welcome all that has been said , especially on the principle of mutual recognition , which itself brings us back to mutual trust between judges .
It is true , as has been explained very well , that there is scope for convergence of the judicial systems , which , in particular , should be formalised through minimum procedures in the case of criminal proceedings .
I really believe that all this is paving the way for a good Stockholm Programme , and I would like to thank Parliament for that .
As for the rest , I can confirm that it will indeed be possible to find an institutional framework for bilateral agreements , but that the Community and the Commission must have exclusive competence .
That is what I am able to say .
I do not wish to prolong the debate .
There are still many things to be said .
Above all I am grateful to Parliament , and I must say - as I will not get to speak again - that I will have been greatly enriched by my experience as commissioner , insofar as I really feel that a good alliance between the Commission and the European Parliament can often - I apologise to the Presidency for pointing this out , but it is the truth - highlight and promote the general European interest .
However , I am of course grateful to the Presidency for having given its support .
There must be synergy between the three institutions ; however , my thanks go to the European Parliament which , again this evening , has just given us a very good report .
Thank you , Mrs Pagano .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , this debate has been extremely interesting , and it seems that we are very close to reaching a first-reading agreement on the proposal in the area of applicable law .
May I say there is not just agreement , but a fair and well-balanced agreement .
This is , I think , an excellent illustration of the good cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
I am convinced that Member States will make good use of the procedure established by both the future regulations , and it will allow them to provide an adequate legal framework for their relations with certain third countries with which they have specific ties .
As I stressed earlier , the first-reading agreement on the proposal in the area of applicable law has an impact on the other proposal in the area of family law , given that the two texts are largely identical .
Through the first-reading agreement we have , therefore , also paved the way for an early adoption of the other proposal .
This is indeed a desirable development .
A great many Member States have a huge interest in being able to conclude agreements with third countries on family law matters , such as custody of children , access rights and maintenance obligations due to , for instance , specific historical or social ties with those countries .
Finally , on behalf of the Council , I would like to thank Parliament for its inspiring recommendations on the development of EU criminal justice , which are the subject of the report by Mrs Maria Grazia Pagano .
I would like to thank Parliament for this fruitful debate and for the excellent outcome .
Mr President , when we began this work we were aware that we were walking on thin ice .
On the one hand there was the exceptional nature and unusual importance of the legal instruments upon which we were working .
On the other hand there was an awareness of the passing of time and the unavoidable approach of the end of this term of the European Parliament , and thirdly and finally there was an expectation , both from the Member States and from the citizens of the European Union , that at least at some precisely specified time there would be help available for them to resolve matters which are for them so very difficult and at the same time so important .
It was only thanks to our will to achieve a good result , while of course retaining full respect for Community law , and our will to develop an instrument which will fit into the legal system of the EU , and thanks to our desire to work well together , that we could reach the stage at which we are closing the debate today , which will probably lead to our achieving success at first reading .
Therefore I would like once again to express my sincere thanks to Mr Deprez for his strenuous efforts at stopping us from crossing certain barriers .
I would also like to express my sincere thanks to Mr Kohout for the unusually dynamic work of the representatives of the Czech Presidency , and to Commissioner Barrot for the truly perfect cooperation of the representatives of the Commission .
I would also like to thank my fellow Members , who have spoken here today and who throughout the period of our work contributed to its final success , and also our coworkers , especially all the staff of the Committee on Legal Affairs , who put a truly huge amount of heart and hard work into the final success .
Mr President , I will not need two minutes .
I believe - in response to what I took to be a call from the Council and a wish of Mr Zwiefka - that , as we have worked well together , so far as it depends on me , we will have an agreement at first reading tomorrow .
Therefore in the voting instructions that I shall give to my political friends , I will advise them to vote for the text of the agreement that we have negotiated with the Council and the Commission , irrespective , I might add , of my personal feelings and of the improvements that I would have liked to have made to this text .
That said , Mr President , since I have a bit of time left , I would like to use it not to speak any longer about our reports , but to tell the minister how happy I am that , today , the Czech Senate has given its agreement to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I think that , beyond the work that we have done , that is the good news , the main piece of good news , of the day .
( Applause )
I thank all those who have laboured on this , because we all know that the circumstances have not been easy .
There were strong opposing winds in your country .
The latest political events did not necessarily make things easier , and I would therefore like you to pass on our gratitude , both to the authorities and to the people of your country .
Today you have served the European cause well !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank the Council for supporting the principles and , above all , if he will allow me , Commissioner Barrot , with whom I have had very profitable exchanges that have been extremely useful in the work that we have subsequently brought to the Chamber .
I would also like warmly to thank those Members who worked on this report , giving me ideas and , of course , bringing all their experience to bear , first and foremost Mr Demetriou , Mrs Ludford and the excellent Mr Deprez .




I wanted to say that Mr Demetriou , Mrs Ludford and Mr Deprez hit the nail on the head ; they identified the challenge faced by the European Union , because achieving a collective European judicial culture - which of course means seriously combating the factors mentioned by Mr Deprez - establishing the independence of the judiciary , providing guarantees and ironing out the disparities between the various judicial systems are the challenges that await us .
I nevertheless believe that the work we have done allows us to be optimistic .
I would like to say to Mr Romagnoli - I say this from my own point of view , which ought to be his too - that , essentially , because of the way in which the situation is viewed , there definitely is pessimism in Italy , but we must be willing to be optimistic , and the work that you too , Mr Romagnoli , have done and the contribution that you have made to the report means that , together , we can build the European Union , and the European Union is a reality for we Italians as well .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0231 / 2009 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Council .
Mr Kohout is here representing the Council .
I should like to take this opportunity to welcome the decision made today by the Czech Senate , which gives us high hopes of the future ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Subject : Protection of European creative works
Given that European creative works are being undermined by the growing plethora of pirated copies , what measures does the Council propose in order to afford real protection ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , thank you for your kind words addressed to the Czech Republic and to the Senate .
We are also very pleased that the green light for the Lisbon Treaty is now much stronger than it was a few hours before .
In response to the first question , I would like to say that the Council shares the concerns expressed by the honourable Member relating to the need to comprehensively address the problem of piracy of protected works .
This issue has been identified as a policy priority by both the European Parliament and the Council in the context of the overall effort to protect and foster innovation of European creators and consequently the competitiveness of the European economy .
The European Parliament and the Council have adopted Directive 2004 / 48 / EC , which puts in place a Community framework for the enforcement of intellectual property rights and are currently working on a proposal for a directive on criminal measures , aimed at ensuring enforcement of such rights .
The legislative framework already in force provides for a solid base for the Member States to pursue effective protection of intellectual property rights , including by fighting piracy .
Moreover , the European Community and the Member States are participating in ongoing negotiations , such as the draft anti-counterfeiting trade agreement , in order to render the protection of intellectual property rights more effective at international level .
On 25 September 2008 , the Council adopted a resolution setting down concrete actions to be taken by the Member States and the Commission in the context of a comprehensive European anti-counterfeiting and anti-piracy plan .
Moreover , the Council adopted in November 2008 a set of conclusions in response to the Commission communication of January 2008 on creative content online in the single market , highlighting , amongst other things , the need to promote and facilitate legitimate online offers of copyright-protected material as an important means of effectively fighting piracy .
In the customs field , the Council has adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 1383 / 2003 concerning customs action against goods suspected of infringing certain intellectual property rights and the measures to be taken against goods found to have infringed such rights .
This regulation sets out the conditions under which the customs authorities may intervene in cases where goods are suspected of infringing intellectual property rights and the steps to be taken by the authorities when goods are found to be illegal .
In particular , the Community has concluded a series of customs cooperation agreements , like the agreement recently concluded with China , in order to improve and facilitate cooperation with the customs authorities of third countries , inter alia for the fight against counterfeited and pirated goods .
These agreements are practical means and methods of cooperation between the European Community and the customs authorities of partner countries .
These agreements are constantly implemented and updated in the framework of the Joint Customs Cooperation Committees established under these agreements .
At multilateral level , the Council actively contributes to the work undertaken under the auspices of the World Customs Organisation .
Lastly , on 16 March 2009 , the Council adopted a resolution on the EU customs action plan to combat intellectual property rights infringements for the years 2009-2012 , following on from the abovementioned Council resolution of 25 September 2008 .
The Council remains open to examining any future initiatives that would aim at reinforcing the fight against counterfeiting and piracy so as to provide more comprehensive protection to right holders .
The Council appreciates all similar efforts by the European Parliament to the same end .
( ES ) Thank you very much for your answer , Mr President .
I believe that , in fact , the Council does understand what the problem is , but I would like to insist on this point and to ask you , President-in-Office of the Council , if the Council is aware that at the moment European cultural production is below minimum levels .
European Union law on the protection of creative works is that of an underdeveloped country and , as a result , our cultural production is falling to the levels seen in underdeveloped countries .
This is especially apparent in the audiovisual sector , where at the moment the majority of production is taking place outside Europe , mainly in the United States , because that country protects creative works .
If Europe does not protect creative works , we will not have them .
Is the Council aware of the responsibility that it bears at this time ?
( DE ) My question concerns the following : Mrs Trautmann was outvoted today here in Parliament with her compromise amendment on the telecommunications package .
This means , therefore , that she has put President Sarkozy in a good position with his ' three strikes - out ' solution .
How does the Czech Presidency assess today 's vote in Parliament with regard to the European creative artists who want to protect their rights on the Internet ?
Mr President , I would just like to assure the honourable Member that the Council is well aware that this is a significant activity and a real threat to the cultural wealth of Europeans and the European Union .
I think it is evident from the list of measures that the Council has undertaken in previous months and previous years that these issues have been and continue to be a priority , even within the framework of the comprehensive European plan which has set specific action goals , such as the establishment of the European Counterfeiting and Piracy Observatory .
I believe it should be stated in this context that the Council realises its responsibility , is aware of the serious nature of the problem at hand , and is resolved to take specific action in this matter .
As for the telecommunications package , both the previous presidency and our presidency have invested much energy in this matter .
We are disappointed that the complete compromise , including this anti-piracy provision , has not been approved .
I would like to voice the hope that the agreed telecommunications package will eventually be passed , following further procedures .
Nevertheless , I am disappointed that , for the reasons mentioned by the honourable Member , the package has not been passed today .
Subject : Climate change
Given the well-known sceptical opinion of the Czech President Václav Klaus on climate change , how is the Council ensuring that the views of the vast majority of EU Member States and citizens endorsing the scientific veracity of man-made climate change are being respected , specifically in relation to preparations for the Copenhagen Climate Summit and the forthcoming Swedish Presidency ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Last March the Council and the spring European Council further refined a new position for the international climate change negotiations , in particular in view of the Copenhagen Conference .
At this meeting of 19-20 March 2009 , the Council stressed its conviction that the economic crisis and the policy measures in response to it provide an opportunity to achieve the necessary economic reforms and at the same time speed up reforms towards a safe and sustainable low-carbon resource-efficient economy .
The Presidency conclusions of the European Council of March this year stated that the European Union remained committed to playing a leading role and bringing about the global and comprehensive climate agreement in Copenhagen in December this year , designed to limit global warming to below 2 ° Celsius .
To this end the European Council recalled the EU 's commitment to a 30 % emission reduction as its contribution to such an agreement , provided that other developed countries commit themselves to comparable emission reductions and that advanced developing countries contribute adequately according to their responsibilities and respective capabilities .
The European Council will further discuss these issues at its June meeting .
deputising for the author . - I would like to thank the Czech Presidency for the chairing of the committee and their views on this .
As I asked one of your colleagues before , could I have assurances now , as we approach the critical meeting that will be the UNFCC COP-15 in Copenhagen this December , that we will have the enthusiastic support of the Czech Government for an adequate and fully equitable global agreement to reduce carbon emissions worldwide ?
You started your Presidency with the reputation of being climate-sceptics .
Can you confirm now that you are converts and that you fully agree with the legislative climate and energy package that was passed overwhelmingly last December by this Parliament ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , in response to the question I would like to say firstly that we - in the sense of the Czech Government and the Czech Republic - have never been sceptical about climate change .
I do not think that what I said in my speech about certain conclusions being adopted by the March European Council , about certain measures being adopted by previous European Councils attended by the Czech Government and about the government agreeing with those conclusions , can indicate in any way that either the outgoing government or the new government which comes into office on Friday have changed their opinions on this matter in any way .
In this sense we can say that we will follow the course submitted or outlined by previous Councils , and our ambition is for the EU to do its utmost at the upcoming June EU summit to move forward , despite all the associated problems and difficulties , on the preparation of the mandate of the European Council and the negotiating framework for Copenhagen .
I sensed in the question an allusion to the Czech President but I can tell you categorically and honestly that two days ago a summit with Japan was held in Prague , chaired on behalf of the EU by President Klaus and if you spotted anything out of line there with the unified EU view on the climate , kindly let me know , although I know that but nothing of that kind took place .
Seen in this light , I view these concerns as understandable , but not entirely justified in principle , and I hope I have managed to dispel them .
Subject : Lisbon Treaty and the Czech Presidency
Could the Council please comment on a possible timetable for ratification by the Czech Republic of the Lisbon Treaty ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , in your introduction to my speech today you made an announcement in which you congratulated the Czech Republic over the fact that its Senate today approved the Lisbon Treaty with a clear majority of votes .
I believe that - at this moment - this is the best reply to the question in hand .
Thank you to the Czech Minister and congratulations through him to the leader and all the members of the Czech Senate .
Now both the upper and lower houses have voted to approve the ratification .
You may look at me as an Irish Member of this House and say : is this the pot calling the kettle black ?
We have a job yet to do in Ireland .
The Poles and the Germans also have a bit of tidying up to do .
But can I ask you to indicate when and if your President Klaus is likely to accept the wishes of the upper and lower Houses and approve - or sign off , if you like - the full ratification of the Treaty ?
Again , thank you .
I am delighted with today 's result in your Senate .
( DE ) Mr President , I congratulate the Czech Presidency on the decision in the Senate .
Nonetheless , I have to say that we in Europe are naturally dissatisfied with many areas of the interplay between the institutions of the European Union and that is why we have negotiated this reform treaty over the last eight months .
Would it perhaps be possible for a debate to be conducted in the Czech Republic regarding what in fact they find troubling about this treaty and what alternatives President Klaus could offer the people of Europe to quell the current dissatisfaction , to which he indeed vociferously refers , and what solutions he would envision ?
At present , all that is known is that he wants to prevent the reform but is putting forward no positive proposals .
( DE ) Mr President , with President Klaus having damaged the national renown of his country out of sheer egocentricity I too would like to congratulate the Czech Presidency and say that it was a first-class presidency .
I am happy that it has ended with the ratification of the treaty as far as parliamentary procedure is concerned .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for your words of appreciation , and your congratulations on the approval of the Lisbon Treaty by our Senate .
President Klaus has his own views and we in the Czech Republic respect his opinions , which are part of the democratic spectrum of opinion .
As for the debate on the Lisbon Treaty , it proved to be very intense , and that is why the Senate has not approved the Lisbon Treaty until now , following long discussions on the subject .
The large majority of votes - 54 senators out of the 80 present - cast in favour of the treaty included senators from the Civil Democratic Party ( ODS ) ( the party President Klaus once founded ) , which shows that there is ' Eurorealism ' in the Czech Republic , that there is a very strong feeling of co-responsibility for Europe and for the EU , as well as a will to continue the process of European integration and to take an active part in it .
As regards the constitutional arrangement for approval by both chambers of the Czech Parliament , it is really a precondition for ratification , which then culminates with the signature of the President .
In this respect , the constitution does not set any deadlines , and I would not like to speculate at this moment about the date by which the Treaty will be signed by the President .
The situation for us is now quite new , even in the Czech Republic itself .
This is a great load off our minds and we are naturally overjoyed .
We will of course hold further consultations and talks aimed at finalising ratification within the shortest possible period of time .
Subject : Croatia , Macedonia and Southeast Europe
How does the Council judge the likelihood of concluding accession negotiations with Croatia and giving a deadline for negotiations with Macedonia before the end of the year and fleshing out the prospects for EU accession of southeast European states , including Kosovo , lying between Croatia and Macedonia ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the negotiations with Croatia have entered an important and demanding phase .
Since the start of these negotiations , 22 chapters have been opened , of which seven have been provisionally closed .
Forecasts of the conclusion of the negotiating process cannot be made .
As you know , the advancement of the negotiations is mainly guided by Croatia 's progress in preparing for accession in addressing opening and closing benchmarks , as well as in meeting the requirements of the negotiating framework and fulfilling Croatia 's obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
The implementation of the revised Accession Partnership is also important to prepare for further integration with the European Union .
Full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , including access to documents , remains essential in line with the negotiating framework .
In this context , it is worth recalling that the Council has repeatedly stated that , in accordance with the negotiating framework and the Accession Partnership , efforts towards good neighbourly relations must be continued - in particular work on finding solutions to bilateral issues with neighbouring countries , especially border issues .
The Presidency regrets that the border issue with Slovenia is affecting the pace of Croatia 's accession negotiations and the progress on the ground does not match the former progress registered .
As you know , the Presidency , together with the former and incoming Presidencies and the Commission , has made significant facilitation efforts to make progress on this issue .
Furthermore , the April General Affairs and External Relations Council held a useful discussion to take stock of the situation .
Concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I would like to recall the decision of the European Council of December 2005 to grant it the status of candidate country , taking into account in particular the requirements of the stabilisation and association process and criteria for membership and implementation of the priorities in the Partnership , the substantial progress made in completing the legislative framework related to the Ohrid Framework Agreement , as well as its track record in implementing the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , including its trade-related provisions since 2001 .
According to the European Council of June 2008 , further steps by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in its progress towards the EU will be possible , provided that the conditions set out in the December 2005 European Council conclusions , the Copenhagen political criteria and the outstanding key priorities of the Accession Partnership are fulfilled .
Maintaining good neighbourly relations , including a negotiated and mutually acceptable solution on the main issue , remains essential .
Holding free and fair elections is crucial .
According to the preliminary assessment of the OSCE / ODIHR election observation mission , elections held on 22 March and 5 April were organised thoroughly and met most international commitments and standards .
This is an important step forward for democracy in the country .
We encourage the new President and the Government in their efforts to achieve progress in their country , to the benefit of all citizens , and the Government for concentrating on the reform agenda , such as the strengthening of the rule of law , economic progress and the fight against corruption and organised crime .
Concerning other countries of the Western Balkans , very considerable progress has been made towards EU membership over recent years but this has also been uneven and huge challenges remain .
The Council is willing to support efforts to meet these challenges , in particular by implementing the Stabilisation and Association Agreements and by granting considerable financial support .
The Stabilisation and Association Process remains the overall framework for the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
By making solid progress in economic and political reform and by fulfilling the necessary conditions and requirements , the remaining potential candidates in the Western Balkans should achieve candidate status according to their own merits , with EU membership as the ultimate goal .
In December 2008 Montenegro filed its membership application .
On 23 April this year the Council asked the Commission to prepare its opinion on the application so that the Council can then take further decisions .
On 28 April Albania applied for EU membership .
Applications from other countries might be received at a later stage .
The Council recalls the European Union 's willingness to assist the economic and political development of Kosovo through a clear European perspective , in line with the European perspective of the region .
The Council welcomes the Commission 's intention to present , in autumn 2009 , a study examining means to further Kosovo 's political and socioeconomic development .
The Council is committed to strengthening people-to-people contacts , such as lifting the visa requirements when the benchmarks defined in the visa liberalisation road maps are met , as well as further promoting student and young professional exchanges .
While strengthening the ownership principle , the EU stresses the importance of regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations among the Western Balkan countries .
Regional cooperation and the European agenda are linked .
The more Western Balkan countries cooperate with each other , the more they integrate within European structures .
This is because regional cooperation contributes to a shared understanding in the region and to finding solutions for issues of common interest , such as in the fields of energy , transport , trade , the fight against organised crime and corruption , refugee return and border control .
( DE ) Many thanks for that very good and very exhaustive reply .
I have three very short supplementary questions :
First , do you believe it is conceivable that the Czech Presidency will open a new chapter with Croatia ?
Second , will you name a date for Macedonia this year ?
Third , what is the timeframe for relaxing visa restrictions ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , with respect to the first question concerning the unblocking of the negotiation process , as I previously stated in my opening speech , one of the agenda items of the last meeting of the Council for General Affairs and External Relations was devoted precisely to these issues .
We firmly believe that progress in this matter will be achieved during the current presidency , as well as an agreement to facilitate the conclusion of the negotiating chapters that have been prepared for closing .
It has been one of the main goals of this presidency since the outset to unblock this situation .
A solution is taking shape and we hope it will be acceptable to all parties involved , making it possible to achieve progress in the negotiations .
As for the question concerning the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) , it should be noted that at this moment we do not expect a date to be fixed or other specifics to be finalised during this presidency .
We do not envisage visa liberalisation in the first session of this year , but do believe that by the end of this year or early next year citizens from a number of Western Balkan countries that are close to meeting or have already met the benchmarks , could travel visa-free from some of the Western Balkans countries to the European Union .
It has been emphasised here on several occasions that one of the priorities of our presidency is to bring the countries of the Western Balkans and the European Union closer together .
We have been devoting considerable efforts to this end , and we want to devote equal , if not greater , efforts to this priority in the two months remaining to us .
Subject : Protecting the most vulnerable in the economic crisis
In the conclusions of its meeting on 19 and 20 March , the European Council stated that in tackling the social impact of the current economic crisis , ' particular attention should be given to the most vulnerable and to new risks of exclusion ' .
In what ways is the Council focusing on protecting the most vulnerable , such as new migrants , older people , settled ethnic minorities , people with disabilities and the homeless , from being pushed to the margins of society ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - As the honourable parliamentarian has said very well the joint report on social protection and social inclusion , which was submitted to the European Council meeting on 19-20 March , stresses the need for appropriate social policies , not only to mitigate the adverse social impact on the most vulnerable but also to cushion the impact of the crisis on the economy as a whole .
This implies adjusting benefits , where needed , to safeguard appropriate support for recipients .
In particular comprehensive active inclusion strategies that combine and balance measures and inclusive labour market access to quality services and adequate minimum incomes need to be implemented .
A boost must be given to Member States ' efforts to implement comprehensive strategies against poverty and social exclusion of children , including accessible and affordable quality childcare .
Sustained work is required to tackle homelessness as an extremely serious form of exclusion , to promote the social inclusion of migrants and to address , for example , the multiple disadvantages the Roma people are facing and their vulnerability to social exclusion .
Vigilance is also needed as new risk groups , among them young workers and labour market entrants , as well as new risks , may emerge .
As regards the specific situation of older people , ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities , the Council has already adopted legislation aiming to protect these and other vulnerable groups from discrimination .
Council Directive 2000 / 78 / EC establishes a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation and prohibits discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation as regards employment and occupation .
Council Directive 2000 / 43 / EC implements the principle of equal treatment between persons , irrespective of racial or ethnic origin , in a wide number of areas including employment , self-employment , vocational training , social security , education and access to goods and services , including housing .
In addition , the Council is currently examining a new Commission proposal that aims to extend the protection against discrimination even further .
The proposal for a Council directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation would extend the protection against discrimination based on religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation to areas beyond employment .
On 2 April 2009 the European Parliament voted in favour of the Commission 's proposal under the consultation procedure , and discussions on the draft directive are ongoing in the Council .
Allow me also to recall that last spring the Council and Parliament successfully negotiated a first-reading agreement on the Commission 's proposal to establish a European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion in 2010 .
At the time , few of us could have guessed the scale of the coming economic crisis .
However , with the benefit of hindsight , it is clear that the Commission , Council and Parliament were absolutely right to focus on the problems of poverty and social exclusion .
Finally the Council is also examining a set of draft conclusions on equal opportunities for women and men of the age 50-plus generation , tabled by the Czech Presidency .
It is expected that these conclusions will be adopted by the Council in June .
This will be another opportunity for the Council to reaffirm its commitment to ensuring that our older citizens can live active lives and age with dignity .
Within the framework of the current EU Presidency , the Conference on Social Services entitled ' Social services : a tool for mobilising the workforce and strengthening social cohesion ' was held in Prague in April this year .
The conference stressed the importance of social services for active inclusion of people endangered by social exclusion and excluded from the labour market .
The social services sector , due to economic and demographic changes on the one hand , becomes the important field of new job opportunities , in particular for women and older workers and , on the other hand , it helps the social services users themselves to hold down their jobs .
The conference introduced basic starting points for further all-European discussions on the role of social services in society .
Although the ways of providing social services , sharing competences and the conception of financial sustainability are different in EU Member States , there was a good deal of consensus among the speakers at the conference on the role and goals of social services .
In the conference conclusions , which will be further elaborated and then negotiated with the aim of adoption by the EPSCO Council in June , the role of social services as an essential instrument for social policies is stressed .
The necessity of the integrated manner in conceiving and delivering social services and taking into account individual needs of clients is underlined as well .
The important role of public authorities in guaranteeing quality , access and sustainability of social services is mentioned and it is stated that investing in social services , in particular during the present financial and economic crisis , pays and can strengthen the growth potential and the cohesion of economies and societies .
The importance of informal care is pointed out and so-called ' shared care ' , a combination of both formal and informal care , seems to be optimum and most effective .
In the conference conclusions , the importance of the promotion of a system of lifelong training and capacity-building for assuring the quality of services is mentioned .
Last but not least , the protection of rights , dignity and special needs of social services users is emphasised .
deputising for the author . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Czech Presidency warmly for answering my question .
I was pleased to hear that the issue of extending the Directive on anti-discrimination to goods and services was given a prominent place in your answers to questions on the fight against growing poverty and social exclusion amongst the most vulnerable groups .
Allow me to tell you how much I appreciate this .
My question to you is , does this also mean that the text which this House approved in April enjoys the full support of the Czech Presidency , and what practical steps have you , as President-in-Office , taken in order to ensure that this directive is also adopted as soon as possible by the Member States and the Council ? Many thanks .
( LT ) I too would like to thank you for your comprehensive reply .
The problem of social exclusion is very widespread and multi-faceted , because , in my opinion , now many people simply face problems of survival .
Is the Council prepared to increase food aid ?
Food aid is also a very important matter now , as this crisis rages , and it seems to me that we should devote more attention to this .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) I would like to thank you for applauding my previous reply and my efforts to give a truly exhaustive answer to the question posed .
As regards the additional question , it must be said that I am not in a position to give a perfectly clear answer at this point in time .
Nevertheless , it should also be noted that all of the issues relating to social exclusion , as well as those concerning the fight against poverty in this time of crisis , are quite naturally on the agenda and are being discussed intensely in the Council 's working groups , including the directive that you mentioned .
As for food aid , I may have misunderstood the aim of the question , but at the Council we have been discussing food aid primarily for developing countries , in other words the countries worst affected by the economic and financial crisis , as well as by the previous food crisis .
As far as the situation in the European Union is concerned , no such topic is being discussed .
Nevertheless , we are aware of the responsibility of the European Union regarding the least successful or those who need far more assistance in the current situation , and this subject will also figure on the agenda of a meeting of the ministers for development co-operation .
Subject : European Employment Pact
How does the Council view the proposal to adopt a European Employment Pact which could be an important tool in preserving social cohesion and promoting the growth and economic recovery of the EU which is suffering from the effects of the global crisis ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - The Council has not received any proposal from the Commission for a European employment tax .
Therefore the Council is not in a position to answer the specific points raised by the honourable Member on this issue .
However , the Council shares the concerns expressed by the honourable Member in her question and considers that it is important to preserve social cohesion and to promote the growth and economic recovery of the European Union , which is suffering from the effects of the global crisis .
In this framework , the Presidency would like to recall that Member States remain , in the first instance , responsible for designing and implementing the employment policies .
Nevertheless , the Council pays special attention to these employment policies , especially now that Europe is facing a financial economic crisis and adopts new early employment guidelines in accordance with the Treaty .
In this sense , the Presidency would like to recall that in December last year the European Council decided an overall European economic recovery plan to address , inter alia , employment issues resulting from the financial crisis .
The plan consists of immediate budgetary measures amounting to EUR 200 billion comprising , on the one hand , Community measures amounting to EUR 30 billion and , on the other hand , national measures that would amount to EUR 170 billion .

The European Council also supported the idea of rapid action by the European Social Fund in support of employment , especially for the benefit of the most vulnerable groups in the population , such as supporting flexicurity policies and policies easing job transition periods , and giving Member States the opportunity , where necessary , for reprogramming European Social Fund expenditures in order to strengthen their employment strategies .
It is also to be recalled that , in addition to the European Social Fund , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund also provides Community assistance to complement national actions , including actions at regional and local levels .
This fund , created by the Council in 2007 , addresses specific European-scale crises caused by globalisation and provides one-off , time-limited individual support geared directly to redundant workers .
A revision of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is under way and the European Council of March 2009 called for a swift agreement to be reached .
The Council welcomes the agreement for a first-reading adoption of this revision and goes by today 's vote in plenary .
The European Council of March also agreed upon some additional measures such as the following : removing barriers while preventing the creation of new ones and achieving a fully operational internal market ; further reducing administrative burdens ; improving framework conditions for industry in order to maintain a strong industrial base and for businesses with a special focus on SMEs and innovation ; encouraging partnership between business , research , education and training ; and stepping up and improving the quality of investment in research , knowledge , and education .
Finally the Presidency would like to recall that the initiative of the current Presidency , an Employment Summit , will be organised on 7 May in Prague .
Yesterday the Czech Deputy Prime Minister for European Affairs , Mr Vondra , had the opportunity to speak at this plenary on this issue on behalf of the Presidency .
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply .
My question was on exactly the same wavelength .
Should all the means programmed from time to time - especially as a result of the crisis - not be coordinated under one umbrella , what I call an ' agreement on employment ' , so that they bear fruit for the European citizens , who hear about millions of euros - you mentioned the sum of 200 billion - but do not see this money being translated into effective action which will give them a way out of unemployment and poverty ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , I must say I am wholly sympathetic to what has been said here , and I am convinced that the forthcoming summit , the 'employment summit ' in Prague , will be another occasion for creating and putting forward initiatives which the June European Council will be able to return to and which will be focused precisely on the topics we have been discussing here , in other words issues relating to the impact of the economic crisis on employment .
Subject : Health care abroad
The new patient mobility directive , scheduled to be debated by Parliament in April , will lay down common provisions on the reimbursement of health care received abroad .
Members of the European Parliament are seeking to ensure that patients from EU countries have every opportunity to receive treatment abroad ( such as through the reimbursement in advance of expensive health-care services so that they are not only available to the wealthy ) , while the Council is proposing that such rights be limited and that the Member States themselves decide what health care received by their citizens abroad would qualify for reimbursement .
In the Council 's view , how can these opposing positions of Parliament and the Council be reconciled ?
What possible compromise proposals does the Council envisage ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the Presidency , building on the work carried out by the French Presidency , is pursuing actively discussions on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border health care .
The Presidency 's objective is to find solutions that will strike the right balance between the rights of the patients in cross-border health care and the responsibilities of the Member States for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care .
As the Presidency stated during the plenary debate of 23 April 2009 , patients travelling to other Member States should receive full information and high-quality health care .
But it is also important to make sure that the directive fulfils the principles of clarity , legal certainty and subsidiarity .
Discussions are still ongoing in the Council , so it is impossible to predict whether a political agreement can be reached under the current Czech Presidency .
However , the current discussions in the Council suggest that a system of prior authorisation is likely to be limited to specific types of health care .
It will be an option for Member States , which they may or may not use .
This possibility was recognised by the European Court of Justice under certain conditions .
The Council is also considering accompanying any system of prior authorisation with measures aimed at transparency and full information of the patients about their rights related to receiving cross-border health care .
On the other hand , the directive sets a minimum level of what the Member States have to guarantee to their patients as regards the reimbursement of the costs of cross-border health care .
It is the same amount which would be incurred for the same treatment in their home Member State .
Nothing prevents Member States from providing their patients who receive cross-border health care with a more advantageous form of reimbursement , even in advance .
However , it depends on the Member States ' national policy .
Nevertheless , in cases where the person really needs to receive planned treatment in another Member State and there are objective medical reasons for that , there is already in existence Regulation ( EC ) 883 / 2004 , under which the patient will receive health care without actually bearing costs himself .
According to the report voted in Parliament 's plenary on 24 April 2009 , the European Parliament has also recognised the prior authorisation system as a planning and management tool if it is transparent , predictable , non-discriminatory and subject to clear information for patients .
The Council will study all the amendments with care and will consider how to take account of them in its common position in order to reach an agreement in second reading .
( LT ) Once again thank you for your comprehensive and , I would say , hopeful reply .
It is very good that the conditions for obtaining medical assistance , both at home and abroad , are being harmonised .
However , it is clearly wrong that a lot will depend on a patient 's ability to pay .
Those patients who are unable to make up the difference between costs at home and abroad will not be able to take advantage of this .
The Czech Republic , which took over the presidency from France , is still a young country and I would like to ask : were there differences in the way the new and old Member States assessed this problem ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for the additional comment by the honourable Member .
We are bearing this in mind and we will take account of it .
I think he has identified a major problem , but at this moment the question cannot be resolved in a clear-cut and simple manner .
I view this as a problem that should be addressed by the Council in its further discussions on these issues .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Parliament 's new role and responsibilities in implementing the Lisbon Treaty - Institutional balance of the European Union - Relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments under the Treaty of Lisbon - Financial aspects of the Lisbon Treaty - Implementation of the citizens ' initiative ( debate )
We are going to resume the sitting with a very important subject : the joint debate on the Treaty of Lisbon , which includes the following reports :
the report by Mr Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on Parliament 's new role and responsibilities in implementing the Treaty of Lisbon ,
the report by Mr Dehaene , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on the development of the institutional balance of the European Union ,
the report by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the development of the relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments under the Treaty of Lisbon ,
the report by Mrs Guy-Quint , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the financial aspects of the Treaty of Lisbon , and
the report by Mrs Kaufmann , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , requesting the Commission to submit a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the implementation of the citizens ' initiative .
As you can see , these are five extremely important reports dealing with an issue that is highly topical , and we should also bear in mind the fact that , as you know , the senate of the Czech Republic has approved the ratification of the Treaty by the majority required .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the final evening sitting of this legislative period is devoted to the debate on the Treaty of Lisbon .
We know that many evening sittings have preceded this one in our effort to bring about a Reform Treaty and its ratification in 26 parliaments of the Member States .
I should like to express my congratulations and my appreciation to the Members in the Czech Senate , who today supported this Treaty with a clear majority .
I would also like to thank all those who helped to remove this obstacle .
( Applause )
Yes , let us applaud the Czech Senate all the way from Strasbourg to Prague .
We are very pleased with this outcome .
I am very optimistic that we will be able to complete the ratification procedure towards the end of the year .
We must not count our chickens before they are hatched , but everything would seem to indicate that we will get 27 ratifications .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs was therefore right to be optimistic .
The European Council , the Commission and the European Parliament must prepare for the entry into force of the Treaty .
I am very happy that this House has adopted four eminently interesting and important reports - no , five reports , as Mrs Guy-Quint also presented a report on the financial aspects of the Treaty of Lisbon - as a kind of final act of this legislative period .
I see that this House never gave up on the Reform Treaty , even in difficult times .
That is not true of everyone , though .
I cannot understand why there was so much hesitation in this House and why so many doubts were expressed as to whether we should still be discussing Lisbon at all .
This debate was even hidden in the evening sitting , when it could quite easily have taken place during the daytime .
It is beneath the dignity of this House to postpone such a debate to the evening sitting .
We know why it happened .
They did not want this House to reaffirm its conviction in front of a large audience that we need this Treaty , that we want it and that we believe in it .
There were sceptics at the very highest levels of this Parliament , which I find absolutely incomprehensible and totally unacceptable .
I took on the report on Parliament 's role in implementing the Treaty of Lisbon and I can say that this Parliament will be one of the winners under the Reform Treaty .
We are taking a quantum leap in democratic control , whether in terms of legislation , or budgetary control and decision-making , or the control and even the election of the executive , of the Commission , or the approval of international agreements , or new rights of initiative that we are granted , the most prominent example being the right of the European Parliament to suggest amendments to the Treaty - a privilege previously reserved to the Member States and their governments .
Codecision as standard puts us on an equal footing with the Council of Ministers : agricultural policy , fisheries policy , research policy , structural regulations - much will now lie within the joint responsibility and codecision power of this House .
We have new supervisory powers , new rights to information and new powers of initiative .
Vice-President , I thank you for always standing alongside us .
Today has been a good day and , with the four reports , as a kind of final act , we close a period full of dedication to reforming the European Union .
It is my hope that the final act will be played out with the new Parliament and that we can enter the new legislative period on new , stronger foundations .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the approval of the Treaty of Lisbon by the Czech Senate is a further important step towards ratification of the Treaty .
It is , therefore , a positive thing that the European Parliament is , this evening , approving a number of reports setting out Parliament 's position regarding the implementation of the Treaty .
After all , it is necessary for Parliament to be equally well prepared as the other institutions before entering into talks and negotiations with them on the implementation and application of the Treaty .
This is all the more important for Parliament , given that its powers will be substantially extended under this treaty .
Therefore , Parliament has a strong interest in seeing that a ) it is well prepared to carry out its new tasks fully - as set out in the reports by Mr Leinen and Mrs Guy-Quint , and that b ) it adopts a clear position regarding its relationship with the other institutions , which is the subject of my report .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens and clarifies the institutional balance within the Union .
The Treaty on European Union , which we hope to see adopted , marks a formal end to the pillar structure .
In addition , the European Union will acquire a legal personality ; Community institutions will become Union institutions and , under the Treaty , the roles and powers of each of the institutions will be clearly defined .
The Treaty will also thereby put an end to the twofold position of the European Council , making it an autonomous institution of the Union .
Although it is still subject to too many exceptions , the application of the codecision procedure , which will become the ordinary legislative procedure and which will also include approval of the budget , will give Parliament a very important role .
As a matter of fact , the powers of the Council and Parliament have been formulated identically in the Treaty .
The Treaty thereby strengthens the Community method and transforms it into the Union method .
Furthermore , that method will be extended to the former Justice and Home Affairs pillar .
In my report , I have emphasised the fact that robust coordination of legislative and budgetary work will be required if the institutions are to operate efficiently .
The report calls for programming of the legislative work , including the multi-annual perspective of the budget .
The role of the General Affairs Council within the Council of Ministers will be very important , in that it needs to become the Presidency of the Council 's instrument for dialogue with Parliament .
The Commission 's role as initiative-taker is also clearly upheld ; unfortunately , the plan is to reduce the number of commissioners , so as to arrive at a smaller college .
This will require the Commission to strengthen its internal organisation all the more , if it is to function as a college .
One important new feature is that the twin role of the new High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission will be crucial when it comes to foreign affairs , external affairs and security .
In my report , I have stressed that it would be very much in his or her interest to work closely with the Commission , so that all of the Union 's foreign policy resources can be mobilised .
I would like to conclude by saying that we will have a very difficult period of transition following the elections , as well as a difficult transition from the Treaty of Nice , which must be applied first , to the Treaty of Lisbon , which will hopefully be approved by the end of the year .
I call on Parliament and the Council to once again consider together how we might organise this period and I fail to understand why this has not been more the case already .
Otherwise , we risk ending up in a situation after the elections where we do not know what exactly should be happening .
Since no one would be served by such a situation , let us agree clearly on that .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President , representatives of the Czech Presidency , ladies and gentlemen , as the previous speakers have said , this is a great moment , not because our reports are being discussed , but because today it has been established that the parliaments of 26 countries have ratified the Treaty of Lisbon , and that a referendum , which has been promised , still has to be carried out in just one country .
That the parliaments of 26 countries have ratified the Treaty of Lisbon shows that it is a parliamentary treaty .
A great deal of progress has been made over the course of the unification of the European Union , but there has never been a treaty like the Treaty of Lisbon , in which the parliaments - both the European Parliament and the national parliaments - have been strengthened , democracy has been strengthened , a citizens ' initiative has been introduced and the principle of subsidiarity has been politically and legally strengthened through the strengthening of national parliaments .
It is therefore astonishing that those who set themselves up as founders of democracy oppose this treaty .
They oppose the Treaty of Lisbon because they do not wish to accord the process of European unification any democratic legitimacy .
European unification is abhorrent to them and they are afraid that this Europe could gain popularity through greater democracy and transparency and also enhanced decision-making abilities to face the challenges of the future .
That is why they tell the lies that they tell .
May I also say at this point that I would like to thank the Czech Presidency and , in particular , Prime Minister Topolánek , who , in a situation that was personally difficult for him and for which he was not responsible , on the last day of his term of office fought to get a sufficient majority in the Czech Senate .
And it was no meagre majority ; it was 54 : 20 .
That is a gigantic lead for those who said yes to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I hope that , after all 26 elected assemblies have made their decision , administrative people do not hold up the democratic process by withholding their signature .
I believe that they will keep the promises they have given and that this Treaty will be signed .
We are seeing in the discussions in this election campaign that the financial crisis has shown that each country that acts alone in this global order is lost .
That is why it is extraordinarily important that this is recognised in Ireland and that - if I am to believe the opinion polls - the people of Ireland rethink their position so that the interests of Ireland can be defended .
I am sure that , through the social clause , through the commitment to a social market economy and not to predatory capitalism , in other words through commitment in the social sense , this is also a Treaty for ordinary citizens .
In this way , we can defend our interests in this world together .
In order to really exercise control over an administrative bureaucracy , national governments , the Commission or the Council apparatus here in Brussels and in Strasbourg , we must establish close cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments .
There are many common tasks in foreign and security policy , in legal and home affairs policy , in the control of Europol .
There are many opportunities open to national parliaments through their right of veto .
With the orange and yellow cards and the right of action they have possibilities in the field of subsidiarity control and , as Members of the Council , they can exercise more control over their own governments .
In this way , they are doubly legitimised democratically .
That is why the European Parliament and the national parliaments are not opponents in this process but allies , desirous of exercising joint democratic control over Europe , of taking it forward , and of not allowing it to degenerate into a Europe controlled by apparatchiks .
The Treaty of Lisbon is therefore right and proper , and national parliaments and the European Parliament will not shirk this responsibility .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure for me this evening to present the report on the financial aspects of the Treaty of Lisbon , which has been ready for some time now in the Committee on Budgets .
This will be the last budgetary report of this parliamentary term and my last parliamentary report .
Above all , I am very pleased to see that Parliament has had the courage to present our reports in the ' Lisbon ' package to honour the promise made to the citizens to inform them of the consequences of this treaty .
A betterinformed citizen is a citizen who votes in full knowledge of the facts .
Speaking about the Treaty of Lisbon in this House is not a denial of democracy , rather the contrary .
Its implementation will have major consequences for the budgetary powers of the institutions and financial implications .
The reform is in fact important for Parliament .
Apart from the introduction of multiannual financial frameworks , it should be remembered that the budgetary procedure has remained practically unchanged since 1975 .
It was therefore essential for the Committee on Budgets to analyse these modifications and verify that they were the conditions needed for our institution to maintain , even strengthen , its role as a budgetary authority .
That is the whole thrust of this report : simplification and clarification of the budgetary challenges of the Treaty .
My main desire was to defend the prerogatives of the parliamentary institution .
Future Members must not be dispossessed of their powers in future budgetary procedures and future negotiations on the multiannual financial framework .
These substantial modifications are of three types .
First of all , modifications to the primary legislation .
The new budgetary procedure includes real advances and new challenges for Parliament with , firstly , the removal of the distinction between compulsory expenditure and non-compulsory expenditure .
Next , the single reading for the budgetary procedure with the introduction of a revert mechanism in the event that the Council rejects the common position , the introduction of a conciliation committee responsible for preparing the common position and a tight timetable for the conciliation committee .
In addition , changes are made to the new multiannual financial framework that strengthen Parliament 's role .
This framework is becoming restrictive .
To be adopted , it requires unanimity in the Council and the consent of the European Parliament .
I would add that its adoption is the result of an entirely new and special procedure .
With regard to the new financial perspectives , we want them to have a five-year lifespan to coincide with Parliament 's and the European Commission 's terms of office .
The commissioners will thus be more accountable for the budgetary choices that they make .
Codecision is extended to the adoption of the Financial Regulation and to its methods of application .
Unfortunately , however , the decision on own resources remains with the Council .
Parliament is merely consulted , except on the methods of application .
Budgetary discipline , therefore , returns in part to Parliament , which can reject the multiannual financial framework .
This is real progress .
The challenge for the future Parliament is to know what will be negotiated under the new Financial Regulation procedure , the responsibility for which Parliament shares , and what will fall under the legislation for the new regulation on the Interinstitutional Agreement , which Parliament will have the right merely to reject or accept .
Finally , the Union 's new responsibilities will create new funding requirements .
First of all there will be the External Relations package with , in particular , the creation of the European External Action Service and the High Representative Vice-President of the Commission , and , then , the new policies : energy , space and tourism , research , civil defence , administrative cooperation , and sport .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you will have understood , the changes implied by the Treaty of Lisbon are important .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is my last speech in the plenary sitting of the European Parliament and , as rapporteur of the European Citizens ' Initiative , I am pleased to have been given the floor .
I hope that tomorrow , during the last sitting of this legislative period , Parliament will send a political signal , that it will set a course towards bringing Europe closer to its citizens , and that it will move ahead with a project that has been close to my heart for many years .
Let me start by making a number of observations .
I realise with regret that neither my Group nor my Party - and here I am choosing my words carefully - was able to support the Citizens ' Initiative .
While , on the one hand , no opportunity is missed to complain about the democratic deficit in the EU , on the other , there is a general refusal to take the serious steps to make the European project more democratic .
This is behaviour that is neither credible nor forward-looking .
It blocks the progress in Europe that the citizens have insisted on for such a long time and I cannot and will not accept it .
Before the end of my mandate I would like to thank all my fellow Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance who have supported me with my report .
I would like to thank Jo Leinen , the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , and , in particular , all the coordinators and shadow rapporteurs of these four Groups .
I thank you that we worked together so well across party and country boundaries and that we were able to advance the European integration project together .
Vice-President , the provision contained in the Treaty of Lisbon concerning the Citizens ' Initiative is without doubt a milestone in the European integration process .
The truth is that , in the European Union , it is not states we want to unite , but people .
This matter will be addressed in a totally new way if , as laid down for the first time in Article 11 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on European Union ( EU Treaty , new version n.v. ) , citizens are directly involved in the European legislative process .
One million citizens will then have the right to ask the Commission to present a specific draft regulation or directive , which the Council has had since 1957 and the European Parliament since 1993 .
In my report , Parliament presented key points and guidelines for a future regulation on conditions and procedures for a European Citizens ' Initiative .
Vice-President , in the event of the Treaty of Lisbon coming into force , I expect the Commission not only to present a proposal as quickly as possible but also to follow the guidelines of my report if at all possible .
In particular , the Commission should endorse the view of Parliament , which reflects the view of a significant number of Member States within the meaning of Article 11 ( 4 ) of the EU Treaty ( n.v. ) .
In my report , the number 7 is proposed .
It is essential that not just any arbitrary figure is established , as it must , first , be able to justify the associated restriction of the right of EU citizens to equal participation in a Citizens ' Initiative , whatever their nationality , and , second , it must be oriented towards the relevant objective .
This means that the establishment of a minimum number of Member States must ensure that the starting point in the European legislative process is not an issue that reflects the specific interests of a single Member State , but rather one that is consistent with the European general interest .
In addition , I ask that particular attention is paid to the structure of the procedure , especially the question of the admissibility of a Citizens ' Initiative .
The criteria of friendliness towards citizens and legal security must be given top priority .
If EU citizens codetermine the European legislative process and wish to introduce a Citizens ' Initiative , fairness essentially requires that the competent EU bodies state as soon as possible and in a binding manner whether the planned initiative fulfils the legal requirements of the Treaty .
It is absolutely vital that this takes place before the statements of support are collected , as the Member States that provide the necessary resources need legal security .
Finally , I should like to remind the House that the provisions of the Citizens ' Initiative did not fall from the sky .
They were already in the Constitutional Treaty , as they had been developed in the Constitutional Convention , at the signing of which some Members were present , in close cooperation with NGOs .
Their inclusion in the Convention 's draft Constitution was neither a sure-fire thing nor the result of chance .
They represent the results of intensive consultations between the members of the Convention and NGOs committed to democratic policy .
We now know that this idea has been on ice for six years .
It is high time that it is brought to life after such a long time .
The time has come for direct democracy in a united Europe .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , allow me to say a special ' thank you ' to all the rapporteurs .
I admire very much your commitment and , could I say , perseverance .
Maybe it is because I recognise what my husband would call stubbornness in your insisting on these issues being dealt with in this Parliament that I also feel very much at ease and have established excellent cooperation with all of you .
A special thanks to those of you who will leave .
You have not only been very good collaborators and partners in all of this but also good friends and good sports .
Thank you very much .
I think , Mrs Kaufmann , that you can be proud of helping to establish what I call establishing and charging the power lines between citizens and the European institutions - new power lines , drawing them up and charging them .
I think that is quite something .
I am , of course , delighted d to be able to take part in this debate tonight on the day when the Czech Republic has completed its parliamentary ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Today 's vote brings to 26 the number of Member States whose parliaments have backed the Treaty .
This debate , I think , offers a good opportunity to remind European citizens of the role of the Treaty of Lisbon in delivering a more democratic and coherent European Union .
At a time of economic crisis it is more important than ever to have a Europe that works well , that has the right systems to ensure democracy .
The Treaty would give to the EU 's democratic institutions , most obviously this Parliament , the powers they need .
It would help the EU to act with greater unity and coherence on the world stage .
It would allow Europe to deliver more effectively on the key challenges we face today in areas like climate change and energy security .
The reports we are discussing tonight will also help to ensure that , with the Treaty in place , its implementation will be swifter and smoother .
Good cooperation between the institutions will be critical in securing the maximum benefits from the Treaty , and the Commission is committed to working in partnership with Parliament and the other institutions to make this happen .
The Irish referendum was a sharp reminder of the need to anchor the case for Europe within the national debate .
The substantive concerns underlying the vote deserve to be taken seriously - and that was exactly what happened at the European Council last December .
The legal guarantees and the decision on the size of the Commission show the respect given by Europe 's political leadership to the result in Ireland and the will to understand the reasons why they voted ' no ' and respond to those concerns .
But it also showed that they remained convinced that this Treaty is right for Europe .
That is also why , since the vote , eight more Member States have concluded their parliamentary proceedings , with eight more ' yeses ' .
Parliament 's reports add up to a comprehensive analysis of key aspects of the Treaty .
The underlying approach is to be ambitious for what the Treaty can achieve for the EU - an approach fully shared by the Commission .
The reports are particularly valuable in deepening our thinking on how the Treaty should work in practice .
In their different ways , the five reports all show a strong , self-confident Parliament looking for ways to maximise the potential of the Treaty for improving the effectiveness , efficiency and accountability of EU action , to the benefit of voters and citizens .
Mr Dehaene 's report sets out a lot of important detail , and the Commission very widely shares the interpretations it makes of the Treaty .
The great strength of the report lies in the clarity with which it shows that implementing the Treaty is not reinforcing one institution at the expense of another - the European Union can only deliver what citizens expect if all Institutions are strong and cooperate effectively .
The report pays particular attention to the issue of transition , and there would have been many advantages in having the Treaty in force before this year of institutional transition .
Unfortunately , that has not been possible .
So a pragmatic and flexible approach is needed , finding a sensible way forward which will take into account the need to avoid any institutional vacuum this year ; the importance of ensuring that the next Commission will enjoy the full authority of a democratic mandate ; and the need to respect the role of the Parliament .
The Dehaene report sets out a model which will help us all to find the way forward .
Mr Dehaene 's report calls for political and gender balance to be taken into consideration , together with geographical and demographic balance , in the appointment of EU top posts .
In today 's Europe , where more than 50 % are women , they are still under-represented in politics .
This Commission - as you know - has the highest number of women commissioners ever .
Still , this is not enough .
Improving the gender balance should be an objective when the next Commission is appointed : an objective that can be achieved if there is strong political support from the next Parliament .
I also hope that we will have more women in the European Parliament and in top EU posts .
Without them , we all lose out on their knowledge , experience and ideas .
Mrs Guy-Quint 's report tackles another important issue : how to organise the Union 's financial planning cycle for the best use of the EU budget , putting the money where the political priorities are .
At a time of intense pressure on public finances , we must have the right procedures in place to deliver best value for money .
The balance between stability and responsiveness in budget planning is critical to effective EU planning , and the Commission will return to this in the budget review .
Mr Leinen 's report shows how the Treaty will affect the work of Parliament , and the report covers very thoroughly the implications for Parliament of new policy areas , new powers and new procedures .
For example , it underlines the importance of ensuring adequate scrutiny of the Union 's external action , and we are certainly open to identifying the appropriate methods to do so .
However , these methods can only be agreed once the Vice-President and High Representative has taken office .
On this , as in many of the other issues raised - including comitology and delegated acts - we look forward to more detailed exchanges with Parliament on implementing all of the issues raised .
Let me turn to the report of Mrs Kaufmann , which explains clearly how the Citizens ' Initiative can bring a new dimension to democracy in the Union .
Citizens will be able to call on the Commission to bring forward new policy initiatives .
This is one of the areas where the Commission intends to act swiftly once the Treaty is in force - also on the basis of consultation - to understand stakeholders ' and citizens ' expectations .
The Commission 's thinking is very much in line with the recommendations of Mrs Kaufmann .
There are , however , a few areas we should discuss further .
We want to strike the right balance between a procedure that is easy for citizens and one that means that initiatives will have legitimacy and weight .
For example , on the minimum number of Member States , we should also more closely reflect the type of procedure foreseen in the Treaty .
Finally , Mr Brok 's report covers an area in which both Parliament and the Commission have made important strides in recent years : relations with national parliaments .
This Parliament has pioneered the use of inter-parliamentary conferences and has found some very practical ways to build up a real parliamentary network .
The Commission , as you know , has set up a completely new dialogue mechanism with national parliaments , and this is an area where a lot of progress has been made .
Since 2006 , the Commission has sent to parliaments not only consultation papers , but also legislative proposals , inviting them to respond .
So far , we have received and replied to around 400 opinions , and we have also massively increased the number of direct contacts , with more than 500 meetings between Commissioners and national parliamentary bodies since the Commission came into office .
So , as the report implies , the Treaty 's new provisions on national parliaments will be fully in tune with the trend of recent years , and I think will reinforce the European parliamentary family still further .
Taken together , these reports illustrate how the Treaty of Lisbon would deepen European democracy and deliver results to European citizens .
That is an excellent message for us to take into the European Parliament elections , as well as being an excellent launch pad for preparing for the implementation of the Treaty itself .
Before I give the floor to the speakers , I am going to allow myself a certain degree of licence that I think may be granted to someone chairing the sitting at this stage of our term of office and this stage of the night , for it is true that these late-night sittings have an advantage .
I would like to tell you that I intend to forward immediately to the President of Parliament and the Bureau a proposal that they prepare a publication containing the Treaty of Lisbon itself , the five reports and the corresponding resolutions , together with the introductory speeches by the rapporteurs and by the Commissioner .
I believe that a document of this kind , translated into the EU 's 23 official languages and distributed to the men and women of the 27 Member States , would be a very important document in terms of understanding the importance of the Treaty of Lisbon itself , and also understanding the efforts made and the actions taken by Parliament .
It would also be a deserved tribute to the five rapporteurs , particularly to Mrs Guy-Quint and Mrs Kaufmann , who have told us that they are leaving Parliament but who will be always present in our memories and to whom we will always extend our gratitude .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , to celebrate the occasion , as you see , I have consciously taken the place of Mr Zahradil .
On behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs I would like to stress that we regard the future Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative as fully accountable to Parliament for the simple reason that , like all other Commissioners , he needs the confidence of Parliament to take office .
The current practice of regular political dialogue in plenary and in the Committee on Foreign Affairs must be preserved in the dual function exercised by a single person .
As the vast majority of us want a more uniform and hands-on approach by the European Union towards foreign policy , the future incumbent of this office will also have a self-interest in securing the support of the European Parliament for his actions .
The political plans and positions of our executive can also be regularly debated in the Committee on Foreign Affairs in meetings where the future Chairman of the Permanent Representatives Committee provides information on issues that are debated in the PRC .
If so requested , this practice must also apply to the special representatives .
In future , posting decisions in the field of security and defence policy should also be discussed by Parliament to give operations in third countries greater democratic legitimacy .
As regards the European External Action Service , we are of the opinion that the European Parliament must be fully involved in preparatory operations .
We affirm that this Service should be assigned to the Commission for administrative purposes .
We also want to succeed in ensuring that , in future , the head of an EU delegation in a third country appears before the Committee on Foreign Affairs before the posting is finally confirmed .
I think that , if a person does not make a good impression on his or her own Members there should be little chance of that person being posted abroad .
We also ask that the entire foreign policy of the European Union , including the common security and defence policy , be financed in future from the Community budget .
However , for the next treaty after the Treaty of Lisbon , I would also like to see common military expenditure appearing in the budget .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Mr President , as the previous speakers have said , the development of common foreign , security and defence policies is one of the greatest prizes that is prospectively in our grasp as a result of the Treaty .
So national parliaments are greatly affected by the changes afoot .
Of course they retain national responsibilities for national security but they should also be required to play a leading part in close and regular collaboration with the European Parliament in scrutinising and seeking to formulate a common European policy , criticising and interrogating their own ministers for performance in Council and in transmitting to the press and public something of the new reality , which is that foreign policy is best made by seeking out , finding and projecting the common European interest .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Czech Senate has today accepted the Treaty of Lisbon .
Now , there is just Ireland to go , you may say , and then we will have a treaty that will also provide more opportunities for my Committee on Development to make better policy .
However , pressurising Ireland now would be a tremendous mistake .
This is a union of independent states and the Irish are free to make their own decisions .
Any outside pressure will increase the risk of the whole EU exploding , because , despite all the fine and complacent words that have been voiced today in this House , the European Union is undergoing a deep crisis of confidence .
This kind of crisis can only be resolved with results , social policy , investment and economic recovery , the provision of clean energy for our climate , the protection of social rights , here and elsewhere in the world , but , in achieving all of this , we must respect each Member State 's right to come up with effective solutions for itself .
Cooperation is necessary , and that is certainly true in this crisis , too , but you also have to have the confidence to remain true to yourselves .
Therefore , pressure on Ireland would not be appropriate , either for the Irish or for the rest of Europe .
Let the EU behave modestly , so that it may benefit from great ambitions .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to underline that the Treaty of Lisbon will give the European Union more opportunities to take the initiative in shaping development coordination policy , to improve donor coordination , to allocate tasks and provide aid more effectively .
However , it also means that EU institutions , including Parliament , will have to take on greater responsibility .
To implement development cooperation policy successfully , it is essential to have the appropriate administrative structure to remove the existing inconsistencies of the directorate-general structures and competences within the Commission on aspects of policy and budget , and to give sole competence to the Directorate-General for Development Cooperation .
As development cooperation policy will be applied according to the usual procedure , it is essential to define very precisely the remit of the European Parliament 's Committee on Development Cooperation .
The Treaty of Lisbon will allow better implementation of development cooperation policy goals with the aim of reducing and ultimately eradicating world poverty .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( EL ) Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade , I should like to point out that the changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon in the area of the common commercial policy contribute overall to the enhancement of its democratic legitimacy , transparency and efficacy of the Union 's external action .
I would underline in particular the redefinition of the institutional balance within the Union with the promotion of the European Parliament to colegislator for the purpose of defining the application framework of the common commercial policy .
Parliament 's approval will also be required for all trade agreements concluded .
However , I should like to highlight the imbalance between the internal and external competence of Parliament , in foro interno and in foro externo , in connection with the common commercial policy , given that the Treaty of Lisbon does not provide Parliament with the right to approve the mandate of the Commission to negotiate a trade agreement .
Considering that Parliament is entitled nonetheless to lay down preconditions to its approval of the Union 's trade agreements , I consider an enhanced framework agreement to be necessary here for relations between Parliament and the European Commission .
Finally , I should like to highlight the need for more intense dialogue between the European Parliament and the national parliaments , given that all the matters covered by the common commercial policy will come under the Union 's sole jurisdiction .
All trade agreements will be agreements with the Union and there will no longer be any mixed agreements concluded by both the Union and the Member States .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Mr President , in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection we also see the enormous advantages of the Treaty of Lisbon , which we would not want to miss out on , notably in the area of consumer protection .
It is very interesting to note that , in the Treaty of Lisbon , consumer protection has become a cross-sectional task , which naturally gives this area much greater strength .
This area is especially important to the citizens of the European Union , as we can show them on a daily basis what the European Union does for them .
The citizens continually ask what the European Union does for them .
That this is now anchored in Article 12 and not in Article one hundred and something is also important as it means that the value of consumer protection has been enhanced a great deal .
I think it is good that we will have the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am very pleased that the Prague Senate has also ratified the Treaty .
This has sent a clear message that we are for this Europe , a social Europe , a Europe of citizens , which we wish to equip for the future .
Thank you for allowing us to demonstrate this once again today .
A special thanks to you , Mrs Kaufmann , for your very good work in the Convention .
You have achieved something very important there .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to introduce a territorial dimension into the discussions on the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is a fact that individual local authorities , municipalities , and regions must cope , on a growing scale , with the impact of European law and European policies .
In connection with this , a survey by Utrecht University has shown that Community bodies annually adopt more than 100 regulations with an immediate impact on local authorities .
Seventy per cent of the legislation and measures we produce must actually be implemented in regions , towns , and local communities .
That is why the controversial Treaty of Lisbon may be perceived positively from the perspective of local authorities .
In actual fact , the Treaty of Lisbon contains a subsidiarity protocol , in other words a protocol under which the adoption of a norm at a higher level , in this case the European level , can be justified only when such a measure is demonstrably more efficient and more necessary .
Under the treaty , more effective consultations with local and regional authorities and their associations are required .
Another provision that would be introduced is the obligation of the European Commission to minimise the financial and administrative burden of each new legal regulation .
These measures should ensure that Brussels will be more attentive to the real problems confronting mayors and better prepared to solve them .
I would also like to stress here that this is quite definitely not the last change to primary law that we will be discussing .
Therefore , we should start thinking carefully about the changes that have to be made in order to render the EU 's legal foundations comprehensible , firm , and beneficial to all citizens .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would not like to judge the positive and negative aspects of the Treaty of Lisbon here .
You all know that the Czech Republic 's view is critical yet realistic .
This has been corroborated by today 's debate in the Senate of the Parliament of the Czech Republic , which then approved the treaty later in the day .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , I speak on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I am a bit irritated , as I would also like to know the opinion of the Committee on Development , but Mr Berman used his speaking time to warn us against exerting pressure on the people of Ireland .
This mentality is clearly one of the reasons why we are debating tonight .
I find myself wondering whether this Parliament still has the right to speak with its citizens , to exchange arguments , to defend the results of its 10 year 's work on the constitutional process , or whether with this dialogue we will be accused of the exertion of pressure and blackmail .
It is a rum old world .
I would have liked Parliament to have defended this treaty much more vociferously , much more offensively and much more openly to the citizens of the European Union and not to have left everything entirely up to governments , which all too often have a rather ambivalent relationship with the progress embodied in this treaty .
Mr President , many Eurosceptics claim that the democratic progress embodied in this treaty is slight and that , in fact , it is a fig leaf for a dark and more sinister Europe hidden behind it .
I believe that a brief glance at the area of internal security , justice and the police , its communitarisation , Parliament 's right of codetermination , the application of the Charter , punishes these assertions and unmasks them as deception , propaganda and ignorance .
For me , this area is still perhaps the most annoying expression of the democratic deficit in the European Union .
I have never been one to consider the separation of powers a historical philosophical principle ; rather it is a basic principle of democracy .
In this area , the Treaty of Lisbon has provided a very decisive , forward-looking response .
It is one of the most sensitive areas in the constitution .
In reality , in this area , ministers of police have made decisions on police laws - behind closed doors - without the control of the courts or the European Court of Justice and without the application of a comprehensive code of basic rights and freedoms .
This is changing , however , and it is a huge step forward in the direction of a European democracy .
Moreover , Mr Berman , to discuss it with the citizens , to defend it , is our duty and not the exertion of pressure .
( Applause )
I am going to have the pleasure of giving the floor to my compatriot , Mr Carnero González .
He is another Member who will not be with us in the next term of office , and I would like to thank him publicly for the enormous efforts and extremely laudable work he has accomplished within the specific area and on the issue that we are dealing with here .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - ( ES ) Thank you , Mr President , and friend , for those kind words that , obviously , are emotionally affecting at a time when I am in the House for the last time in this term of office , to thank for their collaboration all those with whom I have had the honour of working and , also , to ask forgiveness for any mistakes I may have made .
I have tried to do my best for the citizens of my country and all Europeans , and there have been periods during this work that have been truly special , such as the Convention .
In fact , we are talking today about citizenship and I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Petitions .
Which committee in this Parliament is closer to the citizens than the Committee on Petitions ?
It safeguards one of the most important rights enjoyed by European citizens , namely , the right of petition .
The issue is this : if the European Parliament is known in many countries , it is through the exercise of the right of petition .
We , as members of the Committee on Petitions , know this , and in fact the entire House knows this .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which makes the European Union more democratic and more effective , is bringing in new elements , such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and new instruments , such as the citizens ' initiative .
The issue is to avoid confusion , for example , between the right of petition and the citizens ' initiative right .
I would like to point out that , for instance , citizens may demand , through a petition , that Parliament request the Commission to take a legislative initiative , so that in the future we might have a European citizens ' initiative calling on the Commission to institute a legislative procedure and a petition , on the basis of the right of petition , addressed to the relevant committee of this House , asking the House to approach the Commission to that effect .
We need to avoid this contradiction and to seek synergy that reinforces both routes , which are routes that make citizenship more concrete within the EU .
Of course , the Committee on Petitions would like to be involved in the administration of this right of citizens ' initiative .
Of course , all the committees would like to be involved , but I would ask that this right be made effective in the best possible way .
I believe that this would also be a tribute to a day like today , which is so important : the Treaty of Lisbon has been ratified by the senate of the Czech Republic , so there is just one step left before this Treaty becomes a reality and , in fact , before this Treaty , which is the heir to the European Constitution , the best text produced by the EU to date , enters into force .
If we succeed in this , all of us who are here - starting with all the members of the Convention who are here tonight - will have made a huge contribution to the usefulness of having been a Member of this Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , this is my last speech in the plenary , so it is a bit different .
A day will come when federal and cosmopolitan parliaments will join to govern the world .
The dream of a shared humanity without frontiers is being born right here in this place of representation , where freedom grows stronger and democracy grows wider .
The Enlightenment 's visionary idea of a union of peoples gives the first steps within the magic of our rooms and our debates .
In this union Machiavelli weakens , for we were able to replace the sovereignty of powers with the sovereignty of men .
The paradigm of cosmopolitanism settles in our institutions and in our decisions and is now drawing a share of the action .
A new anthropocentric vision of law and politics is emerging , and the post-national identity is taking form in the streets of Europe .
The sublime dignity of man is now the principle that brings together national and international law .
It is the ultimate rule for our original coordination .
What the European Union and its Parliament represents is a moral view without precedent in the history of mankind - a collective moral view that entered the strategy of the European states and founded their integration .
European people 's mutual commitment is truly the assumption of their common humanity .
In fact , isolation and egoism fell on that day of the Treaty of Rome .
Now justice emerges precisely from the virtue of politics , like a bridge between Kant and Aristotle , between freedom and happiness .
The peoples of Europe know that the only legitimacy is that which comes from human rights , and that the only authority belongs to the powers that respect them .
They know that the emancipation of history is only possible through a project of political sharing and global justice .
A day will come when the peoples of Asia , of the Americas and of Africa will get together .
The dignity of men will cross all cultures , from Goethe to Pessoa , from Bach to Tchaikovsky , from Mohammed to Buddha .
Human rights as a universal law , as common rule beyond all differences , and Europe , to be an example , requires more constitution , more decentralisation , more politics , more expansion .
At this moment of saying goodbye , I want to tell you how proud I am to have shared such an adventure with you .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs Esteves , for your speech , thank you for your work over the past years , and good luck and happiness for the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , you said that you would propose to the Conference of Presidents and to the Bureau that we summarise the five reports and the essential explanations in a booklet .
This is an excellent idea and one that I can only welcome .
I would recommend that we also include the Corbett / Méndez de Vigo report , which was the basis for our work on the Treaty of Lisbon .
At that time , we had 500 votes in favour , which was a record result .
It is part of the process .
It was the starting point for this attempt , after the Constitutional Treaty , to get the Reform Treaty in place .
I find the idea very good .
You have our full support .
You have already thanked a few who are unfortunately no longer with us .
I can safely say that all the members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs have worked well together .
We have always been a committee with strong participation .
At this juncture I thank once again those who are currently present in the Chamber .
First , I thank Johannes Voggenhuber , a veritable cornerstone of our work for democracy and civil rights .
Sylvia Kaufmann , who has already been mentioned on a number of occasions , has been particularly effective in expressing her opinion in the face of a great deal of resistance in her political environment .
Carlos Carnero González was always with us .
He fought for the Constitution and also for the referendum in Spain .
Assunção Esteves was always very active .
Alain Lamassoure has achieved an enormous amount , including for the Constitution .
And , last but not least - although she is not a member of the Committee - Catherine Guy-Quint .
She has done substantial work in the Committee on Budgets and always supported the idea of Parliament being given more responsibilities and more rights .
I thank you all .
I have mentioned those present today who will not be with us next time .
We promise to continue their work .
As spokesperson for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament I wish to make two more comments on the reports .
As regards the Kaufmann report , we have always argued that the Citizens ' Initiative is neither a placebo nor an alibi , but a serious constitutional instrument , with which the citizens can put issues on the agenda in Brussels .
I believe that , when the Citizens ' Initiative is implemented , we will ensure that it remains so .
The Commission should exercise its right of initiative and draft a bill very soon after the reorganisation .
As regards the Dehaene report , I would once again like to mention the transitional period .
We want the spirit of Lisbon to be present during the consultations for the Council proposal for the new Commission President .
But the entire College of Commissioners , including the President , will not be confirmed until the treaty comes into force .
We will in effect vote twice on the President of the Commission .
It is important to remember that .
It is simply what the transitional period entails .
I think that the programme Mr Dehaene has produced for the legislative period is very good .
The starting point is the citizens ' vote at the European elections , followed by all staffing decisions , political programmes and the financing of the European Union .
The starting position is the vote of the sovereign states , of the citizens in the European Union .
I find that really good .
Thank you , Mr Dehaene .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Mr Churchill said : ' never waste a crisis ' .
Well , we have a crisis today of the economy , of climate , of international instability , and it is clear to us , at least , in our group , that these crises greatly strengthen the argument for granting the EU an enhanced capacity to act globally .
The Treaty is the logical response to these challenges .
It is the best treaty that can be agreed at this time .
It is a good treaty ; historically , certainly , it is on a par with Maastricht .
It builds up democracy and makes the governance of the EU more representative , efficient and effective .
It is also a reformist treaty .
It corrects most of the problems from which the present Treaty of Nice suffers .
You do not have to be a militant federalist - as I am - to see this , but you do have to be a good democrat to get the point : first , that we need an integrated Europe to shape our response to globalisation , and secondly , that a post-national democracy is not a substitute for , but a supplement to , historic national democracies .
Conservative and nationalist opponents of the Treaty should tell us why it is that they prefer to stick with the present , ineffective and clumsy Union and why they seek to retain for the nation state the absurd pretentions to nation sovereignty , when what actually matters is to make the interdependence between states and citizens work - an interdependence which is clarified and entrenched in this Treaty .
This Treaty is a great constitutional step forward for Europe , and I am proud to have been associated in its drafting .
I will fight to the finish to see that it is brought into force and put into effect successfully and quickly .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President , looking around this House I somehow have the impression that the occupants of the constitutional ivory tower have been invited to continue their discussions in the plenary sitting of this House .
That was not the agreement .
What had been agreed on was a major debate of the European Parliament on the consequences of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Would it not have been nice if this Parliament had discussed the treaty this morning at the same time as the Czech Senate and had made it clear to the citizens of the European Union that the treaty was the work of the European Parliament , starting with the Convention and continuing right through to the present day , that this reform had not been imposed by an EU of elites , but that it was a major piece of work resulting from a collaborative effort ?
When something fails , my 15 years of experience tells me that the failure is usually down to governments and not to parliaments .
Now , we are all covered in scars and bedecked with decorations .
I am giving my last speech after 15 years .
We have come a long way .
It has been a great honour .
I was also invited - along with Mr Duff - to be a rapporteur for this House , both on the Charter of Fundamental Rights and on the Constitution .
I am bound to say - and I think I also speak for the other members of the Convention - that we always felt supported by the approval of the European Parliament .
We stuck our necks out , dared to have visions that provoked much shaking of heads , resistance on the part of governments , many a veto , almost the collapse of the Convention .
But there is , in fact , no denying that the driving force , the visionary force in this process was the parliaments .
As such it was also a first victory for the citizens of the European Union .
Allow me to , perhaps , take a look into the future .
We know what we all think of the progress made by this treaty .
When the Intergovernmental Conference attacked the results of the Convention , abolished the Legislative Council , re-introduced laws made by the Council and added on the third part - and all these things that really upset us today - I had the idea of a First Amendment of the Constitution in a far and distant future .
One of the important cardinal elements of this treaty is the European Parliament 's right of initiative , its right to propose motions for a Convention to be formed to amend the Constitution .
And we have not yet come to the end of the road .
When we fought for our visions , we were often told in the Convention : ' Ah , you with your comparison to the Philadelphia Convention , Europe needs a major crisis .
Without a major crisis you will never manage to create a real European democracy , a real political community .
We really do need a major crisis ' .
They were clearly thinking of the next hundred years .
But we have it .
We have this crisis .
And now , suddenly , the citizens are asking why we do not have any economic governance .
They are asking why we do not have a minimum of common European economic law , at least with regard to the key aspects of fiscal policy , corporate taxes and transaction taxes .
People are also asking for a social Europe .
Yes , we did not dismount from the barricades , the governments simply said Njet .
Today , the whole of Europe is asking where are the powers of the European Union to defend the social market economy , a fair distribution ?
In the meantime billions of euros will be spent into the next generation .
And we have no democratic power , no legal basis to develop a social Europe .
Every day I am asked what the situation is with regard to military action in the name of Europe .
A couple of nation states are taking military action in the context of cabinet politics as practised in the 19th century .
Should we not reflect on the fact that this House has to agree before military action can take place in the name of Europe ?
And the citizens ' initiatives ?
There too constitutional changes were excluded .
Why ?
Why can there not be a Citizens ' Initiative calling for the treaty to be amended and for the further development of the European Constitution ?
I think there is still a long way to go .
The timidity and shyness of this Parliament before the Council is a huge obstacle .
( Heckling )
I believe we should be more militant .
I hope that this House will really claim the rights to which it is entitled under the Treaty of Lisbon with tremendous selfconfidence and with great loyalty to the citizens of the European Union , assert them and then consider how the whole thing can be developed a lot better towards a European democracy and a social order .
Mr President , I am not giving up on my dream .
( Heckling )
I am not giving up on my dream to enable my children and their children to at least say : " Vive la République d 'Europe ! ”
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the speeches show that the Treaty of Lisbon is clearly viewed emotionally and not rationally .
Why do we not wait for the next Parliament and let the new Parliament discuss the issue and just wait and see whether the Treaty of Lisbon actually materialises ?
No , there are some people here who are absolutely fixated on this Treaty and who want to explain its supposed advantages again and again .
Burkhard Hirsch , the excessive moralist , put it so beautifully when he said that the Irish should not be seen as rain-soaked shepherds and as the only Europeans incapable of understanding the blessings of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The referenda would have obtained a negative result elsewhere because we cannot expect , nor should we expect , voters to endorse a Treaty that even a wellintentioned reader will never be able to understand .
The Treaty of Lisbon does not only regulate the relationship between the EU institutions ; no , the Treaty of Lisbon establishes policies .
And that is important .
For example , Article 43 ( 1 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon lays down the tasks of combat forces of the European Union .
The Solidarity clause in Article 222 ( 1a ) states that all available resources are to be mobilised to prevent the terrorist threat in the territory of the Member States .
The European Union will therefore become a military alliance and there is even the possibility of military operations being conducted inside the European Union .
Article 43 ( 1 ) talks of assistance being given to third countries to fight terrorism in their territory .
There are a number of regulations in this area .
There is ' permanent structured cooperation ' enabling a military core Europe .
There is a role for NATO in this Treaty and ' Member States shall undertake progressively to improve their military capabilities ' .
In the future , should this Treaty be ratified - and I hope it will not - there will be a start-up fund ( Article 41 ) : the EU budget could also be used for military purposes in the area of foreign and military policy .
In terms of economic policy , the economic logic of the Treaty of Lisbon is precisely the economic logic that led to the economic crisis : ' an open market economy with free competition ' .
Only one would never call it that today .
I have the impression that the people who want this treaty , especially those from the EU elite , are actually living in the past .
Conditions have changed fundamentally .
What we need is a new treaty for a new era .
Ireland has decided .
The decision in the referendum was clear .
The treaty was voted against and is therefore dead .
All of a sudden there is going to be a second vote .
Who in France would say , following the election of President Sarkozy , that they should simply vote again because somebody does not like him .
I want to make one thing perfectly clear : there are good , purely rational reasons why we should not ratify this Treaty .
What was said in Ireland should stand ; in other words ' no ' means ' no ' .
This means that the Treaty of Lisbon is dead , and I do not understand why we are discussing it today in this context .
There is a shift in power within this treaty in the direction of the large Member States .
I will make no bones about it : as internationalists we defend the European idea against those who want to make the EU a military power and a purely economic alliance .
We need an alternative treaty to the Treaty of Lisbon , and that means a treaty that is oriented towards peace and not a treaty that is , at heart , a military treaty . Thank you .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I take it for granted that we are all entitled to speak for as long as we like .
I might need an extra minute or two , and I shall be happy to take it .
( SV ) I will now switch to my own language .
The European political establishment 's handling of the Treaty of Lisbon will go down to posterity as a disgrace in two respects : firstly , with regard to the political process for pushing it through and , secondly , with regard to the actual purpose of the treaty and its content .
If we look back to Laeken 2000 , it was said there that we should produce a proposal for a constitutional solution .
This was to lead to us having a closer-knit Europe and citizens who were committed , as we were concerned that , in practice , citizens had a poor opinion of the EU .
The Convention , under the leadership of Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , produced something quite different .
The people of Europe did not want this , and the people of France and the Netherlands said ' no ' .
Everyone knows that people in the United Kingdom , Denmark and many other countries would have voted ' no ' if they had been given the chance .
Attempts were made to find a way round this - a new treaty appeared which is the same but , when it suits , is claimed not to be , and this claim continues to be adhered to .
It is now the case that , when the people of Ireland said ' no ' to what we are now calling the Treaty of Lisbon , we have the gall the carry out an investigation into the reason why the people of Ireland voted incorrectly .
This is quite incredible , and there has been absolutely no debate about it .
You are all patting each other on the back and saying how good this is , despite the fact that you know it is a disgrace .
My second objection is this : a constitutional treaty , a constitution , does not exist to make it quicker to take political decisions .
Quite the opposite in fact - it exists to make it more difficult to take political decisions .
Constitutions are there to ensure that those who simply happen to be elected right now cannot make whatever decisions they want to .
It should be complicated .
This is what the American Constitution is like .
This is a French bureaucratic tradition to ensure that an authority can quickly take decisions on anything under the sun without needing to worry about public influence .
This is appalling and a disgrace to the EU .
Mr Lundgren , I am sure you will have noted that your fellow Members have listened to you with respect , in silence and without speaking as you did when you were talking during other Members ' speeches , but that is the way that different people understand democracy .

Mr President , I had been hoping that Mr Pöttering might perhaps be in the Chair tonight , as I wanted to thank him publicly for giving me the opportunity of leaving the EPP Group a few years ago .
I am delighted that my Conservative colleagues will all be leaving the EPP Group shortly - an objective which I have worked towards for 10 years .
We are here to debate the Lisbon Treaty so I would have reminded Mr Pöttering that his own country , Germany , has not yet ratified .
We in the EU claim to be a Union of values , based on democracy and the rule of law , yet we ignore democracy .
We ride roughshod over the wishes of voters .
We rejected the results of referenda in Denmark on Maastricht , in Ireland on Nice , in France and Holland on the Constitution and now on Lisbon in Ireland again .
We treat the aspirations of our electorates with outright contempt .
So much for democracy !
We are no better on the rule of law .
We are implementing plans and spending based on the Lisbon Treaty ahead of ratification .
This is little less than a bloodless coup d 'état .
Mr Pöttering says that a million Irish voters cannot stand in the way of 450 million Europeans .
He is right .
So let the 450 million vote on the Treaty .
Britain will vote ' no ' .
In all probability , France and Germany will vote ' no ' but you dare not let the people vote on the Treaty because you know their answer already .
In Britain , all but eight of our 646 MPs were elected on a commitment to a referendum , yet our discredited Labour Government has scandalously broken its promise .
Let me give colleagues due notice .
We in the British Conservative Party will make a Lisbon referendum a key plank of our European election platform .
We will deliver a referendum and we will kill this wretched and shameful Treaty stone dead .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European integration occasionally provides us with symbols that move anonymous actors such as we .
The last vote of the parliamentary term will therefore be on the last amendment that was jointly proposed by MEPs and national MPs before the European Convention : the creation of a citizens ' initiative at European Union level .
Let us not under-estimate its significance .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives the citizens themselves , the ordinary citizens , the same power of political initiative within the European Union as our own Parliament .
Our owninitiative reports allow us to invite the Commission to act , to propose a legal basis to us in order to launch a new policy or to adapt an existing one .
Well , the citizens will now be able to do the same , if there are enough of them and if they come from a significant number of Member States .
I congratulate Mrs Kaufmann on the way she has worked to find the consensus that was obviously needed on an issue such as this .
The clarifications that she has brought to the treaty and the procedural guarantees are reasonable .
Setting the significant number at a quarter of the Member States is consistent with the solution adopted for the governments themselves in the framework of the area of freedom , security and justice .
This new right thus given to European citizens exists in none of our countries in this form .
The Union will thus be ensuring that steps are taken towards direct democracy .
Not even in France , for example , do we dare to go so far .
We reformed our national Constitution last year but restricted this same right of collective petition to the local level only .
Let us now hope that our political parties compete imaginatively to make the best use of this new right and , above all , beyond the parties , let us hope that civil society takes a hold of it : unions , non-governmental organisations , students - especially those with Erasmus grants - cross-border workers , all the European citizens living in a country other than their own and who find that the laws that we adopt here are , unfortunately , badly applied on the ground .
In this Union of free movement , the only remaining barriers are those of our political debates .
Once again , unfortunately , there is no European election campaign beginning , but 27 national campaigns based on a European pretext .
The economic area exists , the single currency exists , the single European sky exists , but the single political area has yet to be created .
This is the real challenge for the Treaty of Lisbon and this is certainly one of the provisions that will make the biggest contribution to meeting that challenge .
Mr President , tonight the hope generated by the Czech ratification of the Lisbon Treaty is being overshadowed by the quasi-conspiratorial atmosphere of this meeting .
Some were afraid that by preparing the proper implementation of a treaty badly and urgently needed we might offend certain citizens of the Union .
I believe that , on the contrary , we are offending the citizens by hiding the truth about what Europe really is , and could be , and by refusing a frank and rational dialogue with them .
Likewise , to show respect for a minority opinion while ignoring the majority decision is offensive to both the given majority and the general principles of democracy we all claim to cherish .
The written text of a treaty is not enough .
One has to give that text a clarifying interpretation which puts in light its spirit , thus allowing for the best implementation .
That is precisely what today 's reports are doing .
They speak about : one , the parliamentarisation of the Union ; two , the communitarisation of the European institutions ; three , the establishment of an interinstitutional equilibrium as a guarantee for a transnational checks-and-balances system ; four , the assurance of legislative coherence and cohesion at European Union level through Europeanisation of the national parliaments and not nationalisation of the European Parliament ; five , concentrations of instruments and policies for the good of institutional efficiency ; and , six , the improvement of representation , transparency and participation at European Union level .
Along those lines , we will be able to see emerging a demos which will fill with substance the present shell of the European procedures , making them relevant to the citizens .
The only thing which remains to be done is to find a solution to bridge the elections to the new Parliament and the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I hope that the sense of responsibility and solidarity of our Irish fellows will help us to achieve that , and to keep to our historical timetable .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that Mr Dehaene 's report , which is very important and very valuable , should be supplemented as regards the operation and , above all , the responsibilities of the European Council .
This important body will be raised to the rank of institution and , in the political sphere , it is a leading force .
Particular attention should therefore be paid to it .
Its actions will be subject to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice in the same way as the European Central Bank 's are .
I also propose , on behalf of my group , an amendment which reflects this extra responsibility .
As its legislative functions are limited , this responsibility essentially falls under Article 265 on the failure to act .
I believe that , for lack of details in the treaty , the obligations of the European Council will probably have to be spelled out in an interinstitutional agreement .
Mrs Kaufmann 's report is therefore very important , because it constitutes a real opening up towards the citizens .
The greatest weakness that we could show , when faced with a challenge for the Union 's future , would be to create a void , a distance between the Union and the citizens .
For them , the Union is distant and unknown , even though they feel that they need it .
My group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , believes that this void can only be filled effectively via regular , broad-based consultation of the citizens .
We have not had the time to finish our work nor to conclude our debate on this issue .
Nevertheless , as Mr Lamassoure has already observed , the citizens ' initiative can , according to the treaty , be a major instrument for creating a European public space that we very much need .
It will , in effect , encourage public debate between the citizens and the Union , and this in turn will awaken the public awareness that is crucial to us .
Even so , however , its management is a major challenge for the European institutions , especially for the Commission , with the credibility of this new instrument at stake , for the Member States , which must accept the new practice and provide the infrastructures and , obviously , for the citizens , who must take up this new instrument for the good of direct democracy .
( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President , President Klaus reacted to today 's decision in the Czech Senate , which we sincerely welcome and on which I offer my hearty congratulations , by , amongst other things , claiming that the Treaty of Lisbon was dead , because it had been rejected in the Irish referendum .
He is a political zombie launching an attack against the majority decisions of his own Parliament and the Senate and confirming his unfortunate and sectarian attitude in other policy areas as well .
Fortunately , after the positive votes , he is merely making himself look very silly .
We , the Greens , have a positive and constructive attitude towards the process of European integration , with critical comments , of course , where necessary .
Once again , my warmest thanks to the Czech Senate , the Czech Parliament and the Czech Government .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Dehaene 's report gives me mixed feelings .
On the one hand , I welcome the fact that he occasionally feels the need to analyse things in earnest , and here I refer to paragraphs 14 and 26 , where he refers to the dominance of the European Council and the problems associated with the new presidency system within the Council .
On the other hand , I am disappointed with this report because the rapporteur 's analysis is not focused throughout .
In particular , in the last 12 paragraphs , where he discusses external policy , all the institutional uncertainties have been massaged away , although the institutional consequences of this dual role are not entirely known .
Therefore , I cannot understand how the rapporteur has come to the general assessment that the new system will entail stronger institutional balance in the Union .
I recognise that the Treaty of Lisbon constitutes an improvement in certain areas .
However , this does not detract from the fact that it is precisely the uncertain consequences of this Treaty which will prove to be Lisbon 's Achilles ' heel for the Union 's institutional balance , something that the rapporteur has failed to pick up .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , at this session we are doing something described in our country as drawing up the bill in the absence of the innkeeper .
We will be voting on relations between the institutions of the European Union , its Member States and their parliaments , as if the Treaty of Lisbon were in force .
I would like to reiterate that the Treaty of Lisbon is still a long way from ratification .
Members of this Parliament should be aware of that and should not withhold this information from citizens .
Each democratically minded person must realise that not even the most aggressive onslaughts against politicians who have not signed the Treaty of Lisbon will change anything .
In conclusion , I would like to tell Mr Cohn-Bendit that his objectionable statements , claiming that President Klaus of the Czech Republic intends to bribe senators of the Parliament in my country , are an affront not only to President Klaus but also to the citizens of the Czech Republic .
Such accusations are an affront to the principles of friendly international relations , as well as simple human decency .
That is why I am asking Mr Cohn-Bendit either to prove his claims of corruption or to make a public apology to President Klaus .
Mr President , this package of reports shows that , if the Lisbon Treaty comes into force - and this is without prejudice , of course , to the decision of the Irish people - then we will have a Union that offers more opportunities for participation , more accountability , more democracy and more checks and balances .
That is the central message we can give out tonight , whether it is through the Leinen report showing the increased role for this elected Parliament within the institutional system ; the Brok report showing the new opportunities for national parliaments to participate ; the Dehaene report looking at the extra accountability of the executive branches of the institutions and how we will operate a possible transitional period ; the Guy-Quint report showing that there will no longer be parts of the European budget that are ring-fenced from parliamentary control ; and of course the Kaufmann report on the citizens ' initiative .
My group will support all these resolutions and we are proud to do so , I would just say , with one particular reservation , and that is on the Kaufmann report , which we see as a first step : putting on the table a first reflection on how that might operate in the future .
But we have to be careful - and I agree with what the Commissioner said earlier - not to set up a system that is too onerous for citizens or has too many bureaucratic obstacles for exercising that right .
But we have plenty of time to come back to that , should the Treaty indeed come into force .
We are talking on the day where we have achieved the 26th parliamentary ratification .
I know that the British Conservatives over there are not interested in that .
They are chatting away on some other matter no doubt , but it is an important fact .
Twenty-six ratifications through parliamentary procedures : 26 ' yeses ' to the Treaty ; one ' no ' .
I would suggest that , in that situation of 26 ' yeses ' and one ' no ' , it is not , as some people have suggested , undemocratic to look at that result and ask the one country that has said ' no ' whether or not it is willing to reconsider in light of the ratification of the others .
It remains their choice to do so or not .
But I think it is quite reasonable that they themselves in Ireland have come to the conclusion that they might be willing to reconsider if certain conditions are met .
And it is incumbent on us to do what we can to address the concerns that were expressed by the ' no ' vote .
That has to be part and parcel of the answer and that , after all , is what the Union has agreed to do .
All the other Member States - because it is the Member States , not just the European institutions involved in this - have agreed to try and address those concerns to make it possible to achieve the 27th ratification .
There is a wider lesson to learn from this .
Our basic rule book in the European Union , the treaties signed and ratified by Member States , can only ever be modified by the unanimous agreement of each and every single one of those Member States .
That is a very high hurdle to reach .
It shows that those that claim that we are running roughshod over democratic accountability and ignoring the views of the people have got it completely the wrong way around .
It is very easy to block any step forward , any reform of the European instructions .
Those Eurosceptics over there only need one victory out of 27 .
The dice is loaded in their favour , not in the favour of those who , like Mr Duff , would want a much more speedy integration .
That is the way it is .
They also quote referendums that have given a ' no ' result .
I notice they only quote the referendums that have given a ' no ' result .
They never manage to mention the Spanish referendum , the Luxembourg referendum .
I think if you look at the history of European integration there have been some 32 ( if I remember correctly ) referendums in the Member States over the years , with 26 or 27 of them giving a ' yes ' result and only a handful giving a ' no ' result .
But whenever there has been a ' no ' result , it has been impossible to override it without coming back and addressing the concerns that were expressed and asking the country in question whether or not it wished to reconsider ; whether or not it wished to change its mind .
I find nothing wrong in democratic terms with that , with building up gradually , step by step , slowly , by means of consensus of all the Member States , this Union that we have worked on over half a century , this Union that we should be proud of , with the fact that we have 27 countries working together in a continent which our history shows has all too often been torn asunder by the national embers that some are seeking to revive .
( DA ) Mr President , participating in the debate this evening is a somewhat special experience .
For five years I have been working closely with Catherine Guy-Quint .
The two of us have been budget coordinators for our respective political groups .
We have had our battles along the way , but most of the time we have fought together in the spirit of cooperation which pervades work in the Committee on Budgets .
You are finishing , Catherine , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank you more officially for the time we have spent together .
I have learnt a great deal !
My French has improved and I have also learnt a lot from your style , which I have come to respect .
You are more no-nonsense than I am , but sometimes that is necessary !
This evening the outgoing Parliament is handing over to the new Parliament , which will be elected from 4 to 7 June .
If the voters of Ireland vote yes in October and the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force at the end of the year , we will have to act quickly because there are major consequences for Parliament 's work ; not least in the area of budgets .
This is described well and clearly in Mrs Guy-Quint 's report .
You have completed a first class piece of work to hand on to the new members of the European Parliament .
Parliament will be formally involved in establishing the multiannual financial frameworks , but we still have not succeeded in securing a change in this framework period from seven to five years to correspond to the period of office of the Commission and Parliament .
This would enable us always to help shape these frameworks .
Parliament would have full influence over the entire budget , including the agriculture budget .
I believe that it would be good for the farmers and citizens of the EU if the discussions concerning agricultural policy were thereby thoroughly opened up and if the horse trading behind closed doors were replaced by open , democratic debate .
No one can say in advance what the result would be for the level of agricultural expenditure , but it would undoubtedly prevent schemes being maintained and developed if they cannot be clearly and logically explained to our citizens .
The annual budget procedure is being changed , and last year we tried out the new requirements made of work in Parliament 's Committee on Budgets .
Having only one reading followed by negotiations to reach agreement forces us to prepare earlier and much more carefully .
That is not such a silly idea in essence .
I feel that last year 's general trial of the new discipline had good results .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives Parliament new budgetary powers and new ways of working and Mrs Guy-Quint 's report provides the forthcoming Parliament with an excellent basis for this work .
I hope and believe that we will succeed in getting the Treaty of Lisbon adopted , thereby ensuring that the work of the EU becomes more open and effective .
Mr President , since the 1970s , British politicians have sworn the EU is not about political domination or loss of sovereignty , yet EU presidents state that we pooled our sovereignty and have a European empire , which makes 75 % of our law .
This Treaty signs away our ability to rule ourselves , yet a BBC poll says that 84 % of the British people want no more power surrendered .
Like mushrooms , the British people are left in the dark and fed manure .
The Conservatives , through the EPP Group , gave their allowances to the ' yes ' campaign in Ireland , then deviously promised to allow a referendum - but only if Ireland votes ' no ' again .
Behind the backs of the British people and with no mandate , the Westminster parties have sold their country away , while the polls show 55 % want to leave the EU .
Never before in the field of human politics have so many been conned by so few .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , millions of Europeans , Britons , Italians and French do not want a Europe based on politically correct attitudes , on a laissez-faire and antisocial outlook , as we have seen with the Bolkestein draft , on totalitarian and Jacobin centralism , or on a lay , Masonic and faux Marxist outlook .
I believe that Europeans are very interested in true social freedoms , in those that offer families , communities and social bodies the opportunity to achieve real progress , and in a Europe based on subsidiarity and , precisely , on social bodies and a deep-rooted Christian and Roman view of history .
This is a Europe in direct opposition to that of the Treaty of Lisbon , sought by the strong powers , sought by the lobbies that effectively wish to radically centralise the situation .
We believe that Europeans must finally vote and throw this treaty into the sea .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this debate is very important , because we have heard from various sides of the House that powers are to be given to Europe .
From the point of view of the nation states this is true , but the fact is that nation states are also to be given an opportunity to ensure that the same laws and regulations apply in the remaining 26 Member States .
This European rationalisation project , undertaken to ensure that we do not have completely different legal systems in 27 Member States and that we strive to create a single regulatory framework , is a major step forward and gives not only our Ministers but also our Members of Parliament many more rights and opportunities to promote the interests of the citizens of the European Union .
Even though I often express dissatisfaction in the tiers here in Parliament , and when I now look back and see that the tiers of opponents are empty and that the vast majority of opponents are not taking part in this debate , I wish to make it quite clear that of course we are also critical of the institutions and we want improvements .
It is precisely these improvements that have been the subject of intense debate over the last eight years .
We simply want to ensure that relations between the institutions and the citizens are improved .
Today we cannot just stand there and say that a reform process initiated eight years ago is to be stopped without offering any alternatives - that is the true scandal of this debate .
We urgently need to focus on what the treaty is about .
This treaty gives us new objectives .
We are at last getting a representative and participative democracy with the corresponding Citizens ' Initiative .
We are getting new powers in environmental protection and climate change .
As if a single nation state could solve these problems on its own !
For air and water in particular , and in various other areas too , that is just not possible .
Together , we must also take care of freedom , security and full employment .
In view of the crisis , it is particularly important that the European Union be given these powers .
New legal bases are also important , however .
In view of the critical energy situation we need a legal basis for energy policy .
Also in the field of trade policy , when we consider international trade issues , we see how urgently we need a good solution for our European citizens , quite apart from space travel and intellectual property .
And , for our opponents , the exit clause may also be quite important .
I believe that the new supervisory powers and procedures will strengthen this Parliament .
I am in favour of this debate being much more intense , because many of us have still not seen what opportunities this new Europe offers .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as a Memberfrom the Czech Republic , I am delighted that today , as we are discussing the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Czech Senate has approved the Treaty of Lisbon with an huge majority of 54 to 20 votes .
It has thus expressed the will of the Czech people to have the Treaty of Lisbon in place .
This particular will has already been expressed by the lower chamber of the Czech Parliament , the House of Deputies .
At the same time , however , the President of the Republic is questioning the will of the people , the view clearly expressed by the House of Deputies and the Senate .
Václav Klaus , the President of the Czech Republic , has said : ' I must express my disappointment that some of the senators , following unprecedented levels of political and media pressure , both at home and abroad , have abandoned their earlier publicly held views - thus surrendering their political and civic integrity - and have given their consent to the Treaty of Lisbon .
They have turned their backs on the long-term interests of the Czech Republic , which have been subordinated to their own interests and to the short-term interests of current politicians .
This provides very gloomy evidence of yet another failure on the part of a major section of our political elite .
I will now wait to see if a group of senators - some of whom have already announced their intention of doing so - asks the Constitutional Court for another review of the Treaty of Lisbon in relation to our constitution .
If this happens , I will not be considering my own decision over the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon until the Constitutional Court has issued its judgement . '
We are here to discuss the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on the development of the European Union 's institutional balance .
However , I think we should also discuss here - and this should be done by Czech deputies and senators as well - the institutional balance in the Czech Republic .
The Czech Republic is a parliamentary democracy .
In spite of this , the Czech Republic has a President who does not respect the will of the House of Deputies , who does not respect the will of the Senate , and who acts like an absolutist monarch or dictator from the country he criticises so much and recalls so often , which is to say the former Soviet Union .
There is much to say to our Eurosceptics on the state of democracy in Europe , on the state of democracy in our country and on the behaviour of the President whom you admire so much .
( FI ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon will radically reform the budgetary procedure of the European Union .
The multi-annual financial framework will become mandatory , the classification of expenditure into compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure will go , and budget proceedings will be shorter .
I support the five-year financial framework for the term of office of the European Parliament and Commission .
It will result in more efficient work and allow the institutions to establish their own policy strategies .
It is becoming an awkward process drafting the budget .
It makes one wonder who could have developed such a complicated system .
So far it has been clear as to which institution decides the final figures for the budget .
Now there has to be consensus on each detail , which can mean very intensive negotiations in the Conciliation Committee .
For Parliament the new procedure will require a strengthening of available human resources .
Otherwise it will not be fully able to exercise its powers in the drafting of the budget , in general , or in the administration of the EU , in particular .
Finally , I wish to thank the rapporteurs , and Mrs Catherine Guy-Quint especially , for their excellent reports and , more generally , for their excellent levels of cooperation over the years .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , thank you for giving my this opportunity to make a few comments rather earlier than anticipated .
This debate has shown a high degree of conviction right across the political and national spectrum .
It has also demonstrated the strength of our commitment to take Europe forward .
When I listen to some very critical speakers from Anglo-Saxon countries , I remember that it was precisely from such countries that , over the last few months , a particularly large number of cries for help came to overcome the financial crisis together .
I am sure that these gentlemen will also realise that they represent positions based on the 60-year legacy of Winston Churchill .
We are now entering a very decisive phase .
Following our decisions , which we reached with such broad consensus in the European Parliament and which we found so convincing in Prague , we should not fall into triumphalism .
It will be an important task for us to give the people of Ireland , in all modesty , an opportunity to take their decision , in sovereignty and freedom - a decision that Ireland has to take in sovereign freedom out of responsibility for the entire continent .
I believe that we should also be instrumental in ensuring that this is possible .
I hope that , at the end of June , the European Council will create the necessary conditions for the completion of this final stage and that the Irish are given the conditions they need to tackle this issue .
Mr President , I welcome this debate .
It seemed for a while that it might not happen .
I am glad it is happening , and it is thanks to the persistence of my colleagues that it is taking place .
It is entirely appropriate for this House to responsibly and sensibly address the transition for the possible ratification - finally - of the Lisbon Treaty .
It would be foolish of us not to do so .
I will be working hard in the latter part of this year to ensure there is a ' yes ' vote - whether I am elected to this House or not - and I regret that a number of my friends are not going to be here , and will miss them .
But I want , in particular , tonight to congratulate the Czech Republic for a ' yes ' vote , because they have voted today for the future .
I think that it is extremely important that we get this message across : that the unification of Europe and the building of a united Europe is about the future for the people of Europe .
Nowhere else in the world outside of Europe do we have 27 sovereign Member States sharing decision-making on a cross-border basis in the common interests of their people .
Nowhere else do independent states submit their collective decisions for approval and amendment to a directly elected multinational parliament .
This Union of ours is unique .
It is a unique democratic experiment .
It is not without its faults .
It needs reform , and indeed the reforms in the Treaty of Lisbon are the reforms on which we can agree at this point in time .
No doubt future Parliaments - and indeed future Councils - will identify and agree further reforms .
But Europe also needs a new direction .
It needs to reassert its commitment to the social well-being of our peoples and to rebalance the almost exclusive obsession with market liberalisation that we have had for the past decade .
It must be borne in mind that the political and social and economic orientation of this Union is driven by the choices made by the electorates : in general elections , in European elections and by the commissions that we collectively select and put in place .
The European Union is where we settle the disputes , where young men previously resolved them by killing each other in trenches .
It is a great honour for me to participate in this Parliament , where we have replaced the force of arms with the force of argument .
We cannot let the Eurosceptics turn the clock back .
That the decision of one Member State , representing less than 1 % of the population of the Union , could stop it in its tracks is a sign of how delicate our construction is .
But it is also a sign of the strength of the Union that we can survive and allow the peoples of Europe to independently make these decisions .
We must , I believe , try and reinfuse the dream of Europe with our people .
We have to avoid getting dragged down into the gutter by the angry old men who stand up at the backbenches up there on the far right and who scream at us and tell us how undemocratic we are , when in fact this is the Parliament elected by the people of Europe to make decisions for the people of Europe .

( FR ) Mr President , this is indeed a rather solemn day : the Lisbon package - as it is called - is finally coming before Parliament ; the Czech Senate has given a sign of hope ; many are taking the floor for the last time , the emotion is palpable ; we are in the process of bringing this parliamentary term to a close , and many of us are quite emotional .

A really historic atmosphere prevails in this late-night session of Parliament .
As a Janus Member - half constitutional , half budgetary - I would like today to speak a little more specifically about Mrs Guy-Quint 's report on the new budget system and about the impact that the Treaty of Lisbon will have on this new system .
As has been said , it is above all a more democratic system .
Henceforth , all spending - the entire budget - will be agreed under the codecision procedure between the Council and Parliament .
It is also , and this is even more important , a more political budget , since we have - as Mrs Guy-Quint calls it - interinstitutional strategic programming , in other words , all of the bodies of the European Union agree to bring the budget into being .
However , this is a system that still contains uncertainties .
Will Parliament , for example , really play what is , in theory , its strengthened role ?
Will it enjoy this new power , given that there are also problems ?
We have less time ; there is only a single reading .
It is therefore up to Parliament to seize - and this is a challenge in itself - this opportunity to play its role .
Will the five-year budgetary term coincide with or be accentuated by the five-year parliamentary term ?
It is not certain .
On this issue , too , we need to make an effort .
There are also lost opportunities .
We lost the opportunity to provide ourselves with more own resources , we lost the opportunity - please allow me 10 more seconds , since we are in a formal late-night sitting - to implement a new budget philosophy .
To end , I would like to stress that we face challenges : the challenge of the transition - it is not easy to go straight over to a new system - and the challenge of flexibility - we need more flexibility if we are to face up to the crises .
I will finish with the wish that all this might be carried forward with the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As I myself am a Janus Member on the same committee as you , Mr Botopoulos , I had no option but to give you those 40 seconds .
( LT ) I think that all us taking part in this late-night sitting will remember this meeting for a long time to come and will have something to tell our children and grandchildren .
Even this evening we can all feel the European ship being buffeted by the storms of the financial crisis .
It is clear that this ship 's engine , the treaty mechanism , is too weak and needs to be replaced immediately .
The Treaty of Lisbon is the stronger engine which we need to face the crisis .
Therefore I agree with the reports being debated and I agree with my fellow Members , who stress that it is not very democratic if the rock of one referendum can wreck the whole European ship , if one state leader can imagine that he is the only one marching in step and the opinion of the other 26 states is of no consequence .
I think that Ireland 's voters will draw their own conclusions on what is happening in Europe and throughout the world .
Mr President , it remains for me to be the last on the speakers ' list for the European People 's Party / European Democrats this evening , and as an Irish MEP I suppose there is some rationale to that .
Could I thank , first of all , all the rapporteurs of the five reports .
I am delighted that we have the opportunity to discuss them and , like other Irish colleagues , I have been requesting , through my political group , that we arrive at the situation we have here tonight where we can discuss five most important reports .
At the outset , may I make it quite clear that what I say on this debate tonight is fully predicated in my next sentence .
It would not be appropriate , nor is it intended to anticipate in any way or take for granted the decision of the Irish people in the forthcoming second referendum on the Lisbon Treaty , which was announced only earlier this week by our Taoiseach Brian Cowan TD .
The conclusions of last December 's European Council contain a package of measures that arose from research following our referendum last June : measures to respond to the concerns of the Irish ' no ' voters as they were outlined by our Taoiseach to the Council meeting last December , along with a road map to enable the Treaty to enter into force by the end of 2009 .
This package includes the retention of the principle of one Commissioner per Member State , confirmation of the importance the Union attaches to workers ' rights and other social issues , and a series of legal guarantees on taxation neutrality and the provisions of the Irish constitution in relation to the right to life , education and the family .
At the spring European Council our Taoiseach informed partners that , in accordance with the timeline agreed in December , detailed work is now under way to give effect to these commitments and should be finished by mid-2009 .
If our Government is fully satisfied with the outcome , the Taoiseach has agreed to seek ratification of the Treaty by the end of the term of the current Commission , which is expected to leave office , I understand , at the end of October .
I sincerely hope the promise of an early autumn referendum will mean early October at the very latest .
And , given the increase in the European Parliament 's powers envisaged in the Treaty of Lisbon , it is understandable that its Members should consider the institutional and procedural implications of the Treaty , hence tonight 's debate on the five reports .
The European Parliament 's consideration of these issues tonight takes place at a time when my script for tonight said four Member States - Ireland , the Czech Republic , Germany and Poland - had yet to complete their ratification process .
Technically that is true , but my congratulations this evening to the Czech Republic - to the Czech Senate particularly - for their Parliament 's complete approval to allow , hopefully , their President to ratify the Treaty on behalf of the Czech people .
I trust he will accept the will of their Parliament .
I understand it has been referred to a judicial review .
I hope that is only a technical delay .
For the Treaty to enter into force , of course , all countries must ratify the Treaty , and , yes it is correct to say that 26 European parliaments - 26 Member State parliaments - have said ' yes ' , and so far the Irish are the only ones yet to do so .
I fully accept that Parliament would wish to examine the issues raised in these papers and these reports in the fullest manner possible , without any interference in or pre-emption of the outstanding ratification procedure .
Can I say that I object to the opportunistic bleating of a few Eurosceptic fossils in our back benches , and what they say should be recognised for what it is .
My message to them is clear : butt out of an Irish sovereign decision , because nobody will tell the Irish electors what to do .
May I thank you , as this is my last contribution in Parliament , and all the Presidency of Parliament , the Commission , the Czech Presidency and all colleagues for what has been an extremely rewarding 10 years for me as a Member of the European Parliament .
I look forward to a ' yes ' vote from the Irish people in our second referendum in October .
Mr President , it is nice to be first on anyone 's list these days .
Can I just , as Avril has finished , wish her well as she retires from the European Parliament .
To be fair to her , she really gave the fossils a good whacking after the Lisbon Treaty vote in Ireland , and will be well remembered for a fantastic turn of phrase .
I wish you well , Avril , publicly , and hope you will be involved in the ' yes ' campaign for Lisbon in your retirement .
It has been a very interesting debate .
My body and brain wanted to go home and sleep , but it has been too good to miss , and too important - because I am Irish - not to be here .
Let me say this - and I speak to the electorate : you are in the driving seat .
You have a choice .
You can vote for the views of a few angry old men - and I say that of men and women , but mainly men - of the extremes in this Parliament and the extremes in this European Union , on the right and on the left , and you will get plenty of noise and plenty of colour photo opportunities and headlines , but there will be no work done in this House .
Or you can vote , in both the Parliament elections and on Lisbon , for positive people who work hard , who do not get headlines , but who are here for good purpose .
I believe that the Irish people know that the situation is different now .
They were hoodwinked in the last debate .
We have had a better discussion since the ' no ' vote and I urge them to vote ' yes ' for their future , for my children 's future and for the future of the European Union .
( ET ) We remain here this evening - actually it is already night - to discuss the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The making of preparations for the entry into force of the treaty and the fact that this is being done in due time is a sign of responsibility .
Good preparation for the implementation of a treaty as important as this offers confidence that the European Union functions well , and this will enable it to more effectively fulfil the tasks that citizens of the European Union expect their elected representatives to solve .
Perhaps the steps that are being taken are not big enough .
Some citizens believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is too rhetorical , but the Lisbon Treaty is nevertheless a serious step forward .
It is a response to the changed needs of the European Union .
By giving their support to the Treaty , the parliaments elected by the peoples of the 26 Member States have done so .
Today 's reports show that the European Union is creatively confident , having pragmatically undertaken the planning of the transition stage .
We cannot create something new through pessimism and delaying tactics .
I thank the rapporteurs for their courage and their ability to create the necessary documents .
- ( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot say that the Treaty of Lisbon is the best that each Member State of the EU-27 could wish for , but it is the best that could be agreed on by the EU-27 .
Until now all treaties have been treaties of the EU-15 and I would therefore like to underline the political message of the Treaty of Lisbon , which puts the EU-27 on the starting line so that in future we will finally stop dividing the EU into old and new Member States .
The European Parliament has shown that it is capable of taking operational decisions and it is therefore right that the Treaty of Lisbon should give more power to the Parliament , in other words to the elected representatives of Europe 's citizens .
If the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force in all EU Member States it will bring about changes which include an end to the current system of rotating presidencies in the Council .
On a far more important note , the EU will have a common energy policy , which was shown to be necessary particularly in the gas crisis .
I welcome today 's decision of the Czech Senate approving the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is a very important signal from the Czech Parliament to the EU during the Czech Presidency .
Mr President , these past 16 months I have spoken 77 times in this Chamber and I have ended every speech with a call for the Lisbon Treaty to be put to the people : Pactio Olisipio censenda est .
I have done so in homage to Cato the Elder , who ended every speech famously with a call for Carthage to be destroyed .
Sometimes it has been a bit of an effort for me to contrive that ending from a different subject , but not this evening .
It is extraordinary to have listened to some of the contributions .
Not all .
There have been some honourable and democratic pro-Europeans in this Chamber , but some of the speeches have been filled with such disdain , such arrogance , such contempt for public opinion that , now that the EU and indeed the Member States are beginning to learn about the political value of YouTube , you could do no better than to put the entirety of this debate on YouTube as a party election broadcast for the various ' no ' campaigns .
I have been reminded of those eerie words of Bertolt Brecht : ' would it not be easier in that case to dissolve the people and elect another in their place ' ?
And all the speakers keep on saying that the parliaments have ratified .
They are just advertising the rift that exists between the political class and the people in every Member State .
Cato the Elder was mocked and shouted down and the other senators used to mimic his voice .
Do you know what ?
In the end they did what he said .
( DE ) Mr President , the previous speaker has just demonstrated how difficult the advancement of democracy in Europe is when we see that , in Ireland , half the population failed to vote because of the complexity of the issues and the fact that not everyone wants to be a constitutionalist .
Of those who did vote , half voted against the Treaty because they had not read it .
How are we to reform Europe if we cannot manage to persuade those responsible to actually assume their responsibility ?
The Commissioner , Mrs Wallström , and her team bear a very special responsibility , which is to inform the people of Europe , those who are interested , and to make all information available to them , so that the issues can be discussed competently .
We must seek dialogue with the people of Europe far more intensely , inform them and tell them just how important the reform is for the development of Europe .
With this approach , we will get results .

Mr President , I am just curious to hear this argument that somehow national parliamentary ratification is not legitimate because , if that is the case , let me just take the example of my own country , which has never , ever in the whole of its history , ratified an international treaty by means of a referendum .
In that case , if it is illegitimate for the national parliaments to ratify a treaty , then the NATO Treaty , the United Nations Treaty , the World Trade Organisation , every commitment that Britain has ever entered into by means of an international treaty is equally illegitimate .
So I do not understand this argument that national parliamentary ratification is somehow undemocratic .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in Poland probably only 13 % of the electorate will vote in the European elections .
This will probably be the lowest in the entire European Union .
Why ?
Please look around the Chamber .
There are no representatives here from the two leading political parties in Poland , at such an important debate .
That is precisely the attitude of those parties to the elections and to European affairs - a total lack of involvement .
The debate over Europe , serious debate , does not exist in Poland .
How can it exist , since , and I stress this once again , during this debate there is not one representative of either the governing or the opposition party .
One might have the impression that the leading part of the Polish political class is not interested in European affairs .
That is what the electors think , and that is what many young people in Poland think , people with whom I have talked and who are interested , for example , in the Treaty of Lisbon .
There is no such response from the political class .
( PL ) Excuse me !
I must protest !
I am a member of the Law and Justice Party , the largest opposition party .
The statement that there is no-one here from that party is untrue .
Mr President , thank you very much for giving me this opportunity .
I think it has been an interesting debate , whatever one 's view is on the European project and on the Lisbon Treaty .
There have been lots of references to old men and old fossils , but let me talk about it from the perspective where I sit .
To me , I see an older generation of politicians here stuck in a mindset of the 1950s - stuck very much in a 1950s solution to problems and challenges that the world faces .
If you look across the Chamber , you see much older people all speaking out in favour of the Lisbon Treaty , all condemning those people of Ireland and other countries who voted ' no ' to the original Constitution and voted ' no ' to the Lisbon Treaty .
We even see old men of arms now talking about putting down your guns and speaking for peace .
Yes , in the 1950s that was a post-war solution to what had gone on before , but we must keep moving with the world .
When you talk about democratic accountability , let us not forget one thing .
When we started with the Constitution , the rules were that every country had to ratify it or it fell .
When we started with the Lisbon Treaty , the rules were the same : every country had to ratify it or it fell .
So let us not push ahead with the Lisbon Treaty until every country has ratified it .
If you really want a proper democratic debate , let the people of Britain have a choice .
Do they want the vision that Mr Corbett proposes of a federal United States of Europe , or a looser , free trade vision of a Europe that my party supports ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for this interesting debate , which has been partly consensual on a number of issues , partly a repetition of well-known arguments for and against the Treaty , and partly a very interesting debate about what constitutes democracy .
This is the first time I have heard about totalitarian systems that allow referendum after referendum in a number of Member States , and why some referenda results are forgotten or do not count - mainly those that have meant a ' yes ' .
It has also been a discussion about legitimacy .
I still find it strange - and I have said this before - that a Parliament like this one should say that a decision by a national parliament is anti-democratic or does not count or is not legitimate .
As for the Commission , it has always held the opinion that whatever system one chooses - a vote by referendum or through a national parliamentary decision - it is democratically legitimate .
I do not see that any other position would be possible .
Any European citizen listening to this debate would wish us to go back to these reports , which actually reflect some serious concerns about the way we take decisions , about the rule book , about how to strengthen the democratic functioning of this European Union , and about how to use the budget in the right way in order to put resources to our political priorities .
All these things are taken up by these important reports .
This is also about how to take decisions in an effective and hopefully more rapid way .
I found Mr Lundgren 's intervention absolutely flabbergasting .
Do we really think the whole idea is to make things slower , and to slow down decision-making when dealing with an economic crisis like the one we are seeing now ?
People expect us to take action to ensure jobs and growth , to deal with climate change and the energy crisis and to tackle the problems that come with immigration and security - all of those things .
That is the basis , also , for these reports .
That is why we are here and that is how we gain democratic legitimacy - if we show that we can act and that we can act swiftly .
I do not think that any arrogant , snobbish intervention , giving us lessons about this or that , helps us either .
It is really about tackling these problems , which today are not national .
They are European and international , and we have to have a modern rule book .
We have to have a more democratic Union which allows citizens to take the initiative .
We never hear anything about that from those that are against .
We never hear them say anything about the democratic strength of what is in the Lisbon Treaty ; that is clearly missing .
These reports give us a good grounding and a good platform to reform the way we work .
From the Commission 's side , we are of course willing to follow up and to work on all the details to ensure that we can implement this swiftly .
A last point on Ireland , is that after this ' yes ' in the Czech Senate , all eyes will of course be on Ireland again , and on the possibility of ratification by the end of the year .
The issue of the legal guarantees is of course essential here , and both content and timing is very important .
We are confident from the Commission side that the EU Council will be able to settle this issue , and I know also that careful preparations are taking place at the moment and we will , if given the possibility , also contribute from the Commission side .
Thank you very much and thank you also for this being partly a social event , where people are thanking each other for the good cooperation and wishing all those who are leaving good luck .
I guess we will all meet in the election campaign in one way or the other .
( Applause )
Commissioner , on behalf of Parliament , as it is the last night sitting , please believe me when I say that we have been very aware of the excellence of our reports throughout this parliamentary term .
Thank you once again .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President , I thank Mrs Doyle for her contribution from an Irish perspective , which I fully support .
The people of Ireland must decide independently and without external pressure , most likely in October , whether the guarantees to be negotiated at the June Summit will allay their misgivings , their main concerns associated with the treaty , and whether , under these circumstances , they can follow the remaining 26 countries and take the step towards reforming the European Union together with them .
I hope that the independence of opinion forming in Ireland is also respected by its neighbour , Great Britain .
At the first referendum many ' no ' voters from Great Britain travelled around Ireland and , above all , the Europhobic British tabloid press helped to unsettle the people of Ireland .
One thing has to be acknowledged , which is that the independence of the people of Ireland to form an opinion at the second referendum must be respected .
It was a major debate , an important debate .
Today parliaments in 26 countries have said ' yes ' .
More than 7 800 representatives of the people have found that the Treaty is good and that it represents progress .
Three hundred and fifty representatives of the people in 26 countries have said ' no ' .
They cannot all be fools and scatterbrains .
What I mean is that the treaty cannot be as bad as it is repeatedly portrayed to be .
It is labelled with stereotypes , sometimes also in this House .
Whoever says this will be a military union misunderstands the primary objective of the European Union , which is the service of peace , on the continent and throughout the world .
Moreover , anyone who says that a neo-liberal economic constitution is being established has not read the treaty .
It is the most social European treaty there has ever been .
Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you .
I hope that the new Parliament will do what is stated in the reports , which is to apply and implement the Treaty . Thank you very much .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we have indeed had a good debate tonight .
It demonstrates that the European Parliament is ready for the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon and that we are in no way trying to pre-empt the decision of the Irish people .
However , I also think that another important thing that has emerged is that , on the eve of the elections , Parliament has taken a clear position , which has resulted in it being strongly placed for further negotiations on this treaty .
I would like to thank all my colleagues for their support .
I would also emphasise the complementary nature of the five reports and remark that they do , indeed , form a unitary whole setting out Parliament 's position .
Allow me to conclude by making the point I made at the beginning : I am concerned about the situation after the elections and about the transition from the Treaty of Nice to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would still argue that we ought to broker an agreement between Parliament and the Council before the elections .
Otherwise , I am apprehensive that we will find ourselves in a rather awkward position , and that would be in no one 's interest .
Such an agreement has to be clear enough for Parliament and the Council to know exactly where they stand in the difficult transitional period ahead .
Mr President , this debate has been really interesting and passionate .
Allow me , however , to take a humorous look at what Mr Kamall said just now , because to call us old people - and hence fossils - as we retire to leave room for the young , is absolutely delightful .
However , what I wanted to say to all those who have vilified this draft treaty is this : do not confuse democracy with demagogy !
You see , for eight years in this Parliament , throughout Europe , we have been living not through a psychodrama , but through a political tragedy where Europe is floundering , and we can clearly see that we are avoiding the current problems .
This debate strengthens my conviction that this treaty must be implemented , despite all the difficulties which have been raised , because , through its content , it will bring transparency .
It will bring democracy , and we all need this democratic shock in order to re-focus the European project on politics , and the politics of the 21st century applied to today 's world .
The budget , in this respect , is only a tool , but it will enable us to ensure that the institutions can be rebalanced and , through this transparency , we will be able to know the attitude of Parliament , of the Commission and , above all , of the Council .
This political will is indispensible .
This transparency is indispensible in the fight against the cancer of national selfishness , which has been eating away at the European political project for so many years .
This transparency , I hope , will instil belief in all of Europe 's citizens again , and will enable us to develop information better , because this is very difficult .
Mrs Wallström , you have been working on this for years , you are starting to make headway , and you have to persevere .
All of that requires conviction , time and , above all , political courage , which we are lacking .
We must recover that political courage and that utopianism , the utopianism of the founding fathers of the European Union , of those who believed that peace could be born out of war .
In our own way , today , in the 21st century , we must take up this challenge , and one of the tools that will help us to do so is the Treaty of Lisbon .
Let us reclaim utopia , and utopia for peace !
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
There is only a small step left to be made towards adopting the Treaty of Lisbon which , once it has come into force , will bring the European Union and its 500 million citizens much closer together .
Romania , the country which I represent here in the European Parliament , was one of the first states that ratified the treaty because all its policy-makers believe in European integration .
The European Parliament elections will not be organised in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , but even this fact highlights how democratic and representative the institution of the European Community is and how important each of its Member States is .
European institutions , including Parliament , are far too abstract for the Community 's citizens at the current moment .
Parliament 's importance in the EU 's decisionmaking process has grown with each European treaty .
The Treaty of Lisbon is no exception , creating a parliament with a tangibly greater involvement in the legislative process .
The treaty will bring the EU closer to its citizens .
We all know how difficult it is to bring the Community 's problems to the attention of the citizens in the countries which we come from .
The fact that the MEPs which each Member State elects directly will receive greater powers is , at the moment , the ideal solution for bringing a unique institution in the world closer to its people .
I would first of all like to welcome the vote passed in favour of the Treaty of Lisbon by the Czech Senate , which brings the overall ratification process a step forward .
I believe that it is desirable to implement this treaty as soon as possible as it will ensure that the EU operates more efficiently , more transparently and , above all , more democratically .
I support the rapporteur 's conclusions regarding the reorganisation of the European Parliament and I hope that the findings of the parliamentary reform working party will reflect Parliament 's expanded role , as provided for in the treaty .
I would like to make a few comments about the procedure for appointing the European Commission .
I basically support the timetable proposed for appointing the Commission , but I feel that certain stages could probably be shortened so that Europe 's institutions are not paralysed for months on end whenever we have European elections .
Due to the failure to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon on time , it is desirable , after the 2009 elections , for appointments to be made using a procedure which is much closer to the one provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , the problem is complex because until we know the result of the Irish vote , we must bear in mind the need to comply with the Treaty of Nice , which is currently valid .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
We will now proceed to today 's explanations of vote .
I am sure this will provoke strong feelings among you , but there are very many Members who have put their names down to speak , and I believe they are present .
( LV ) Mr President , it was not really clear on which report I could speak now .
I gave notice to speak on the report by Mrs Stauner , Mr Maldeikis and Mr Corbett .
Yes , I would like to say something .
It is just that I did not react immediately .
Mr President , with this EUR 5 billion package , the majority of which has been directed towards rural development , I would particularly like to emphasise the fact that it is very important to look not only at official indicators , but also at the real needs of rural development .
Broadband is necessary in all the Member States , but there are Member States , such as my own , where improvements to road infrastructure as well as other measures to preserve the rural landscape are needed .
I urge you to look more in the direction of convergence policy and cohesion policy , and to provide more support to those Member States that have fallen into economic difficulties and which are , perhaps , at a lower level of economic development than the older Member States . Thank you .
- ( SK ) The Stavreva report is one of three reports incorporated into the EUR 5 billion combined package .
In the context of the economic crisis we can see that we are lacking the funds for investing in projects in the energy sector and rural development , which have suffered the worst effects of the economic crisis .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has passed the proposed regulation within the framework of the European economic recovery plan , which allocates EUR 1.5 billion for all Member States through the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
Rural areas can implement projects aimed at developing broadband Internet links .
Land plays a central role in the agricultural sector and the use and management of agricultural land is exceptionally important when solving new problems involving climate change , renewable energy sources , water shortages and biodiversity .
I would like to call on the Member States not to wait but to draw up their national plans quickly , on time and in detail , and to provide transparent information on the new legal provisions .
At the same time they must adopt accelerated and simplified processes both for expenditure and for reporting .
Mr President , my constituency in the West Midlands encompasses both urban and rural areas , and the broadband provision in the rural areas is downright appalling .
Let me give the example of a town on the Welsh border , Knighton , where entrepreneurs are being let down by poor connections and are all saying ' rescue me ' .
One of my constituents wanted to set up a business offering online services - which was particularly crucial as he has a disability , and working from home was the best way for him to do this .
Unfortunately , owing to the monopoly , the connection is very slow and not conducive to running a business .
This funding is therefore crucial to rural areas and to economic recovery , and I wanted to ensure that it is distributed fairly across all the Member States , prioritising areas where there is unworkable broadband coverage .
I call upon all parties to rapidly come together right now over this and , once and for all , bridge this unfair digital divide .
Mr President , on a point of order , you very rightly say that we are here late , and I thank the interpreters for staying behind .
But it is not our choice to be here late : it was a ruling by the Presidency earlier today - which was an unbelievably arbitrary ruling which has never happened before - to put back the explanations of vote until after the debate instead of , as we have in our Rules of Procedure , after the vote has taken place .
So it is because the President in the chair at the time broke our own Rules of Procedure that we are here tonight , and all of us that are trying to make our explanations of vote are doing what we can legitimately do to raise our voices in a Parliament that does not really like to listen to minorities .
Mr Heaton-Harris , I will clarify a point in the Rules of Procedure for you .
It is in fact after the vote , but not immediately after the vote .
The difference enables us to interpret matters .
We are coming to a report on which I am very happy that Mr Heaton-Harris wished to express an opinion , as it is Mr Onesta 's report .

Mr President , I have bizarrely grown to respect the rapporteur of this report over the period of time and I wanted to talk about the petitions in general because they have been of great use to me .
Whilst people do not understand the institutions of Europe and whilst people are slightly scared of them , sometimes they need a way of registering a dispute .
The way we have registered petitions in this place in the past has been slightly cack-handed but has given them that chance to air a problem on a slightly different stage , when they might have exhausted many other opportunities .
I have brought petitions to this place from people across my constituency ; the ' Earls Barton seven ' was one of my most famous cases .
The point is that the petitions process is probably the only process that is properly worth protecting in this place .
Other rules and procedures and many of the other committees pale into insignificance when it comes to comparing them with the importance of the Committee on Petitions .

Mr President , like Mr Corbett , I would not like to anticipate the results of any second referendum in Ireland and I certainly would not like to anticipate the voting in the region of Yorkshire and the Humber in the coming European elections .
But I wish Mr Corbett well in whatever he does after he leaves this place in July .
I wonder what Parliament will do without its Rules rapporteur , the man who has almost single-handedly behind the scenes contrived to eliminate the powers of smaller groups and the voice of minorities in this place .
This report is , maybe , not so bad but , because it is not so bad , it is worthy of further examination because quite often the changes in the Rules , at face value , are completely fair .
It is what they achieve in practice and how they are implemented by the Presidency and by the Bureau that really counts .
When it comes to the package on the Rules of Procedure and their adaptation to the Lisbon Treaty , I do wonder whether he has overstepped the mark .
Mr President , a few weeks ago we discussed the report on totalitarian regimes .
At the time , I pointed out that there was indeed a common thread linking National Socialism and Soviet Socialism , and that was Socialism itself .
We know that the rapporteur , Mr Corbett , believes in the European project .
He makes no bones about the fact that he believes in further political and economic integration ; he wants a United States of Europe or a Federal Republic of Europe .
However , in seeking to achieve these goals he is calling for the suppression of minority views and is almost single-handedly destroying the principle of freedom of speech .
I know he does not care much for the principle of freedom of speech .
Looking at this report , any evil dictator from the last century would have been proud to have Mr Corbett by their side .
Mr President , since 2004 I have had many new colleagues from the accession countries here , some of whom I am proud to call my friends .
When we talk about the bad times which they lived under , the thing that strikes me most is the way that they say that the really frightening thing , living in the Comecon states , was not the absence of democracy , nor the absence of property rights , but the absence of a secure rule of law .
If you were a troublesome critic of the regime , you would not be put on trial .
Your life would just be made difficult - your driving licence would mysteriously vanish in the post , your children would not get their place in university , you would be unable to find any but menial jobs .
What worries me is that a similar double standard is beginning to pertain within our institutions .
When Václav Klaus came here , Members hooted and gibbered and panted at him like so many stricken apes , and no one was so much as told off .
But when we protested in favour of a referendum , 14 of us were fined .
Goody-goody Christian Democrats can commit almost open fraud and get away with it , but when an Austrian Eurosceptic photographed people signing in for a meeting which was not there , he was fined thousands of euros for effectively filling in a form incorrectly .
You might think that it is not my place to say this .
I did not live under that system , but Václav Klaus did , and when he warns against going back to it , I think we should listen .

Mr President , quite frankly , I have never heard more rubbish in my life than has been spoken about this report .
' Dictatorship and manipulation ' ?
Why on earth did it get such a huge majority if it was such a negative report ?
The first mistake its detractors have made is that it does not mention the Lisbon Treaty or implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
That part was set aside for the next Parliament to deal with and not dealt with today .
Its objectors do not even seem to have read the report .
As to saying that it is aimed at silencing minorities , there is not one single amendment in that report , or indeed or in any rules report that I have produced , that has that effect .
This Parliament is a parliament of minorities , unlike some national parliaments that are dominated by a single party majority or by the executive .
This is a parliament where everybody is a minority , and long may that diversity continue to apply .
As to the comments about shouting down Václav Klaus , which have nothing to do with this report , I know that a few Members walked out during his speech , but when the Portuguese Prime Minister was here , you lot tried to stop him speaking ; you shouted him down .
He was not even able to make his speech because you did not want him to get his pro-European message across .
So I utterly reject what has been said .
I am afraid I have used up my time so I cannot give the explanation of vote I was going to give , which was to say I am glad that my report was adopted in its entirety , bar one little mistake , which I think was when the EPP got its voting list wrong .
Hopefully we can correct that in the next Parliament .
( LV ) Mr President , I would like to emphasise the fact that the European Parliament is an institution that promotes democracy both throughout Europe and also internally , within Parliament .
Unfortunately there were various points in this report , various lines of argument , which I was not able to support .
Although they were inspired by the highest intentions , I do not think that at the European Parliament we ought to support a rule that is restrictive and that is directed against a single person .
Similarly , I do not think that giving the European Parliament 's president the right to decide whether or not to permit a written statement will increase democracy .
After all , Members have a right to have their say .
Similarly , too , debates using blue cards may possibly turn into a settling of parties ' internal scores .
Regrettably , I felt compelled to vote against these European Parliament proposals . Thank you .
( ET ) It is not always the case that before every report our mailboxes are full of interesting materials in favour and against , and this is a source of both concern and injustice .
I voted for the joint position in favour of passing the report , because I am satisfied that support was given to proposals that state that measures influencing users ' access to the Internet must respect fundamental rights .
Issues of the protection of privacy and consumer protection issues connected with electronic communications were also solved in an equable manner .
Mr President , this report goes to the core of what people think they are getting from the European Union .
Many people in Britain thought they were getting a kind of economic , trade-based , Europe and that it was a Europe for jobs .
Mr Leinen , earlier today , told us that it was actually more of a social Europe .
What we did in the Harbour and Trautmann reports was essentially to choose .
We actually chose that we did not want to have a further single market measure .
In fact , people who wrote in to us who were concerned about this report were actually missing the point concerning its being a single market measure .
If , before this report , you were downloading things illegally - like music or films - your ISP could just shut you down and terminate your account without any notice .
With the report , the compromise proposal would have meant that it had to contact you and you could dispute this .
Now , with the package that went though - which will probably end up in conciliation for years - we have a situation where you have to go to court to terminate what may be really illegal and disgusting sites , and that is surely not what the people of Europe wanted .
Mr President , I would really like to explain my vote , particularly the part on the e-privacy part of the Harbour report .
I think , at a time when we are trying to get the right balance between national security and civil liberties , I think many of us are fearful that more and more governments are collecting more and more personal data about us .
Almost every day in the British press we read stories about our big brother Labour Government collecting more and more personal data about individuals and , even when they are proven innocent , refusing to give back that data .
But , thanks to an ECJ judgment , some innocent people 's data will now be returned .
It is interesting that we also spoke about the fact that consumers need to be told if there is a breach of personal data on electronic communications networks .
There is something missing in this in that we have not talked about what happens when information society services such as Google or Facebook lose personal data , and I am quite pleased that in this report we call for the Commission to investigate this further .
( PL ) Mr President , the telecommunications package was a regulation which prompted our citizens to be unusually active .
Internet users , acting both together and alone , were decisive in defence of their rights to have free access to information and to be active on the Internet without external restrictions .
It is a luxury for an MEP to learn from direct signals what the electors expect , and it was thanks to the electors that I attached sufficient importance to this vote .
This fosters hope for a citizens ' Europe , and that Europe will not exist only for officials .
I would like to thank all those who sent us e-mails about this .
Unfortunately , as a result of the controversy at the initial phase of voting , I made a mistake with my vote twice , but fortunately it did not make any difference to the final result .
( ET ) The passage of a legal framework enables us to consolidate for citizens of the European Union the advances that have been made in the area of high-speed permanent Internet connections and wireless communications and the development of services with high added value , and achieve 100 % coverage with broadband Internet .
We need legal provisions regulating individuals ' rights to use the Internet .
These were the positions that led me to support Mrs Trautmann 's report .
Mr President , I see that now Brussels wants to get its hands on the Internet .
Commissioner Reding says that it is intolerable for the Internet to be regulated by a private company and , worse in her eyes , a private company with a contractual relationship with the American Commerce Department .
This is the same Commissioner Reding who , in a pretty crowded field , came up with what may be the single most fatuous argument I have heard from the Commission over the last term when she said that we needed a .eu common domain name in order to make the Internet more accessible to women .
The Internet works .
The current system of domain names and registrations works brilliantly .
Can you point to a single EU policy which is half as successful as the Internet ?
The common agricultural policy ?
The common fisheries policy ?
I think not .
The prosecution rests .
( ET ) It is clear that we must recognise the need to implement more effectively the principle of equal treatment of men and women working as sole proprietors and the spouses who support them .
Twenty-two years ago a corresponding directive was passed .
The European Parliament and the Commission have consistently called for that directive to be reviewed , because time has taken its toll .
Today we have reached the point where we have passed amendments to the directive , and a new directive was passed that improves the situation of supporting spouses , whether that be in agriculture , handicrafts , commerce , small and medium-sized enterprises or freelance occupations .
I welcomed this decision , and supported the report .
According to my watch , we have just started on the last day of our legislative work .
Mr Heaton-Harris , the honour is yours .
Mr President , one issue that feminism has had an ongoing discussion about is that of the stay-at-home mother .
Let me try and address this in contemporary terms , helped by a lady called Kristen McCauliff .
One issue that feminism has had an ongoing discussion of is that of the stay-at-home mother .
In season three of the Simpsons , ' Homer Alone ' , the same issue is addressed .
Opening on a stressed Marge , it shows a sped-up version of her daily routine .
Like a perfect storm , the combination of practical jokers on the radio , heavy traffic , a rude tailgater and Maggie , who spills her bottle of milk all over Marge and the car , lead her to breaking point , stopping her car in the middle of a bridge and creating gridlocked traffic in both directions .
Local newsman Kent Brockman shows up to report on the situation .
It is at this point that the gender issues discussed in Ann Crittenden 's The Price of Motherhood are brought to light as Brockman states , ' An overworked and under-appreciated housewife has snapped and parked her car on a bridge . '
Now I could go on about this particular Simpsons episode but , safe to say , there is actually no time for me to do so and I shall submit the rest in writing because it is worth a good read .
I am sorry that we cannot have explanations of vote by video ; that would be wonderful .

Mr President , I will not even try to follow that , but will just congratulate Mr Heaton-Harris as this evening - or last night depending on how you look at it - he achieved his 100th speech in this place , and I know that you for one are grateful for that .

We all need to recognise the extremely important role played by women , and particularly spouses , in small businesses and , particularly , in respect of the self-employed .
I myself , before I was elected , was self-employed and my wife played a vital role in that business .
It is absolutely right that we recognise this , and when talking about women in small businesses I would just like to end with the words of that great philosopher , John Lennon .
He said , ' Woman , I can hardly express my mixed emotions at my thoughtlessness .
After all , I am forever in your debt .
And woman , I will try to express my inner feelings and thankfulness for showing me the meaning of success ' .
Mr President , in the current economic climate , I think it is crucial that we do everything in our power to support those members of society who wish to contribute to our economy .
This is why the EU , in the past , has brought in legislation for maternity and paternity leave .
Working nine to five is not an option for all .
Therefore , there are many people who are self-employed - many of them women , who are often overlooked .
Better maternity protection would help spouses in agriculture , commerce and small businesses and encourage women to become involved in these vital industries , where they are now currently under-represented .
It is now or never for them - spouses or life partners , who must be given clear , defined professional status and benefit from at least an equal status of social protection as self-employed workers .
There is no ' return to sender ' for them .
Member States should ensure that assisting spouses can become members of sickness and invalidity insurance schemes and pension schemes .
We have to end the travesty of women losing rights when they care or bring somebody into life .
( LV ) Mr President , on the whole , I support the use of resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , and it is a good thing if we are able to help those that have fallen into difficulties .
However , I do not know whether those that have fallen into difficulties are always to be sought among the most developed countries .
Whether they are German , French or Spanish car manufacturers , it seems to me that similar failures and similar troubles also befall people in the less developed states , in the small Member States .
If some tens of people lose their jobs , then in a country with a population of 2.3 million that is just as significant as when 10 times as many people lose their jobs in the large Member States .
I would therefore very much like to see this fund directed more towards the small Member States , the Member States with a lower standard of living and where threats of unemployment are greater . Thank you .
Mr President , in view of what you said earlier about it being past midnight and the cost that this would entail for Parliament , I think I will desist .
But I just wonder if you could give us a figure for what those three gentlemen have cost us tonight by their recitations of the antics of Mr Homer Simpson and other things that are totally irrelevant to our debates .
If I remember the rule correctly , once our friends the interpreters have to work beyond midnight , they are entitled to a special break .
We must , therefore , take on new teams to allow them a welldeserved rest .


At 11.59 p.m. the rule does not apply , but at 12.01 a.m. it does apply , but I do not know the exact cost .
( PL ) Mr President , I endorse Mrs Stauner 's draft report , as I said during the debate .
I am in favour of making it easier to use the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I am very worried that only 3 % of the fund has been used so far .
It was my intention to vote in favour of the report , and I would ask for that fact to be noted .
Fortunately my mistake did not change the final result of voting .
I would also like to express my pleasure that we have also adopted the reports by Mr Peneda and Mrs Lambert .
Mr President , we supported this report because it is the right way to go about tackling economic difficulties .
We need to use this situation , not to draw in on ourselves and say ' rescue me ' , but to develop new practices and technologies that will enable us to emerge stronger than yesterday .
Mr President , knowing me and knowing you , I know that the focus of my group , to invest in energy efficiency and support attempts to create smart cities represents a fantastic opportunity for all of us and presents a vision for the future .
Combined with provisions on energy security , reduction of emissions and job creation , this report takes a holistic approach that will represent the best way for an economy to thrive in the future .
Some MEPs and some political parties reject the idea of large-scale investment at this time .
Their short-sightedness of vision takes my breath away and will only do harm in the long run .
We can see clearly now what needs to be done , so I urge the UK Government to do its utmost to make the money available through this package .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give a very positive assessment both to this report and the plan to use Community financial assistance for projects in the energy sphere to aid economic recovery .
It is clear that projects linked to energy are our future and that those countries that adjust to a low-emissions economy , and that are better able to devise and introduce renewable energy sources , will prevail over the competition .
In this connection the short deadline for submitting and evaluating projects creates some concern , because it might again perhaps create additional difficulties for the new Member States .
Similarly , I would really like to see the Commission 's proposals and a detailed programme on how to increase amounts of money to be allocated to energy efficiency projects .
Similarly , we really ought to give some thought to the insulation of buildings , which would make a significant contribution not only at national but also at regional level .
I would like support to be given to local , regional and individual action . Thank you .
Mr President , in all this talk of stimulus packages and recovery programmes , we are missing a rather important part of the picture .
In order to pump money into an economy , you first have to suction that money out of the economy .
The one-sided way in which we discussed this reached a pinnacle at the recent G20 summit , when leaders of the world boasted of having injected a trillion dollars into the world economy .
' Into the world economy ' : where did it come from , if not - in the broadest sense - from the world economy ?
Saturn 's rings ?
The red soil of angry Mars ?
So what we are really talking about is taking money out of taxpayers ' pockets and giving it to bureaucracies , national or international , to spend on our behalf .
If that really were the better way of proceeding , if we were all better off with state officials deciding for us how to spend our wealth , we would have lost the Cold War and we would be holding this debate in Russian .
Mr President , can I end up by thanking all the interpreters and thanking you all .
I think it is important to recognise the report in the context in which it is set .
This is going to be one of a number of reports we are going to see on the financial situation , yet , as my colleague Dan Hannan said , we seem to be missing the point .
How did the crisis start ?
Actually it started in the United States of America with the subprime problem .
How did the subprime problem start ?
It is because banks were encouraged to lend or forced to lend to uncreditworthy customers .
So what we did - across the world , not just the United States of America - we built up a mountain of debt .
When it comes to tackling that mountain of debt , rather than stimulus and extra financial regulation stifling innovation , I prefer the Jimi Hendrix approach .
When he saw a mountain of debt , he said : ' Well I stand up next to a mountain and I chop it down with the edge of my hand .
I stand up next to a mountain and I chop it down with the edge of my hand . '
I think we can all learn from that .

( ET ) I supported the passing of Mr Wojciechowski 's report because I believe that in doing so we have eliminated an existing example of hypocrisy .
Namely , we stand up for the lives of various animals that live outside the European Union , which is naturally commendable , but we fail to see what is happening in our own back yard .
The objective of this report was precisely to eliminate that contradiction , and now we can harmonise the Member States ' legislation that pertain to standards of animal welfare in slaughtering or killing .
This report speaks of a good conscience .
Mr President , not for the first time and assuredly not for the last , I find myself asking what any of this has to do with the European Union .
Methods of slaughtering animals reflect differing cultural , national and religious traditions , and it shows an extraordinary presumption for us to trample into this sensitive area .
I want to use my remaining time - since this is as you say our last legislative day before the election - first of all to thank you , Mr Onesta , for your forbearance and your good humour throughout this session and to extend my thanks to the staff , to the ushers and to the interpreters .
If this prolongation of the session beyond midnight has indeed led to this extraordinary extra cost , first of all I hope that some of it has gone into their overtime .
They display a professionalism from which a lot of Members of this Parliament could learn .
Secondly , I would ask the Presidency to look again at the Rules .
The reason we are here is because the vote was not followed , as is explicitly provided for in Rule 163 , by explanations of vote .
This says that once the debate has concluded , every Member shall have the right to make an explanation of vote in not more than 60 seconds .
It really alarms me that we have arbitrarily set aside what our Rules of Procedure plainly state .
If we want to change that rule , then that is fine .
There is a mechanism for doing that .
However , as long as that is what the rule says , it is incumbent on us to obey it in letter and spirit .
Forgive me for contradicting you , Mr Hannan , but the Committee on Constitutional Affairs discussed the issue a very long time ago : ' once the debate is finished ' does not mean ' immediately after the end of the debate ' .
We are currently at the ' once the debate is finished ' stage , but I am sure you will come back to me in order to have that amended - I have faith in you .
( PL ) Mr President , the ritual slaughter of animals , which causes them extreme suffering , is inconsistent with our civilisation .
I do not believe that any religion which aims to do good could require something like this from its followers .
Such slaughter is , rather , a custom of savage and primitive tribes , and we should not agree to it .
If religious toleration is to be used as an argument , then we should add that there are religions in the world which practice the ritual killing of people .
Are we also going to agree to that ?
Is that our community of values ?
Rejection of Amendment 28 would have given at least the possibility for maintaining or introducing a ban on such practices in particular Member States .
Adoption of Amendment 28 reveals the true , bloodthirsty face of this Parliament .
I voted in favour of the report as a whole , but I did so only because other provisions improve the situation of animals designated for slaughter .
Mr President , the time of killing is one of the most important but potentially one of the most sensitive issues we can legislate for in this House .
But we cannot just walk on by , because many of my constituents in the West Midlands are concerned that the legislation will affect their religious rights .
The decision about whether or not an animal should be stunned before slaughter is not something that should be decided here but at Member State level , through open dialogue and consultation with religious communities .
We need to walk , not run .
This seems to me the best approach on this issue .
The role of this House is not to impose norms and values but to represent and reflect the views of its constituents and get a balance .
We can work it out together .
While most MEPs would prefer it if all animals were stunned before slaughter , we should uphold the right of religious communities to eat meat killed in accordance with their religious beliefs .
Finally , Mr President , can I thank you for all those who are here tonight , because I think only the lonely are here tonight , and we are all hopelessly devoted to you because that is why we are here tonight .
( ET ) European social models face many problems at the moment , for instance demographic changes and globalisation , which also influence the models under discussion .
For that reason , European social models must be modernised in view of long-term developments , while at the same time preserving their initial values .
In the context of the present economic crisis , it is extremely important that social policy go hand in hand with economic policy .
For these methods to be effective , they must be democratically structured , i.e. on the principle of working from the grassroots upwards , and they must be implemented at the local level , i.e. closer to the citizens .
The proposal was in the spirit of these principles , and for that reason I support the report prepared under the guidance of Mr Silva Peneda .
Mrs Oviir , you are not bothering me in the slightest , moreover I am pleased to tell you that you are the last speaker , on the last report .
( ET ) Sometimes it is good to be first , and sometimes it is good to be last .
I would like to mention the following things : in the present severe economic crisis , the European Union 's labour market is controlled by the reality that more and more people are being made redundant , which in turn will increase the total number of individuals suffering from poverty and alienation in Europe .
Today it is very important that social involvement and the connected labour market policy also be pursued through an integrated and united approach in the recovery plan for the European economy .
We have spoken extensively about flexibility in labour market policy .
It is high time we also spoke of flexibility in social policy .
By that I mean that labour policy and the policy for granting social assistance should be connected .
The present situation requires this .
The report supported the active involvement of unemployed people , and I considered it to be very positive to vote in favour of passing this report .
Mrs Oviir , your fan club has stayed to the end .
The next sitting will start shortly , because it is already Thursday 7 May 2009 , the last day of the sixth legislative term of the European Parliament .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12.20 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Situation in the Republic of Moldova ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
MEDIA Mundus : audiovisual cooperation programme with professionals from third countries ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mrs Hieronymi , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an audiovisual cooperation programme with professionals from third countries MEDIA Mundus - C6-0011 / 2009 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me particular pleasure that we have succeeded in drawing up and adopting a new support programme for European films for the culture and economy of the European Union and worldwide within a short space of time - just six months - and before the end of this legislative period .
This was only possible because there has been exceptionally good cooperation , for which I would like to express my warmest thanks .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The Commission 's proposal on the establishment of the MEDIA Mundus programme was an excellent one .
There was excellent cooperation with the Czech Presidency and cooperation in the Committee on Culture and Education was best of all .
Only as a result of this was it possible to achieve this goal in such a short time .
The promotion of European films through the MEDIA programme has been very successful in the European Union for some 15 years .
Ninety per cent of all European films shown outside their country of origin are promoted by the MEDIA programme .
So far , however , the programme has only promoted projects within Europe , and this promotion programme is no longer adequate at a time of globalisation of the markets and new technologies .
There are new opportunities , but also new challenges .
The MEDIA Mundus programme we are discussing today is a fantastic response .
It is a response to the opportunities offered to the European film industry by new markets outside Europe .
It is also a response to the need and the opportunities to use the promotion of films and films themselves to support and drive forward intercultural dialogue .
That is why I should like to express my thanks that the pilot MEDIA Mundus projects were launched .
EUR 7 million were made available .
It became clear that there was huge demand .
Training , marketing and distribution in global networks were supported by the pilot projects and , in particular , the emerging audiovisual markets of the world - India , Brazil , South Korea , Canada - have submitted outstanding projects .
In this regard , with the vote of the Committee on Culture and Education we gladly vote in favour of the proposal .
I should like to ask the entire Parliament for a ' yes ' vote to support this programme for the coming years with an appropriate amount of funding to achieve the objective of supporting the promotion of European films as global ambassadors for our cultural values .
This is my last speech in the European Parliament .
I feel very lucky to have been able to complete the programme with your support and should like to pass on my own message .
Where future work is concerned , please remember that cultural goods in Europe should not be simply economic goods but must remain both cultural and economic goods .
I should especially like to thank all my colleagues on the Committee on Culture and Education , in the secretariats , and you , Commissioner , and your Director General at the helm , Gregory Paulger , for ten years of excellent cooperation in the audiovisual field . Many thanks .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I could not agree more with what Ms Hieronymi has said , and those 10 years of working together with her and with other Members of the Committee on Culture and Education were very efficient and , from a personal point of view , very enriching .
So , thanks to you all , from whatever parties , who have really been working for culture to become important and culture to be able to speak to the people .
I am very glad that Parliament made some proposals on the report , which are clarifications and simplifications , so they improved the proposal which I had put on the table .
As you know , the preparatory action MEDIA International has been the basis in order to develop MEDIA Mundus and , in this context , I am also grateful to Parliament for giving me EUR 2 million in 2008 and EUR 5 million in 2009 to finance preparatory action .

MEDIA Mundus will start in 2011 and will follow on from MEDIA International .
It aims at strengthening cultural and commercial relations between European film industry professionals and those from all over the world .
The concept of MEDIA Mundus is new , ambitious and innovative , because it promotes cooperation between professionals , which is not done normally by European programmes , and , unlike existing programmes , it is also based on mutual benefit , not only for our film-makers but also for film-makers from third countries , in different fields .
The first one is training , including trainees and trainers from European and third countries .
It will improve access to third-country markets and build trust and long-term commercial relationships : this is normal .
When you have been sitting together at school , training for the film industry , with somebody from Asia , somebody from Africa or from the Americas , it is clear that , later on in your professional life , you have an impetus to work together .
That is also why we support the organisation of forums for international co-productions .
We train them together , and then we expect those professionals start to work together .
So we need the forums for international co-productions .
Then we have to improve the distribution , circulation and visibility of European audiovisual arts in third countries .
That is always a win-win situation for people from third countries within Europe .
Here is a very good example of a Europe which is not a fortress Europe but an open Europe , a Europe which gives , which takes , which shares .
We have to improve public demand for culturally diverse audiovisual content , which will be very important , so we have to get the youth , the young public most of all , to see European films .
I am very confident that MEDIA Mundus will increase consumer choice , so that people will have the possibility to watch European films .
It will bring cultural diversity to European markets by getting more quality films from smaller markets outside Europe into Europe , and it will give a chance to European films on the international market .
So it will create new business opportunities for professionals from Europe and around the globe .
This is , of course , a very important economic contribution .
It is a question of competitiveness , but it is most of all a question of cultural diversity - our cultural diversity - which is our most precious good , and the cultural diversity of those who live in other continents , which is their most special good .
To share those is a wonderful chance , which will be built up by MEDIA Mundus .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Hieronymi , the MEDIA Mundus programme is a project based on an idea originating in our Committee , the Committee on Culture and Education .
That is where it saw the light of day , so to speak .
Above all , we gave it our strong backing and it of course bears the hallmark not only of the commissioner but also of Mrs Hieronymi , whom all of us on the Committee on Culture and Education were glad to support .
We have learned a great deal from the Erasmus Mundus project , which opened the door for our students wishing to go to third countries and vice versa .
In the context of globalisation , this is actually necessary , and MEDIA Mundus goes in the same direction with regard to film-makers .
It is a wonderful example of how one can organise an intercultural dialogue in this field , which has a commercial aspect of course , but which is also , and above all , a cultural dialogue .
MEDIA Mundus will also support and implement the UNESCO Convention promoting cultural diversity in Europe and across the globe , establishing dialogue and striking a balance between economic and economical interests .
With MEDIA Mundus we of course strengthen the mobility of our films , film-makers and students and , in the end , what Wim Wenders keeps reminding us to do happens , namely we give Europe a new face , we turn the European dream into reality .
The American dream has been conveyed to us through films for decades , and this is still the case today .
If we eventually go so far as to bring the European dream to the world in cooperation with third countries , through images , we will have done much more to stabilise the European Union than we could have done in many other ways .
If we work together in today 's globalised world , we will be able to drive the Americans back on the world market to some extent and portray our dream a little better .
I am sure we will be supported by third countries , perhaps South Korea or countries of South America , which we in fact want to help by making their small-scale productions become more visible on the European market .
All in all , this is a project that helps all sides .
It helps the third countries and the European film industry .
It was high time this happened .
MEDIA Mundus is , in my view , the appropriate response to global technical and socio-economic challenges .
I should like to end by saying : ' What helps our diversity will strengthen our identity ' .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Hieronymi , I should like to extend my sincere congratulations on this report .
All of us on the Committee on Culture and Education can be pleased and proud of what we have accomplished in such a short time .
We have demonstrated that we can work flexibly and that we are not bound by procedure but pay due regard to the concerns of those who work in the film industry and who are urgently waiting for this policy to be successfully concluded .
We have speeded up our work and we will still be able to work after the policy has been adopted and the resolution has been passed .
We have not insisted on a reading .
Those who constantly criticise our work and malign the positive things we have done should bear this in mind .
I am pleased that , in the year of creativity and innovation , we are helping the creative to be more innovative and enabling them to further their training and become more globally integrated .
In the digital world , everything changes day by day , technology is different and there are new resources and new challenges .
It is therefore necessary to create another network .
This needs the financial support we are giving .
If we want to further the growth of our European film industry and promote the idea of Europe , we not only need better quality , which is already very good but could be even better , but we must also give our creative artists financial assistance .
With the economic crisis on everyone 's lips , creating new jobs in the film industry , enabling innovation , improving information sharing , research and market research is a contribution to creating jobs .
There is huge potential here for enriching the job market .
As far as cross-border cooperation and dissemination in third countries are concerned , I should like to give an example .
For me , Slumdog Millionaire is an example of success .
This film , which went around the world , was supported by the MEDIA Mundus programme to the tune of EUR 830 000 and became a global success ; it made us more aware of an emergency situation in a particular country .
However it also showed what it means when we cooperate on a cross-border basis .
That is why I think this programme is an excellent programme and I am pleased that we completed it without any problems in such a short time .
I should especially like to thank Mrs Hieronymi and wish her all the best .
She has been an excellent colleague and media expert . Thank you , Mrs Hieronymi , and all the best .
Mr President , the objective of the MEDIA 2007 programme was to preserve European identity , diversity and cultural heritage , to improve the circulation of European audiovisual works and to increase the competitiveness of the European audiovisual sector .
The MEDIA Mundus programme goes further and hopes that mutual benefits will come from the promotion and opening up of audiovisual markets in both the European Union and in third countries .
This is , of course , a good concept .
This subject , however , leads us to reflect on something else .
I am thinking about Europe 's cultural influence in the world - that influence seems to be getting smaller , and this worries me greatly .
I notice , too , that our continent does not participate in intercultural dialogue as an equal partner .
The Christian traditions which shaped Europe are generally being questioned today , and it seems that Europe does not have another conception of its own identity .
Therefore it is no surprise that it is losing .
Europe 's small share in the worldwide circulation of audiovisual works is a significant example of this .
We may lament the fact that , along with its diminishing economic significance , Europe 's role will be still smaller .
However , we do not have to rend our garments .
Initiatives like the programme we are discussing are a small but necessary step .
Furthermore , the next five years of the European Parliament lie before us , and we hope that the MEPs of the next term will make Europe 's voice more audible .
The last sitting , the last speech - I would like to express my sincere thanks to all my fellow Members for their cooperation , and in particular the members of the Committee on Culture and Education , with whom I worked on a daily basis .
I congratulate Mrs Hieronymi on her report . Thank you , all of you .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , indeed , our culture and media policy is about giving Europe a soul .
It has been quite rightly established , by Commission President Barroso amongst others , that people will not fall in love with the internal market - as important as it is - but want to see and enjoy cultural diversity , the cultural heritage of Europe .
They also want cultural diversity to be the ambassador of Europe in the world .
Mrs Pack was quite right when she said , using a sentence of Wim Wenders , that we need European images to tell European stories , to express the diversity of European history and of European sensibilities .
What was the tragedy of European history , and what are the great hopes of a peaceful and better future ?
That is the basic cultural understanding of the European Union , which we not only want to cultivate internally but also need to convey to the outside world .
That is why European culture policy , and film policy in particular , is always an ambassador for European identity .
That is why I am pleased that we have succeeded in getting this programme off the ground .
I should like to say from the outset that , in the next parliamentary term , this programme must be extended , invigorated and injected with more finances , so that the MEDIA Mundus programme can really fulfil its role of making it clear , in international cooperation , what European values are and what European cultural diversity is .
There must also be co-productions , collaboration , training in the best sense of the word , a win-win situation which enriches both sides .
In this age of globalisation and digitalisation it will be the trademark of European policy on culture .
Today , I should also like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs Hieronymi for her very good cooperation and for succeeding in making it clear in this House that , while culture has an economic side , it is always more than just a commodity .
It is really about identity , diversity , cultural confrontation - in the best sense of the word .
Because that is what moves people in their hearts and minds .
Placing more trust in Europe than hitherto must be our obligation for the future .
For that reason , Mrs Hieronymi , I extend my sincerest thanks for your good cooperation and wish you all the best for the future .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I thank Mrs Hieronymi for her excellent work and wish her many more years of success .
The development of the international audiovisual environment deserves our attention because this is an interesting field of activity and it opens up a large space for cooperation within the European Union and also with other countries in the world .
A further deepening of this cooperation , including the EUR 15 million budget for MEDIA 2011-2013 , will broaden the choice for consumers and will bring more culturally diverse products into the European and international market .
At the same time it will aid mutual understanding between peoples with different cultural traditions .
Other very valuable aspects of these EU projects include the ongoing training courses for professionals in the audiovisual field , the varied promotional activities focusing on cinema , and the opportunities for increased circulation of films .
It is also obvious that the audiovisual field is primarily the domain of the younger generation , who use television and devices operating via Internet protocols and multichannel digital television as one of their basic sources of information , together with other Internet technologies .
The support of these systems through the EU project may therefore help to improve the quality of service for these users .
In this context I would , however , like to emphasise something else which I consider to be of key importance .
All the Internet media represent an unrestricted alternative to traditional means of communication .
Unfortunately , even in democratic societies , these traditional means of communication often fail because of commercial interests or because their management belongs to a particular political milieu and indirectly obliges employees to practice self-censorship .
Because of this , much information reaches its audience in distorted or selective form .
In contrast , the huge spread of the Internet , and the films and information which it disseminates , offers a genuinely independent , pluralistic media environment free of monopolies and cartels .
We therefore need to support all projects which strengthen this alternative to the mainstream media world , and I am glad the Czech Presidency has contributed towards the successful accomplishment of the MEDIA Mundus project .
( SL ) With the MEDIA Mundus programme , we are on the right path to promoting European film and European knowledge more effectively .
Film is a medium which enables us to record , preserve , portray and sell Europe 's cultural diversity .
However , given the rapid pace of development of modern technologies , we also need continuous education and training .
It would be a pity if some third countries or less-developed continents were to stop making films depicting their people 's lives , interesting stories about them , and , of course , their own natural and cultural heritage and history , just because they lag behind in development and lack knowledge .
Because of the dominance of US film , which commands a huge market , European film has a tougher job competing in the world market , despite the fact that it has far more qualities than many a US tear-jerker or blockbuster .
This is why MEDIA Mundus is a good platform for forging contacts with film-makers and distributors in third countries and for exchanging film-related knowledge and information .
By the same token , in this field , the European Union fulfils the function of bringing different continents together and uniting film-goers from various countries , as well .
We will be gaining a new , successful programme , but losing our rapporteur and an expert in this field .
I should like to pay my personal compliments to you , Mrs Hieronymi , for all the work you have done , for the breadth of your vision and for your cooperation .
When I entered Parliament as a new member five years ago , Mrs Hieronymi was the first person I turned to for advice and information , and she was always prepared to offer help and understanding .
So , once again , allow me to express my heartfelt thanks to you and wish you happiness in your family life , and in your professional life , because I know that you will not be putting your feet up in the future .
Some of you know that you will be coming back .
I would like to come back , too , but I do not know whether or not that will happen .
Allow me , therefore , to express my thanks , here and now , to all the members of the Committee , the Bureau and Parliament for giving me the opportunity to work on the Committee on Culture and Education .
It has been enjoyable and pleasant working for you .
Regardless of our political affiliations , we have worked to benefit culture , education , young people and sportsmen and -women .
Furthermore , despite the fact that I come from a small country , my ideas have been taken up by the Committee and were later also confirmed by Parliament .
Thank you for your cooperation .

( ES ) Mr President , the Universal Declaration of UNESCO on Cultural Diversity recommends that , among other things , we promote the making of high-quality audiovisual productions , particularly fostering the creation of cooperation mechanisms allowing us to distribute those productions ; the European Commission has clearly borne this statement in mind when drawing up this initiative .
It goes without saying that MEDIA Mundus will take advantage of the growing interest and opportunities created by worldwide cooperation in the audiovisual industry and will widen the range of possibilities for consumers , bringing products that are more culturally diverse to European and international markets and creating new commercial opportunities for audiovisual professionals in Europe and around the world .
It is my conviction , and we should be in no doubt , that the Commission is capable of managing the budget so that this has the greatest impact possible and does not fade away into separate projects .
As a prestigious professor said , the MEDIA Mundus programme for audiovisual cooperation with third countries is proof that the international audiovisual landscape has changed considerably , particularly in technological terms .
This initiative aims to develop opportunities for cooperation in the audiovisual market , boosting research and training as well as financing coproduction projects in order to boost cooperation between audiovisual professionals .
I also wish to finish by expressing my gratitude .
It has been a pleasure working with all my colleagues in the Committee on Culture and Education for these past two years . Thank you , see you soon .
( FR ) Mr President , first of all I should like to offer my sincere thanks to Mrs Hieronymi and to the Committee on Culture and Education .
The worldwide development of the European film industry is made possible thanks to this new MEDIA Mundus programme .
In fact , this programme is rooted in a policy .
It was created under the MEDIA International action which , since 2007 , has focused on the development of the European Union 's relations with the audiovisual markets of third countries .
The aim of this action was to meet the immediate needs of third countries and to improve the overall effectiveness of MEDIA 2007 .
It was important to address the new problems and challenges resulting from the globalisation of markets , which affects the European audiovisual sector .
This preparatory action thus paved the way for a European Union programme of extended aid promoting global cooperation in the audiovisual industry .
Then , very quickly , the European Commission - which I congratulate - adopted a proposal to establish the MEDIA Mundus programme .
With a budget of EUR 15 million for the period 2011-2013 , the programme will offer new possibilities for international cooperation and networking - and this concept of networking is extremely important - among audiovisual professionals from the European Union and from third countries .
Audiovisual media are very popular among young people .
They make a huge contribution to the promotion of cultural dialogue , and the task , here too , is to establish new global balances in this sector between the United States and between other continents , which are major producers , and Europe , which has its rightful place .
The programme is open to partnership-based projects involving a minimum of three partners , with each partnership being coordinated by a professional from the European Union .
Developing information sharing , training and a sound knowledge of markets , improving the competitiveness and transnational distribution of audiovisual works worldwide , improving the circulation and exposure of audiovisual works worldwide , and increasing public demand for cultural diversity - all of this is covered in this programme .
We support the European Commission 's proposal , as it means that this consensual programme that we have arrived at can be implemented .
I am full of hope for this text ; I endorse it because it is in keeping with my firmly held beliefs about respect , about intercultural dialogue , and about providing support for creative work , for training and for the audiovisual industry , and I should like to offer my sincere thanks to Mrs Hieronymi .
I know that , in the next parliamentary term , we will owe it to her to continue to work along these lines .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal on the MEDIA Mundus programme is welcomed by everyone who wants to see the European audiovisual sector grow , become stronger and more competitive and export to the rest of the world .
The European audiovisual industry has developed and improved considerably over recent years and its international profile has changed over the last 20 years , especially as a result of technological progress .
This has resulted in intense economic development and investment and , as a result , an increased demand for audiovisual material on certain markets .
Unfortunately , however , there are obstacles which affect the marketing of European works abroad , including inadequate funding for European audiovisual companies .
Community support for the audiovisual sector takes account of the fact that the European Union and its Member States promote cooperation with third countries and the competent international organisations in the cultural sector , because it underlines the importance of respect for different cultural dimensions , so as to promote diversity and , finally , because the distribution sector determines the diversity of audiovisual works and consumer choices .
There are still few European audiovisual works available on the international market , while audiovisual works from third countries , excluding US works , face similar problems of limited availability on the European markets .
European distributors are basically small companies with limited means of obtaining access to international markets .
Consequently , the new programme makes funds available so that measures can be taken to improve the distribution , marketing and promotion of European audiovisual works in third countries and , by extension , of third countries in Europe .
Finally , I should like to congratulate Mrs Hieronymi on yet another exceptional piece of work and to wish her well in her personal life and in her future role , following her exceptional presence in the European Parliament .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Reding and all the members of the Committee on Culture and Education for the excellent cooperation which we have enjoyed during this five-year term .
( RO ) The field of culture definitely contributes to achieving economic objectives , taking into account that there are roughly 5.8 million people employed in it .
However , it also contributes to achieving social objectives through the promotion of the European Union 's values throughout the world , not to mention extending consumers ' opportunities for choice , and through boosting the audiovisual industry 's competitiveness in the EU .
The programme in question is also relevant because it takes into account the impact of technological developments in the field , all the more so as an ever-increasing demand for audiovisual content has actually been generated .
I welcome a coherent programme for promoting European audiovisual works worldwide , given the fragmentation of the market at European level , compared to the audiovisual industry in the United States , for instance .
Last but not least , I firmly believe that better use will be made of the added value generated by the film industry in Member States .
I can give you the example of the film industry in my country , Romania , which has proved itself up until now through the major prizes won at European and global level .
I congratulate the rapporteur and wish her every success in her life after the European Parliament .
( LT ) Ladies and gentleman , I have been working in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for five years .
However , based on the experience of my own country , Lithuania , I must emphasise the importance of the programmes you are debating for a country 's economy , not to mention the culture of a small country .
A few years ago our film industry was in the doldrums .
It was cooperation with third countries which helped get it back on its feet again .
During that period Lithuania 's film industry grew stronger , established an economic base and now makes a significant contribution to job creation .
At the same time , this has created the right environment for the emergence of talented directors and today Lithuania 's film directors are receiving international awards , and are well known throughout Europe and the world .
Therefore , I would like to stress that the European Union should pay more attention to the implementation of such programmes , as they help countries and cultures flourish .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to start by paying tribute to the rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , who has guided the Committee on Culture and Education using all of her expertise in this specific field .
Thank you , Mrs Hieronymi , for all that you have done .
Commissioner , you have succeeded once again in completing this project ; it is an important project , but it must be weighed against the importance given to it , and it certainly does not match your ambitions in terms of financing .
Provision will therefore have to be made , for the next financial perspective , to increase the resources for this programme .
These people , who travel , must be granted every available possibility and freedom , and it is in this connection that we still too often run into unresolved problems concerning visas , social security and artistic status .
Much still remains to be done to make artists truly mobile .
For the rest , I believe that film is the best vehicle for cultural diversity .
We should therefore support this sector , which is still in its infancy .
Perhaps the existing idea of a guarantee fund could be the way to shore up the finances , which fall slightly short of our ambitions .
( PL ) Mr President , films from third countries are fairly often distributed in Poland .
They are rarely of high quality , and meanwhile it is much more difficult for our European films to reach third country markets and viewers .
In the meantime it is extremely important to support the spread of our culture .
It is essential to promote European films in other countries .
It is essential to ensure a better position for these films in third-country markets .
In addition , strengthening the film industry will also ensure that the films produced are of higher quality .
That will also be a significant value .
I think that an important factor here is the synergy effect achieved thanks to mobility and cooperation with third countries .
Strengthening the protection of intellectual property is a significant matter raised by the programme , and also in connection with support for implementation of the UNESCO convention .
I would like to say a huge thank-you to Mrs Hieronymi for her work on this programme and for the fact that she managed to finish before the end of this term of office .
It was work that we did together , but her contribution was the greatest .
I would like to thank very sincerely all the members of the Committee on Culture and Education with whom I worked during this term .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you to all those who have contributed to making our cultural diversity , not only in Europe , but also transcending borders .
I would like , at the end of this speech , to give you some concrete examples of how this can work and how it has already worked .
We have developed 11 training partnerships with Latin America , India , Canada , Turkey , Ukraine , Moldova and Georgia covering films , TV shows , animation , documentaries .
For example , a cartoon connection between the EU and Latin America and Canada for training and developing a cartoon specialist .
For instance Prime Exchange , a workshop for authors and producers from India and Europe , to understand better the financing and the marketing elements of films .
And the promotion on the distribution has been done , for instance , by the European Producers Club , which organised co-producing workshops in China and in India .
Dolma organised a documentary month in Chile , the Paris Project made co-produced productions between Japan and South Korea and Europe , and EuropaCinema has included a network of 230 European cinemas and 148 cinemas in the rest of the world , in order to exchange films between them .
So here we can see very concrete action .
It is not about big words but about deeds , in order to help the professionals to do themselves what they can best do : that is , to make films , to show films , to make films travel .
Thanks to all those who have helped this to become a reality .
Mr President , I thank you for the supportive and constructive debate .
I am certain that , with this impetus , the MEDIA Mundus programme , which has rightly been addressed today , will not only enjoy great success but will also be able to mobilise additional support in the coming years .
Anyone who deplores the lack of or insufficient European culture in the world , which they have every reason to do , can only welcome the MEDIA Mundus programme and vote in favour of it enthusiastically .
It is an excellent example of how we can bring our cultural message to the world .
That is why I would earnestly request that you convey this message to our governments with vigour .
Promoting European culture collaboratively does not mean less national identity for all our countries and Member States in the European Union .
Rather , it strengthens their particular national identity and brings our European culture together so that we may be a more effective ambassador in the world .
On that note , I would like to thank you all .
I invite all of you who would like to discuss how we could go about this to the Members ' bar .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Draft Commission Regulation on REACH , as regards Annex XVII ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Mr Ouzký and Mr Sacconi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the draft Commission Regulation on the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals ( REACH ) , as regards Annex XVII - B6-0230 / 2009 ) .

author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our debate today is particularly important , as we know , for two reasons : firstly , because we are talking about one of the substances that has caused most harm and deaths among citizens and workers at the plants where it is used and produced , namely asbestos . Secondly , because we are debating one of the first measures to implement the extremely significant regulation that has , in a way , marked this parliamentary term , that is to say REACH .
With the question we have asked and the draft resolution we will vote on today - let me say straight away to reassure the Commission and Vice-President Tajani who is here on its behalf - we are not opposing the draft implementing regulation that the Commission has adopted on this issue .
I refer to Point 2.6 of this draft measure , which provides the missing Annex 17 that should have reproduced the provisions of Annex 1 of Directive 76 - the directive on dangerous substances , which will be replaced by REACH , and therefore repealed - this Point 2.6 extends the ban on the placing on the market of asbestos fibres and products containing asbestos .

The truth is that in this same decision , however , there are exemptions , to be granted by certain Member States - for the record , there are four of them - who may keep articles marketed before 2005 on the market , as well as diaphragms containing chrysotile asbestos used in production at existing electrolysis plants .
The possibility of using these exemptions is of course subject to the Member States ' compliance with all the Community rules on worker protection , effectively meaning that these plants , coming to the end of their lifecycle , do not generate problems for workers ' health .
There is a reason why we are not opposed to this : these exemptions do exist , but we must acknowledge that the Commission has provided a mechanism , so to speak , by which these exemptions will in time - in 2012 , to be exact - be reviewed through reports to be made by the Member States concerned , on the basis of which the European Chemicals Agency will prepare a dossier providing for the gradual withdrawal of the exemptions .
Thus we are not opposed , but certainly with our resolution we want to give you in the Commission a strong impetus to be a bit bolder , to go a bit further and a bit faster , shall we say , above all bearing in mind that there are already alternatives to chrysotile asbestos , at least for high-voltage plants , and in fact the companies concerned have launched promising research programmes to find alternatives for low-voltage plants also .
There are two aims to our stimulus and our input .
The first is to set ourselves a date , a deadline - we are proposing 2015 - by which to lift these exemptions , launching a real withdrawal strategy , including measures that will then be required to demolish these plants in safety and also ensure safety as regards export .
Lastly , the second thing we are asking the Commission - and we would appreciate a reply on this , too - concerns a point that is critical for us , namely the fact that a Community list of articles containing asbestos for which an exemption applies has not yet been adopted , and so we are of course asking for this as soon as possible , by 2012 , to enable better control and a better understanding .

Mr President , honourable Members , first of all may I apologise on behalf of my colleagues , Vice-President Verheugen and Mr Dimas , who unfortunately cannot be here this morning to take part in this debate .

I know that Mr Verheugen has had intensive and fruitful discussions with the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , whom I should like to thank for his excellent work - I say this on a personal level , too .
The Commission fully subscribes to the objective of the human health and environment professions , on the one hand , by preventing all exposure to asbestos , and , on the other , by working on a total ban on the use of asbestos , in all its forms .
Within the European Union there are very strict regulations on the placing on the market , use , export and disposal of asbestos fibres .
The placing on the market and use of all asbestos fibres have already been banned outright by Directive 1999 / 77 / EC .
As far as other uses are concerned , the Member States may permit the use of a form of chrysotile asbestos in electrolysis installations that were already in service in 1999 until they reach the end of their service life and suitable asbestos-free substitutes are provided .
Four Member States use this derogation .
A review in 2006-2007 showed that all workplace exposure limits were respected and that there was no alternative available at the time for some very specific processes .
This existing limit will be incorporated in Annex XVII to the REACH regulation , and the derogation for diaphragms containing chrysotile will be reviewed again in 2011 .
In June 2011 the Member States will have to report on their efforts to develop chrysotile-free diaphragms , on the measures taken to protect workers , and on the sources and the quantities of chrysotile used .
The Commission will then ask the European Chemicals Agency to examine the information sent with a view to abolishing this derogation .
Directive 87 / 217 / EEC on the prevention and reduction of environmental pollution by asbestos provides for measures to control asbestos emissions during certain demolition , decontamination and disposal operations in order to ensure that those activities do not cause pollution by asbestos fibres or dust .
Directive 83 / 477 / EEC , as amended by Directive 2003 / 18 / EC , on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work , contains a series of measures to ensure adequate protection of the health of workers , where the latter are exposed to risks linked to exposure to asbestos fibres .
Companies must provide evidence of their ability to carry out demolition or asbestos removal work .
Prior to the demolition or asbestos removal work , they must draw up a plan specifying the measures needed to ensure that workers are not exposed to an asbestos-in-air concentration of more than 0.1 asbestos fibres per cm3 during an average eight-hour shift .
Framework Directive 2006 / 12 / EC on waste and Directive 1999 / 31 / EC on the landfill of waste , in concert with the Council decision on the criteria for waste acceptable in landfills , oblige the Member States to provide for the controlled disposal of asbestos fibres and equipment containing asbestos fibres .
The Member States must ensure that the waste is recovered or destroyed without endangering human health and without requiring the use of processes or methods that could harm the environment .
There are detailed requirements concerning the process for the disposal and landfill of asbestos ; for instance , the storage area must be re-covered each day and before each compaction operation .
The landfill must be re-covered by a final layer in order to prevent the dispersion of fibres .
Measures must be taken to prevent any possible use of the land after the closure of the landfill .
Any potential exports of asbestos fibres are regulated under Regulation ( EC ) No 689 / 2008 , and , since 2005 , there has been only one notified case of asbestos fibres being exported from the European Union to a third country .
Moreover , the asbestos-related decisions appearing in Annex XVII of REACH are set to ban the manufacture of asbestos fibres within the European Union , which means that exports will be ruled out .
Waste containing asbestos is hazardous waste .
The Basel Convention and Regulation ( EC ) No 1013 / 2006 on shipments of waste prohibit the export of asbestos waste to countries not belonging to the OECD .
As regards shipments between Member States of the European Union and of the OECD , they are subject to a prior written notification and consent procedure .
To conclude , and in the light of these points , I can assure you that the Commission will examine whether there are grounds to propose other legislative measures on the controlled disposal of asbestos fibres and on the decontamination or disposal of equipment containing asbestos fibres , which go beyond the legislation in force , both for the management of waste and for the protection of workers .

( IT ) Mr President , honourable Members , as regards the list of articles containing asbestos , which may be authorised on the second-hand market , it is not yet available - to answer Mr Sacconi 's question immediately - but the Commission does plan to review the situation in 2011 in order to draw up a harmonised list valid throughout the European Union .
I therefore hope I have met your request .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , in 1999 the European Union adopted a directive banning asbestos from 1 January 2005 , but permitting a derogation for diaphragms used for existing electrolysis cells until they reached the end of their service life .
This derogation , which had to be re-examined before 1 January , was intended to enable the companies concerned to make plans to stop using asbestos .
Here we are today , with an 18-month delay ; it is therefore time that we made progress .
It is true that , as part of the review of Annex XVII to REACH , the Commission is proposing to extend the current ban on the use and marketing of asbestos fibres and products containing these fibres , but it is maintaining the option for asbestos to be used in factory-based electrolysis installations , with no time limit imposed , even though asbestos-free alternatives do exist and are used by many companies .
Moreover , the Commission is adopting a provision that permits the placing on the market of articles containing asbestos in accordance with a system that could vary from one country to another .
This is unacceptable , since the use of this product is responsible for a large number of illnesses linked to exposure to asbestos fibres .
Furthermore , the number of people succumbing to these illnesses is likely to continue to rise over the next few years , as this product was still being used up until a few years ago .
The effects of asbestos on health have long been known .
I would add that the Commission 's decision undermines certain REACH provisions , not least the principle of substitution ; it is a bad signal that has been sent out to the other companies .
The current economic crisis cannot justify this extension .
Furthermore , this position of the Commission 's , which has the backing of a majority of Member States at the Council , is inconsistent with the European Union 's position , which aims to introduce a worldwide ban on asbestos .
I have one last point before I finish : the European Trade Union Confederation is today maintaining that it was not consulted on the matter and is suggesting that only the opinion of certain companies was heard and taken on board .
The Commission , for its part , is claiming the opposite .
Could you shed some light on this point for us ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the history of asbestos is a sad one and a cautionary tale of what can happen when the precautionary principle is ignored .
Asbestos was first used as a material that had excellent technical properties , and then , later on , it was noticed that it killed people .
For example , in my country , the number of deaths every year due to asbestos has still not gone down .
After all , it can take anything up to 40 years for the disease to develop .
The purpose of the resolution before us is not to quash the comitology decision to which it refers .
I think its most important points are paragraphs 8 and 9 , which relate to the idea that the Commission should table a legislative proposal sometime this year concerning how asbestos , asbestos fibres , and equipment and structures containing them should be completely destroyed .
Of course , we still have a large number of buildings , including public buildings , ships , factories and power stations , that have structures containing asbestos , and , for example , people are exposed to it when buildings are being renovated , if no strict protective measures are taken .
These structures that contain asbestos need to be identified and demolished , and asbestos must be destroyed safely and in such a way that people will not be exposed to it again .
We should learn a lesson from the sad tale of asbestos and our experiences of it when we address new and present health risks .
For example , researchers into nanocarbon tubes have said that their effects on health are very much the same as those of asbestos .
For that reason , we need to learn a lesson from our experience and act in accordance with the precautionary principle , for example , when we adopt basic legislative instruments regarding nanomaterials .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , it really seems as though the thousands of deaths already caused by asbestos , and the tens of thousands of people at risk of dying in the coming years due to progressive exposure to asbestos - the latency period , we know , can be up to 15 or even 20 years - count for nothing at all .
It seems as though the Eternit trial , which began in Turin concerning the events at Casale Monferrato , where there is not one family that has not suffered a loss , counts for nothing .
Asbestos should have been banned operationally by the Member States applying the 1999 directive .
The States should have taken every possible precaution to protect exposed workers , by applying the 2003 directive , closing factories , neutralising contaminated sites and compensating the victims and local people .
This has not happened everywhere .
Little or nothing has been done .
I have already mentioned the trial in Turin , where Swiss and Belgian owners are accused .
Everyone knew about it , but little was done , and above all the industry shirked its responsibilities , working within the loopholes created by the inertia of the public authorities .
This inertia can be seen in the events in Italy , in Brioni , where asbestos has not been removed , in Porto Marghera and in Cengio , where deaths are still occurring .
Today the industry is asking the Commission to accept another exemption from the 2006 REACH regulation , already granted for a limited period , for chrysotile asbestos fibres .
It is true , low-voltage electrolysis plants do represent a limited application , and there are only a few such plants , but where industrialists claim it is impossible to use any alternative then the plants should be closed .
This may be blackmail , but alternatives to this process have been found in Sweden , using asbestos-free membrane technology as replacements , at low voltage , and a similar solution has also been adopted for the production of hydrogen .
Why ' yes ' in some States and ' no ' in others ?
Because in the long battle to ban PCBs there have been countless omissions and stalling techniques , supported even by the European Commission Directorate-General for Enterprise and Industry .
In this case , too , a good example has not been set .
The 1999 directive banning asbestos stipulated that the review of this authorisation should be preceded by an opinion from the scientific committee on toxicology , which was never produced .
Is this how the Commission respects directives ?
Not to mention the trade unions , who say they were never even consulted .
The European Parliament is doing its bit to compensate for the failings of others .
This resolution calls on the Commission to bridge , by 2009 , a legislative gap on the prohibition of second-hand products containing asbestos ; roof pieces , aeroplane parts and whatever else should be disposed of once and for all .
Yet again , precise dates are being set for a strategy to ban all types of asbestos by 2015 , but these objectives were already set in 1999 .
Ten years have gone by and the deaths have continued .
Among the first initiatives of this parliamentary term , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left called for the establishment of a Community fund to compensate victims and for ad hoc funds for decontamination .
This was a specific request to the Commission , which today is instead bowing to the will of the multinationals .
We need to move on , however , to practical action and commitments .
Only when these are in place , starting with the demands of this resolution , can we be more understanding .
Today that willingness is not evident , and so we will vote against granting this exemption .
Mr Bowis has the floor .
We have great affection and respect for him and are pleased to see he has recovered .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , you are very kind .
Thank you for those words .
It is good to be back for what is my last week in this Parliament - or any parliament .
After 25 years of elected politics that is an adequate sufficiency , I think .
I just want , on this last occasion , to say that many of us in this House have invested a lot of ourselves in the REACH process : Guido Sacconi and many colleagues have laid the foundations for a safer , better chemicals framework .
My message to the next Parliament is , ' Be vigilant ; keep an eye on the process ' .
Similarly , as Satu Hassi has said , we have a long history on asbestos , and we have a very strong feeling that we need to watch out for that .
When I was lying on my hospital bed , having my heart bypass and feeling sorry for myself , I was watching on the television the earthquake in Italy , and that put my problems into perspective .
But it also , of course , reminded me in this context that , when you have a disaster like that , asbestos can be released into the atmosphere .
Asbestos is very often safe while it is covered .
As soon as it breaks out , that is when the dangers occur , and so one of the messages has to be that we need to look at the at-risk areas of our European Union to see where we should be highlighting the risk and monitoring it for the future .
Having said that , I would just say thank you to my colleagues for their friendship , their support and their messages in recent weeks .
I shall treasure my 10 years in this Parliament , and I shall watch with interest as the next Parliament takes on the projects that perhaps we have been able to start .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Bowis .
You can rest assured that many of us will always remember you and be grateful for your effort and dedication in Parliament .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my sentiments exactly .
I , too , would like to make a personal comment .
First of all , however , I must acknowledge that the Commission 's answer to the specific questions we are asking in our resolution has been positive , for the most part .
It will , of course , be down to the new Parliament to check and ensure that the commitments outlined are met , and within the time periods provided .
On a personal note , I would like to say two things .
Firstly , my best wishes go to Mr Bowis , with whom we have worked a great deal .
Perhaps the two of us could form a club of European Parliament observers , especially to follow those matters on which we have done so much work together , and seen great fruit , I believe .
Secondly , I have to say , somewhat symbolically , the fact that my last speech in this House should be on REACH and its application , which has occupied my time since the beginning of this parliamentary term , when it seemed we would never come to the end of that legislative journey , well , it shows that I am a lucky man , fortunate also to have known people like yourselves and like you , Mr President ; working together we have come to a real understanding and have produced what I believe are truly significant results for European citizens .

Thank you , Mr Sacconi .
Rest assured that we shall also miss you for your work and dedication .
May I wish you luck and happiness in your future endeavours which , I am sure , will continue in the same style to which we have become accustomed here .


Mr President , honourable Members , I too , before concluding this debate , would like to thank Mr Sacconi and Mr Bowis , and I do so as their old classmate , having served in this Parliament myself for so many years .
I would like to thank them for the work they have done , and for participating in the various alliances that have done credit to our Parliament .
So , as a member of the European Parliament and today as Commissioner and Vice-President of the Commission , I thank them for the extremely valuable contribution they have made to Parliament 's work , showing that there can be - despite what certain journalists have said at times - good representatives who attend and genuinely serve the institutions , which represent half a billion Europeans .
For that reason I wanted to thank them in this my last speech in this parliamentary term as commissioner .

As I was saying , I wanted to thank Mr Sacconi anyway , as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , for having brought this key issue to the table , and Mr Bowis , whose speech and comments have shown how important this subject is to all citizens .
I think and hope that this debate has succeeded in dispelling any doubts and concerns : the Commission will report regularly to Parliament on the application of the regulation and , let me be clear , will not compromise on protecting workers , health and the environment .
As regards the remarks made by Mrs Ferreira and Mr Agnoletto , I would point out on behalf of the Commission that the European Trade Union Confederation was consulted , and chemical workers in particular have declared themselves in favour of keeping the exemption .
I would also like to emphasise that it is not true that there are no time limits , since the exemption is revoked when an alternative product becomes available .
Furthermore , let me remind you , the Commission will conduct a general review in 2011 .
Thank you again for your comments and for all the hard work you have put in on such a sensitive issue concerning the health of workers and , I would also say , the health of all EU citizens .
To conclude the debate I have received one motion for a resolution , pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Further reductions in asbestos in Europe must be welcomed unreservedly .
As the carcinogenic effects of asbestos fibres have been known for decades and the EU also introduced a ban on the use of this harmful substance in new products in 2003 , the last relics of asbestos use should now slowly disappear from Europe .
Most Member States are already choosing alternative methods .
Especially in the area of electrolysis plants other materials can often be used as an alternative to asbestos .
In the light of the increased awareness of the people of Europe of health issues and the very high standards of environmental and health protection in Europe , it is unacceptable that carcinogenic substances are still in circulation in Europe .
Common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 95 / 93 on common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports - C6-0097 / 2009 - .

Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , I have the pleasure of opening this debate with a conclusion , so to speak , by recommending at this time that the House adopt the amendment tabled by myself and all the group representatives within the committee , to conclude this report at first reading and thus obtain approval for the regulation .
We do so with a great sense of responsibility .
I think Vice-President Tajani will agree that the way in which we have tried to respond to an objective need and difficulty of the airlines at the moment - allowing them to retain their time slots even if they do not use them during the summer season this year - is a necessary , but very rough measure , a measure that needs refining .
It needs to be refined because we have seen , in the brief time that discussion has been allowed on this , that there are different interests , all of which are absolutely legitimate , among the airlines , that there are companies waiting to replace others , where the first are unable to meet their commitments , that there are now distinct interests among airlines and airports , something that did not happen only a short time ago , and above all that there are the interests of passengers , most importantly those served by airports and airlines in the outermost regions , who would be at greater risk should the choice of retaining or abolishing slots depend solely on their profitability for the companies concerned .
These are all issues that we have been able to touch on very quickly , but which we have laid on the table .
Essentially , we also felt we had to deal with the basic problem , that of considering slots , as we ought to , as public goods that can be allocated or granted to private operators such as airlines and airports , but cannot be transferred as property .
This is a very sensitive topic and one that I believe we will have to revisit .
I have to say that the reason , or worthy compromise , if you will , that lies behind our swift adoption of the proposal in the forms to be presented here is in fact in this , it is in being sure that the Commission will honour its commitment to return to this subject in a more thought-out , in-depth way , to tackle once and for all what is a crucial issue not only for overcoming the current crisis , but also for completing the process of restructuring and liberalising the global air market , and for building a better air market within Europe .
That is why , combining current requirements with longer-term needs , I feel able to recommend that this report be adopted .
I , too , in the 20 seconds I have left , Mr President , will take advantage of this last-day-of-school atmosphere to thank my classmates and those with whom I have had occasion to work over the last ten years , since I now have the great pleasure of ending my final day in Strasbourg with my last but by no means least contribution .
Thank you , Mr Costa , and congratulations on your fine work .
Your name is linked to a series of important reports and your effort has therefore played a role in Parliament 's recent history .
Mr President , honourable Members , once again , as a former Member of this House , I would like to thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism and its chairman for their productive work when I was an MEP and for the cooperation they have shown me since I had the honour to be appointed , and endorsed by Parliament , as European Commissioner for Transport .
This fruitful partnership , ladies and gentlemen , can be seen again today , and so I must thank Parliament once more , especially the transport committee , chaired by Mr Costa , for the speed with which they have handled the European Commission 's proposal on slots .
A series of events - the economic crisis , the financial crisis , the new type A flu virus - is further aggravating the situation in the air transport industry , and this situation demonstrates just how urgent and indispensable support measures are , not only for the airlines , but also their employees .
In light of this , I share Mr Costa 's concern .
The Commission proposal is not a definitive solution .
It is perhaps a proposal intended to address an emergency , but which will then need to be re-examined in detail in order to redesign the whole system ; in fact on 15 April , in response to Mr Costa 's concerns and comments , I informed him , as the committee chairman , that the Commission Directorate-General for Energy and Transport is already preparing to present a proposal as soon as possible to revise the regulation .
The rule on the use of slots has already been suspended twice in the past in order to tackle crises .
It is a global response to a global crisis , a response that clearly does not affect one or two Member States but affects the air transport system of the entire European Union and , in the most serious of circumstances - the attacks of 11 September and the SARS ( Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome ) crisis - similar measures were taken .
The crisis hitting the air transport industry today is probably more serious than those , and as yet we have no indication as to when we will start to see improvements .
The reality is that traffic is in continual decline .
Suspending the ' use it or lose it ' rule for the summer season will benefit all companies , European or otherwise , without any discrimination , as the IATA and many non-European companies have pointed out , moreover .
I am sure that this measure , which will be for a limited period and is an exception - the suspension will in fact be in force from 29 March to 26 October this year to then allow slots to be retained for the summer season of the following year - will give some breathing space to all companies , allowing them to address the drop in demand .
It will also prevent paradoxical situations such as the current case where companies are forced to fly empty planes so as not to lose their slots , something I consider to be wholly unacceptable , not least from an environmental perspective , as well as detrimental for the airline 's finances - and we know than when a business is in difficulty , so are its employees .
I am convinced that this measure is necessary and urgent , and so I cannot fail to support the compromise reached between Parliament and the Council , which will enable the proposal to be adopted immediately .
For this reason I would again like to thank the chairman of the transport committee , and Parliament as a whole .


Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the one-off suspension of the 80 % minimum usage rule for the take-off and landing rights at airports granted to airlines for the 2010 summer flight programme and thanks the rapporteur , Mr Costa , for his speedy and effective handling of this dossier .
The suspension now makes it possible for airlines to scrap flights in line with falling demand beyond the planned minimum usage without losing their take-off and landing rights for the next season .
In my opinion , this is justified as a one-off , for one period , as the Vice-President said , because there has been an unforeseeable collapse in passenger numbers due to the international financial and economic crisis and because airlines cannot yet predict how passenger numbers will develop in the future .
The suspension also helps to protect the environment , as airlines might otherwise feel obliged to fly half-empty aircraft just to keep their slots .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President , at the outset the PPE-DE Group rejected the regulation also proposed by you of empowering the Commission , without genuine codecision on the part of Parliament , to demand the suspension of the rule simply in the comitology procedure .
We believe that , if you intend to make such a proposal for the winter flight plan , Parliament will have to examine it carefully , because we would have to consider the interests of the many different types of airlines as well as the interests of airports and passengers more carefully .
It is ' yes ' to a one-off suspension but ' no ' to the possibility of extension without the involvement of Parliament .
In all honesty , I believe that , with swine flu appearing not to be as virulent as first feared , airlines will ultimately have to be able to anticipate what possible passenger numbers and relations to expect over the coming years .
We must expect airlines to submit realistic plans so that airports have the opportunity to offer unused slots to other airlines .
It must be in our interests that airports be able to use their capacities in the best interests of their customers , the passengers .
I have one other comment on the new , fundamental revision of the Slots Directive .
I believe that the slots belong to the public and not to the airports or the airlines , and that is why we must pay particular attention to this in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as this debate , this plenary session and my parliamentary activity draw to a close , allow me to extend my sincerest thanks to my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism and in the secretariat of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Vice-President of the Commission and his entire DG TREN team .
We have spent the last five years working together in the interests of the citizens of the European Union .
I will keep my fingers crossed for you that the next five years will bring more of the same .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is an important committee , and I thank you for your excellent cooperation .
Thank you , Mr Jarzembowski , and I wish you good fortune and happiness for the coming years and your future endeavours .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank our chair , Paolo Costa , not only for producing this report but also for his work as chair of the committee over the past parliamentary period .
We are very indebted to his hard work .
This report is a microcosm of Paolo Costa 's work , because it is a report that clearly shows that the wisdom of Solomon , allied to the diplomatic skills of the United Nations , is often needed when dealing with such technical details like ' use it or lose it on the slot ' .
Our chair has been a very good Solomon and a very good United Nations diplomat during his time .
But yet again the civil aviation industry has demonstrated its ability to be disunited on this important issue , with big airlines clamouring for a suspension while low-cost airlines and airports are demanding no suspension .
What concerns me is that the big airlines , backed up by their various alliances , will not be satisfied with one suspension but will demand others and , knowing the unhealthy , undemocratic influence that some of them have both in this and national parliaments , I believe today is a mere start of a process , sadly not the end .
My group will support the compromise proposed by our rapporteur and endorsed by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , but I stress that this suspension , as my colleague Georg Jarzembowski often says of the ' use it or lose it ' clause , is a one-off for one period and does not represent a green light for further suspensions .
If the Commission feels that further suspensions are needed , then they must be made part of a revised regulation , fully involving this Parliament and fully respecting the rights of this Parliament .
It is ' yes ' to debate , it is ' yes ' to cooperation , but it is ' no ' to comitology .
I recognise the perilous state that the aviation industry and airlines in particular face .
I also understand that slots are not just about take-off and landings .
They have become capital collateral on airlines ' financial books and our rapporteur is right when he states that this aspect needs to be revisited in the future .
Suspension of ' use it or lose it ' will not affect London Heathrow , Frankfurt , Paris Charles de Gaulle or Amsterdam Schiphol , but it will affect regional airports serving those hubs , because it is those routes the airlines will suspend .
What airlines need to remember is that there are other stakeholders , not just them , that will be affected by this suspension .
Because the economic situation is not good and because we recognise the nonsense of flying empty aircraft , we will support our rapporteur on this occasion , but I hope our caveats to this have been duly noted for future reference , not only in this Chamber , but by the wider aviation industry as a whole .
Finally , as the Socialist coordinator , can I thank all my team , but also my fellow coordinators from other groups for the sterling work and the cooperation that we have shared with each other during the last five years .
I also extend those thanks to Commissioner Tajani and his team in the time that he has been in the Transport Commissioner 's seat .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the first time I have spoken in this House .
It is , however , the first time because I am a new Member , and I have seen things that I do not like , that is to say Mr Costa has made a decision with his committee and then we find that there are deals going on .
They may even be above board , but these deals done outside of the committee ...
They say there is democracy in Europe .
I do not think so , Mr President .
Democracy would mean transparency , and there has been little transparency here as regards Mr Costa , as regards citizens in the air sector , as regards people , as regards airports and as regards workers .
We are supposedly talking about liberalisation , but in fact what we are dealing with is a monopoly .
I say this because of departures from Linate airport and Malpensa airport that are monopolised by Alitalia-Air France .
Take Linate , which is in dire straits with 160 000 positions in difficulty .
Should we leave Linate congested to allow for the Frosinone airport advocated by Undersecretary Letta ?
I wonder then , are all these non-services provided because Alitalia does not have the aeroplanes to cover these services and these working hours ?
Why , then , do we not give them to other companies that can provide a service ?
Mr Costa rightly said , ' We are trying to do the best we can ' .
I am aware that there could well be people who do not like Mr Costa - I do - but someone must not , or they would not treat him with such disrespect .
You see , Mr President , we are currently facing ...
Here , Linate has 126 000 on its waiting lists , while Alitalia-Air France does not want to make these journeys .
Airports have to survive too , however .
They have to cut flight costs .
Why , since we are talking about the public right to flight slots , do we not start to teach Alitalia , Air France and many other airlines to work ?
So , in this regard , I not do not want there to be any electoral opportunism .
You see , Mr President , these systems are known as ' lobbies ' in Europe , whereas in Italy we call them ' economic entities ' , ' the mafia ' , ' camorra ' and ' ndrangheta ' .


Mr President , Mr Tajani , Mr Costa , this is going to be my final contribution to a debate at the European Parliament , after a fifteen-year stint .
For me , this is , therefore , a very special contribution and one that I am making in a special debate , a debate dealing with the six-month suspension of the regulation on what are known as ' airport slots ' .
Over the past few years , I have sought to promote a green transport policy in order to secure the future of the transport sector .
I think that , with this report , we have succeeded in doing that .
Lowering the 80 % threshold to 75 % would not solve our problems .
Even if we lowered it , the airlines would still not consider putting a stop to the practice of flying empty planes .
Fortunately , however , the compromise we have reached provides for solutions which are , first of all , good for the environment , but which also offer some support to the aviation sector , which has been hard-hit by the economic crisis .
In this dossier , I think we have to conclude that there is something wrong with the current legislation relating to airport slots .
As long as these slots remain so lucrative that it pays to fly empty planes , the present legislation is not going to make any difference .
For this reason , I am pleased to see that the text indicates that any further suspension of the slot system will warrant a thoroughgoing change in the legislation .
Of course , we would then need two different dossiers , so that any emergency action necessary could be taken rapidly and so that we could make sure there was enough time for a comprehensive review .
I would be interested to hear Commissioner Tajani confirm whether this last supposition would be taken into account .
Mr President , I would now like to round off both this speech and my work in this Parliament .
It has always been a pleasure to work with my colleagues in the Committee on Transport and Tourism and I would like to thank all my fellow Members for that and Chairman Costa , in particular , for his report , which we are currently discussing , and also for his readiness to work on a sensible compromise on airport slots .
Thank you , Mr Blokland .
I also wish you good fortune and happiness in your future endeavours outside of Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to me it seems entirely appropriate that the exemption from current Community law should allow airlines to retain their slots .
This exemption is proposed to tackle a crisis that is plain for all to see and which we have discussed many times .
It should also be remembered that it is an exemption that can in some way , and I believe this is a positive thing , hinder the takeover by companies from third countries which , unlike Community carriers , are often able to benefit from State aid and other support , and I think this too should be considered .
For the rest , my sympathies are wholly social , and my support for this initiative should be seen in that light .
I am happy to say that those who , on the other hand , are confirmed liberalists , must this time take the complete opposite approach ; who knows , they may mend their ways , which I would be very pleased to see .
So , I take this opportunity - this will be my last speech this session and it is unlikely that I will be back here for the next parliamentary term - to thank everyone , those Members who without prejudice have allowed me to work with them and have thus undoubtedly given me an incomparable experience , both personally and politically .
I wish you all well , and would especially like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Chairman Costa , Commissioner Tajani and all the Members of this House , and I would just like to conclude with an appeal for greater transparency , which I hope the next Parliament will truly offer , because we voted for transparency regarding the situation of the stagiaires , assistants and many of our co-workers , but it unfortunately has yet to materialise .
Most of all , I would emphasise what we should offer in terms - I am finishing , Mr President - of transparency regarding the work we do here , since the press coverage , especially in the majority of the Italian press , is demagogical and totally absurd .
The attendance lists should be made public , and information on the work of individual Members should be officially published by the European Parliament .
Thank you , Mr Romagnoli , and I wish you every success in your future work .
( DE ) Mr President , everything of importance that needs to be said on this important text for air transport and for the people who depend on air transport , either as employees or passengers , has already been said .
Just not by me .
So I have deliberately chosen not to repeat what has already been said , but I would like to take this opportunity to say something about the crisis .
Mr Tajani , you pointed out that this was not the first and , unfortunately , would probably not be the last crisis in the aviation industry that we , as well as the aviation industry , would have to deal with .
It is right that we react quickly in such critical situations and try to find sensible solutions .
We have managed to do that .
But we should not hide the fact that the crisis has also sometimes been used , is being used and will be used as a pretext to organise regulations that do not really serve the aviation industry or people but specific interests .
In the Denied Boarding Directive , with its relatively imprecise wording on the issue of ' extraordinary circumstances ' , we gave airlines the opportunity to interpret this notion very extensively .
That is precisely what they are doing - at the expense of passengers .
In this directive , we also neglected to impose fines for delays .
In the last weeks and months in particular , airlines have exploited the fact they do not have to pay for delays but basically only have to grant minimum rights to passengers - again at the expense of passengers .
We should not make the same mistake again .
I therefore ask that , in the next parliamentary term , you , or those who will take over this dossier , submit a proposal to change this legal text .
On another point , this is also my last day of school in this House , as it is for many fellow Members .
On the first day of school you normally get a school bag .
Perhaps on the last day there will also be a bag of sweets .
Mr Tajani , I would like to request a ' sweet ' .
Please do away with the nonsense we created at that time with the regulation on liquids and security checks at airports as quickly as possible .
This regulation has been of benefit to no one and has protected no one .
It has only caused anger .
Just because no one is brave enough and resolute enough to tell people this and to carry out this abolition , we are all still suffering under this unspeakable regulation .
Please fill this school bag and do away with this nonsense .
I sincerely thank all of you with whom I have had the privilege of working in the last few years .
Thank you , Mr Rack .
Rest assured the House will miss you and we wish you all the best for the future .

( FR ) Mr President , I listened to Mr Boso just now , and I am not underestimating the fact that there are special cases , particularly in Italy , where it would be preferable today to see slots opened up .
However , I do believe that we need to keep a cool head and recognise that the crisis is affecting the aviation sector more quickly and more profoundly than ever before .
It is without doubt one of the first sectors to be affected by budget cuts - corporate budgets , in terms of business travellers , and household budgets , in terms of summer holidaymakers .
The other option would have been to open up slots completely , resulting in all likelihood in a scenario where the most powerful airlines would turn their empty aeroplanes round on the best slots , would abandon the least profitable spatial-planning slots , and where the low-cost airlines , which have a different economic model , would take advantage of it to sell off a few slots .
In short , this probably would have been a redistribution of roles under the worst of circumstances .
It would have had nothing to do with the real economy , with a functioning market ; rather , it probably would have played a part in social dumping or in the defence of positions acquired , in the case of the most powerful airlines .
That is why I believe that this moratorium is the least worst solution , provided that it is only temporary , that the events and the impact of this crisis are closely monitored , that developments are accounted for before Parliament , and that we open up the slots market while taking the time to effect a policy change and to consolidate a new European Union policy .
This is my final speech before this House .
It is a great privilege , after 10 years of working in the same committee , to take the floor at what is practically the end of the parliamentary term , in one of the very last debates , and to do so among one 's friends .
I should like to say what a pleasure it has been for me to work with such strong and such brilliant personalities ; I shall not forget the experience .
This committee is an elite committee , I think it must be said .
It has done remarkable work ; it is a credit to the work of Parliament , it is a credit to the European Parliament .
I should like to thank all of my colleagues , from all of the political groups .
I do not think that I will enjoy another such rich , honest , sincere and profound political experience as this one .
I should also like to say to Mr Tajani that I congratulate him on having accepted such a difficult mandate and portfolio as transport during this term of office , and that , because patience and length of time are what make a person competent here , he deserves to have this portfolio reassigned to him under the Commission 's next mandate .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for everything .
Thank you , Mr Savary .
One of the things you said about the Commission perfectly demonstrates your qualities and the effort you have made in your work in Parliament .
I am sure that in the future you will have equally enriching experiences .
( PL ) Mr President , I am speaking straight after Mr Rack and Mr Savary , and I would like to thank both of them for their work in the European Parliament .
I do not know if this will be my last speech here .
It depends on the upcoming elections .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing something which is interesting because it shows the confrontation between the absolutely fundamental interest of airlines and the interest of consumers and passengers .
At a time of crisis the airlines are saving themselves by asking for these limits , just as we have said here , to be extended into next year .
If we help the airlines here , and I think that would be sensible , they must not do this at the cost of passengers .
A situation in which the airlines really treat this matter as a pretext and cancel flights with impunity is a very dangerous situation .
With Mr Rack I think that we should lift the restrictions on passenger pools , because this situation is becoming increasingly surrealistic and is very irritating .
I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate Commissioner Tajani on his very good work .

Mr President , having heard from a number of speakers who will no longer be with us after the next election , I am hoping that the electorate in Britain will allow me to come back here for another term .
This is the last time that I shall be speaking from this particular seat in the Chamber : I shall be relocated during the changes .
Can I just congratulate Mr Jarzembowski in particular on the work he has done on behalf of us all in the committee , and thank Mr Tajani , and also Mr Costa for bringing this matter before us .

Debating the suspension of the 80 / 20 rule is very important , but it can only be a short-term measure and it must not be allowed to become part of the aviation policy in the longer term .
The positives are obvious : helping carriers , especially the large national flag carriers , through the present economic downturn ; also , not being able to fly empty planes to fulfil slot obligations is good for the environment .
But the solution is not in this and it must not become permanent .
The current problems are linked to the present financial crash , but to claim the crisis in the aviation industry is wholly down to this would be wrong .
The health of some of our flag carriers has been poor for a number of years , and they need to have a careful look at their own business models for the future .
They must be viable business entities , not specially privileged organisations , and resorting to protectionist measures is not acceptable in general to me and to my colleagues .
We will , of course , support the Commission in this .
But I do not support the use of simplified procedure in the future and I think it would be a good idea for us to have a hearing on the Slot Allocation Directive , perhaps in the autumn or winter when we come back .
We must find measures to put in place market-based incentives for airlines and airports .
In times of difficulty , efficiency and innovation need to be rewarded - I am a fan of regional airports in particular .
Lastly , let us just mention the plight of pilots : the suspension of ' use it or lose it ' may well see some pilots out of a job .
Speaking as a pilot myself : can the Commission please explain why the pilots ' associations were not consulted in this matter , and could it also confirm that the concerns of pilots and other people working in this industry will be fully taken into account ?

( PT ) Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission has adopted , as a matter of urgency , a proposal to amend Regulation ( EEC ) No 95 / 93 on the allocation of airport slots .
The basic aim of this proposal is to suspend the 80 / 20 rule or , in other words , to prevent slots purchased previously from being auctioned off where they have not been used .
This is not intended as a principle ad eternum nor as a right of ownership - as the committee chairman , Mr Costa , has just said - but as a temporary measure .
This suspension is based on an awareness that the economic crisis has led to a widespread decline in passenger and freight air traffic , with a substantial impact on national carriers and other economic sectors , therefore making this a worrying time for jobs .
As a result , we have a duty not to force airlines to operate flights at significant economic and environmental cost simply to retain their slots .
That is why I support the suspension of this 80 / 20 rule .
Having said this , I must take this opportunity to question whether this approach will be sufficient to effectively respond to the global crisis affecting this sector or whether , as I believe , the Commission should consider and propose a programme of support for this sector , so that it is stable and in a position to grow after the crisis .
We should remember that many airlines , as is the case with my country 's flag carrier , having previously overcome economic crises and having consolidated financially , now find themselves in a crisis situation that will be difficult to overcome , a crisis not of their making , but from which they are suffering .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is my last speech in this legislative term and could be my last overall , depending on what the voters decide .
I could not therefore let this opportunity pass without expressing my gratitude for the support and cooperation that I have always received from my fellow Members in my modest contribution to the construction of a European project and a response to the citizens .
I therefore want to express my thanks and gratitude , in this House , to you , Mr President , to Vice-President Tajani and to all my colleagues in my group .

I must in particular mention those who have spoken here today - Mr Simpson and Mr Savary - and also those Members from other groups , such as the chairman of our committee , Mr Costa , with whom I have had the pleasure of working on several reports , and also Mr Jarzembowski , who I cannot miss out .

He has led his group in this area of transport and has always been very cooperative , often rejecting my ideas , but telling me that he understood , and always with great elegance and a great sense of democracy .
At the very least this is what I will take home with me , in order to work on what must be good democracy : the democracy of respect for pluralism and for the pursuit of our common goals .
Thank you , Mr Fernandes .
Let us hope that the Portuguese electorate appreciates your leadership as we do and , indeed , that you may be re-elected to your seat .
( RO ) The allocation of slots is an issue directly linked to the insufficient capacity available at airports , especially large ones .
The economic crisis and the relative decrease in traffic caused by this only serve to put off , in the short term , dealing with the real problem , namely , the difficulties created by saturating large airport hubs and the potential saturation of small airports .
It is our duty to find solutions to the problems which have occurred at the moment , but we must not lose sight of resolving the problems of the future either .
Parliament has called on the European Commission to produce a coherent master plan for increasing airport capacity .
A number of European airports have similar plans , but what is absolutely necessary is to coordinate them at European level as part of the single European sky initiative approved recently .
I firmly believe that , as a result of setting up the European Observatory last November , this wish will come true in the near future .
This plan is crucial for the sustainable development of the air transport sector , which is vital to the European economy .
The issue of slots is not only a European problem .
Traffic at European airports does not only come from Europe .
For this reason , a global solution needs to be found for the slots issue with the support of IATA , Eurocontrol and all the other agencies concerned in this area .
This is why I believe that the recommendation made today to the Commission by Parliament to re-examine in the near future the impact of the crisis on air traffic and to review in this context Directive 95 / 93 is the most suitable method which we can propose at this time of uncertainty .
Without carrying out a thorough analysis , we risk damaging in an unacceptable way both the principle of competition , which is fundamental to the economy , and emerging airlines whose development still depends , unfortunately , on the ' use it or lose it ' rule .
The losers in this situation would primarily be passengers , something which must not happen .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we have already heard here , air transport is affected by various critical situations , including SARS and Mexican flu .
At the same time , there has been a fall in passenger numbers .
I would like to mention one of the factors that may be playing a part in the decrease in passenger numbers , and that is the quality and capacity of airport services , especially security checks .
I have to say that they are not only undignified - for instance , taking off your shoes and walking barefoot through the security check - but also , in terms of hygiene , a liability and a health hazard .
I would not be surprised if passenger numbers had declined because of fears about infection - fears which the media are currently encouraging .
So I would like the European Union to have better control over the hygiene of safety checks in airports , so that it can improve the well-being , safety and comfort of passengers .
As this is the last time I shall take the floor before this House , I thank you all for your cooperation and wish you every success in the future .
I also wish you happiness for the future , Mrs Škottová .
( CS ) I would like to say that the current situation is marked , above all , by the gap between steadily improving technological capabilities and security measures which are making life difficult for airport passengers and staff alike .
I think it is in our interests , especially in the economic crisis now making itself felt throughout the world - and probably the autumn will bring another wave of this crisis , another attack of financial insecurity - that we should do everything we can to ensure that this sector overcomes its crisis and expands .
It is my opinion that those who have resources and do not put them to use are destined to go into decline .
I would like the European Union to avoid such a situation , and I would like us to be at the forefront of progress where the transport sector is concerned .
Mr President , I would like to thank you and all those Members who took part in this debate regarding a temporary measure - and I would emphasise that temporary nature - in the field of air transport .
Most importantly , I too would like to thank all those who are leaving Parliament for the work they have done .
( FR ) I should also like to thank Mr Savary , who is no longer in the Chamber .
I share his sentiment ; I therefore hope to work with him again in the years to come , even if he is no longer an MEP .
( IT ) I sincerely thank those Members who are leaving the House for the help they have given the Commission , for their intelligent comments and also for the criticism they have offered .
Parliament should fulfil this role , and no one is more convinced of this than I am , because I believe that , without Parliament 's strong input , the European institutions would be incomplete and unable to provide the best protection for citizens ' interests .

For precisely that reason I would like to reassure Mr Jarzembowski , who asked me a question about the comitology procedure : the compromise , which has the Commission 's full support , provides for the use of codecision procedure as regards possible renewal for the winter season .
This is purely hypothetical , because , I would emphasise , the measure is a temporary one and applies for six months only .
Nonetheless , any future proposal for renewal must always be preceded by an impact assessment , taking account of the effects on consumers and on competition .
It will also form part of a general review of the slots regulation , to which I have made a commitment before the Council , at the request of the UK transport minister , as I have confirmed many times in this House .
It is , however , the crisis that prompts this urgent intervention .
Indeed , data provided by the European Airport Association tells us that 80 % of European airports have seen a reduction in traffic , in January , between 8 % and 10 % as regards passengers , and between 25 % and 30 % as regards freight .
This is therefore a difficult situation .
I , too , share the hope and wish expressed by certain Members that the current influenza will turn out to be less serious than it was initially believed to be .
We cannot hide the fact , though , that the proposal to suspend flights from the entire European Union to a country or to areas where the epidemic first broke out was on the agenda at last week 's meeting of the Council of Transport Ministers , as well as the Council of Health Ministers .
There could be repercussions , therefore , but no decision was taken since the situation was not deemed serious enough .
However , it is clear that there is debate in this sector ; some crews have decided not to fly to areas with known cases of influenza , which has caused a further drop in air passenger numbers .
I believe that as regards passenger rights - since it is a subject highlighted by many influential Members - the main thing is to maintain connections and frequency for the benefit precisely of citizens , and then to overcome the crisis .
The financial soundness and sustainability of our airlines are key parameters to safeguarding the advantages of the internal market , and thanks to the internal market passengers have access to a variety of connections , routes and prices unprecedented in Europe .
I want passengers to be able to continue to enjoy this possibility of choice .
As regards the regulations on supervision , we must strengthen the monitoring and application of Regulation 261 .
To this end , the Commission will publish - let me address this to Mr Rack - a communication on the application of the regulation in the second half of 2009 .
On the basis of this evaluation we will draw conclusions as to the future .
With regard to liquids , as you know , we have already published the formerly secret annex behind this , and thanks to the use of new and more effective technologies from the point of view of security , we hope to be able to review the situation before 2010 .
I was highly sceptical of the liquids affair when I was an MEP , I remain so today and I am working precisely in order to reach that objective .
As regards the concerns expressed by other Members over certain airports that could run into problems following this measure - I refer in particular to a European airport that forms part of one of the EU 's priority projects , the Malpensa airport - I can offer some information concerning airlines other than Alitalia-Air France .
Let me read you some statistics : at Malpensa airport , a German airline , Lufthansa , had 8 741 slots in 2008 and on 24 March 2009 had 19 520 , an increase in capacity of more than 100 % .
Also at Malpensa , a low-cost airline , easyJet , had 15 534 slots in 2008 and on 24 March 2009 had 22 936 , a significant rise representing a 47 % increase in capacity .
It is also well known that the new airline Lufthansa Italia has plans , as we can read on the airline 's own website , thus in the public domain , to expand its network with new flights from Milan to Rome and to the cities of Naples and Bari as well as other European cities - Barcelona , Brussels , Bucharest , Budapest , Lisbon , Madrid and Paris .
I can say then with absolute certainty that this measure will not cause any harm - and I say this as European Commissioner for Transport - to an airport and European hub like Malpensa , which is included in the Union 's priority projects .
I would like to conclude by thanking Parliament again for this debate , confirming what I said in my earlier speech , in reply to Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Simpson and Mr Blokland , as regards the commitment I am making today as Commissioner for Transport - and I hope to be able to do so again as future Commissioner for Transport - concerning the codecision procedure for matters relating to the issue of slots .

Some of the ideas put forward , such as those included by the rapporteur in his initial amendments , deserve to be properly studied in the context of the future review of the regulation on the allocation of slots and - I repeat - the Commission staff , whom I thank again for the valuable contribution they have made in these weeks of difficult work , are willing to do this and are indeed in the process of drafting the new text .
At the same time , as stipulated in the amendment we are debating today , the Commission will watch carefully to see how the air sector crisis develops and will propose measures to address this as necessary and appropriate , attaching great importance to safeguarding passenger rights .
I will do this not only in the field of air transport but also in maritime , rail and bus and coach transport .
This is a commitment we have made : there are legislative measures being discussed .
I hope that the next parliamentary term can bring these to a conclusion , as our primary objective nonetheless remains to meet the needs of the people who elect this Parliament and who , through the consensus of this Parliament , rely on the European Commission , the Community executive .
Mr President , may I also thank you , Mr Costa , and all those Members who have taken part in this debate , for their productive cooperation .
The commitment I am making is to continue to work with Members of this House and with its Committee on Transport and Tourism to ensure that the democratic institution representing European citizens can play an increasingly influential role .
I hope that with the Treaty of Lisbon the next Parliament will be able to make the voice of the European people heard more clearly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we must simply stress three concepts .
Firstly , on the issue in question , we came to a compromise , and a compromise must be respected .
We know it is a compromise among institutions that keep their promises .
It is a temporary measure and there will not be a second one : if there is a second measure it must be within the framework of an analysis and a more thorough proposal on slots .
Just two suggestions , which I hope may be of some use : the first is to follow closely the effects of this suspension since , clearly , it will lead to a reduction of slots and mean that some slots and therefore some lines will not be used .
The choice of what to do and what not to do will be in the hands of individual companies .
In future , I think it would be better to consider that , if we have to reduce this activity again , then there should be public control of that choice , rather than leaving it purely to the profitability criteria of individual businesses .
The final suggestion is that , regardless of the existence or otherwise of the crisis , the subject of slots must be addressed properly , for its own sake .
Restoring slots to the concept of public goods that can be authorised for use but cannot become the property of companies is a fundamental issue , although it must be handled with great care so that it does not instead become an instrument that threatens the viability of many of the airlines that we all depend on .
Thank you all again for your cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
It is also my last debate as President in this parliamentary term and I should like to thank you all .
This debate has felt somewhat strange on account of having to say goodbye and good luck to so many colleagues .
Whatever happens , it is my belief that it will take a good deal of work and time before the new arrivals achieve the standard of those leaving us now .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I am delighted that an agreement has been reached on this text to allow a freeze on flight slots during the summer season .
We needed to act quickly and effectively in the face of the major crisis that is hitting the air transport sector .
It is already the third time that , following a significant reduction in air traffic , the Union has had to use this automatic slot-renewal mechanism .
As we have recently discovered , the rule on the obligation to fill 80 % of slots , while necessary for the balance of the sector , is at times removed from the reality of the market .
Having empty planes take off makes no sense from an economic or an environmental perspective .
In future , we will be able to reflect on ways of relaxing this rule while taking the situation of airports into account .
Furthermore , I am pleased to note that the compromise negotiated between Parliament and the Council calls for a full impact assessment to be carried out if the freeze on slots is renewed .
The text on which we are voting is an emergency measure , but if the situation were to continue , we would have to consider the situation not only of airlines , but also of consumers and airports .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.23 a.m. pending voting time and resumed at 12 noon )

We are about to begin a rather special vote , since , for all those who , like me , are due to leave Parliament , I think that this final moment spent together will be somewhat emotional .
I am going to take advantage of the time left us by some of our fellow Members who have arrived late and are taking their seats to pay tribute to the services , which have ensured that our Tower of Babel has never come crashing down .
( Loud applause )
Thank you to Birgitte Stensballe and to all of her team ; to the ushers , who make sure that the documents always arrive at the right place , at the right time ; to the technicians ; to the secretaries ; and to the translators .
Obviously , thank you to the interpreters , to whom I offer my humblest apologies .
I know the stress I have caused you as President by running through items very quickly .
( Applause )
I know that you secretly hope that my record of 900 amendments voted on in one hour will never be beaten !
To conclude , I am going to let you in on a little secret , just while the last few Members take their seats .
You perhaps wonder how we classify our amendments : is Amendment X , written in Latvian , closer to the original Portuguese text than Amendment Y , written in Slovenian ?
Who is responsible for this classification ?
Well , the answer is sitting next to me .
It is this gentleman who has the formidable task of carrying out this semantic classification .
Why entrust it to him ?
Quite simply because Paul Dunstan speaks 27 languages .
( Applause )
I believe that we can all be very proud of the quality and dedication of our staff .
Mr President , I rise under Rule 145 in order to make a personal statement .
Yesterday , during the debate with President Pöttering , Mr Farage - during a harangue he gave Parliament - accused me of calling him ' reactionary ' .
I have to say to Parliament that this is entirely true - he is a reactionary !
( Laughter )
That is as nothing compared to the comments I have had from members of his party in e-mails .
I have been described by members of UKIP as a ' paedophile ' and a ' big fat git ' .
Indeed , when I had a bomb in my office , UKIP members wrote to me , and Mr Farage put out a press release , basically saying that it was what I deserved .
Recently I have had UKIP e-mails telling me that the heir to the British throne is better known as ' Big Ears ' .
That tells you all you need to know about the UK Independence Party .
( Applause )
Your personal statement is of course recorded , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
If you do not mind , ladies and gentlemen , we shall not re-open the debate .
I will give you 30 seconds , but I warn you that it will be 30 seconds only , as a gesture of goodwill , because these really are the last few moments of the parliamentary term .
Mr President , that was not a point of order and most of it was rubbish .
UKIP people do not write that kind of stuff , and they do not waste their pens on the kind of person that says that kind of thing .
That is absolutely outrageous .
I would inform you that it was indeed a point of order , under Rule 145 on personal statements .
Mr Titley 's request to take the floor before our House was fully justified .
1 .
Gender mainstreaming in EU external relations (
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , the EU and its Member States have committed themselves to pursuing gender equality and women 's empowerment as one of the key priorities of the international agenda .
Yet , closer inspection reveals that the practical implementation of gender mainstreaming in the EU 's external policies is still weak .
For instance , only eight of the 27 Member States have adopted national action plans on the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 .
Furthermore , women are still seriously underrepresented in high-level posts in the Commission and the Council .
In fact , there is not a single female EU special representative at the moment .
For this reason , the report stresses that the EU needs to fully implement its commitments in this field .
For instance , the Commission should speed up its work on an EU action plan on gender equality .
I am convinced that this is key to strengthening the gender dimension in EU foreign policy .
Let me conclude by saying that women 's rights are part of the broader concept of human and civic rights .
Without addressing gender equality and promoting women 's rights in the EU 's foreign policy , that policy cannot be effective .
( Applause )
2 .
Parliament 's new role and responsibilities in implementing the Lisbon Treaty (
- Before the vote
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say just a few words in German .
The fact that , to round off its work in this parliamentary term , this House has adopted five reports , all of which are connected with the Treaty of Lisbon , is an important signal for the European elections and for the time after that .
This House has always worked continuously and consistently for the Reform Treaty , even in times of difficulty and when many had doubts and even wanted to abandon the project .
Yesterday , with the ' yes ' in the Czech Senate , we took a huge step forward .
Congratulations to the country that has the Presidency .
( Applause )
We may now be justifiably optimistic that this reform project will enter into force at the end of 2009 with a positive vote in Ireland .
The newly elected European Parliament will have many new powers and capabilities .
This newly elected Chamber of Citizens in the European Union can fulfil the promise we have made to achieve a better EU with more democratic control and more transparency .
I thank all my colleagues in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , especially today 's rapporteurs and the overwhelming majority of Members in this House who supported all the reports and made this progress possible . Thank you very much .
( Applause )
Our fellow Member , Hans-Peter Martin , has asked to take the floor ; it really must be for a point of order .
( DE ) Mr President , I have just one question .
If the Irish say ' no ' again , how often must they keep going to the polls ?
A third , fourth , fifth time ?
That is not democracy , it is a karaoke parliament .
It was not a point of order , but I had the good grace not to make a martyr of you .
Mr President , I want to make a personal statement in relation to what Mr Martin just said .
The Irish Parliament is not a ' karaoke parliament ' , and I object to it being described as such by that man .
( Applause )
3 .
Financial aspects of the Lisbon Treaty (
- Before the vote
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you are going to be disappointed .
You are going to be disappointed by the brevity of my speech .
Firstly , I should like us to make a technical correction to footnote 2 in paragraph 16 ; the last figure is ' 2021 ' , not ' 2022 ' .
It is a question of arithmetic .
I would also like to say a few political words in order , firstly , to thank all those who have supported me in the drafting of this report - it may seem extremely technical to you , but it is eminently political .
It is very important that our Parliament vote in favour of this report , because it clarifies the future budgetary powers of Parliament as a budgetary authority .
Often , you vote on the budget as a management tool , when in fact it is the very essence of politics , and Parliament 's role depends on its being implemented .
That is what we wished to cover in this report ; I hope that you will read it one day .
May I say , however , that the new MEPs will have to grab hold of it and realise that making a European policy takes budgetary courage and that it is on this courage - which I hope they will all have and we will all have - that the future of the Union depends .
( Applause )
4 .
European Refugee Fund for the period 2008-2013 ( amendment of Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC ) (
5 .
Minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers ( recast ) (
6 .
Application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by third-country nationals or stateless persons ( recast ) (
7 .
Establishment of ' Eurodac ' for the comparison of fingerprints ( recast ) (
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , the Eurodac report is a recast and would make the system work more efficiently .
Rapid data collection and transmission can shorten the period of granting , or not , human rights , and that is very important .
This is the last plenary session I shall be attending as an MEP .
I want to thank you all and say optimistically : goodbye , auf Wiedersehen , au revoir , arrivederci , hasta luego , la revedere !
( Applause )
8 .
Establishment of a European Asylum Support Office (
9 .
Bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries concerning sectoral matters and covering applicable law in contractual and non-contractual obligations (
10 .
MEDIA Mundus : audiovisual cooperation programme with professionals from third countries (
11 .
Common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports (
12 .
Bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries on judgments and decisions in matrimonial matters , parental responsibility and maintenance obligations (
13 .
Situation in the Republic of Moldova
- Before the vote
( DE ) Mr President , for technical reasons , we Social Democrats were unable to sign the joint resolution within the time allowed but signed it later .
The entire Group is behind it .
I also say that especially for our Romanian colleagues , with Mr Severin at the helm .
- Before the vote on paragraph 10
Mr President , I want to propose the following oral amendment to paragraph 10 : I wish to add the name of Mr Sergiu Mocanu .
The text would read : ' ... politically-motivated arrests , such as those of Anatol Matasaru , Sergiu Mocanu and Gabriel Stati ; ' .
14 .
Human rights in the world 2008 and the EU 's policy on the matter (
- Before the vote

( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats I would like to ask you , pursuant to Article 151 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) , to reject Amendment 45a , tabled by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , as inadmissible insofar as it deals with the statement made by Pope Benedict for the following reasons .
First , this statement was made in 2009 , while the report deals with human rights violations that took place in 2008 .
This amendment does not therefore amend the text it is intended to amend .
Second , this amendment compares the statements made by the Pope with human rights violations of the most serious kind , the use of the death penalty , human rights violations in China , and torture everywhere .
This comparison shows a cynical disregard for the victims of human rights violations throughout the world .
( Applause )
Third , it is such an unbelievable aspersion , such an unbelievable discrimination against the Pope that the ALDE Group may well be identified with it , but under no circumstances should the European Parliament be .
( Loud applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I am going to give you the opinion of the legal service and of the President of the European Parliament , since he has of course been consulted in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .

( FR ) Mr President , I just wanted to say , on a legal note , to Mr Nassauer , that the Pope does not count the years , for he counts eternity .
Please , please ...
The legal service has checked this carefully , from a technical perspective , from the perspective of the elements mentioned , from a content perspective and from the perspective of the period under examination .
The legal service is of the opinion that the amendment is admissible , and this is also the opinion of the President of the European Parliament .
It is therefore the opinion of Mr Pöttering only that shall prevail .
Thus , I am sorry , Mr Nassauer , but the amendment is admissible .
- Before the vote on paragraph 25
Mr President , I wish to refer strictly to an update of information , because the text was condemning the imprisonment of a Sudanese leader who has been released .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Nassauer , the right to self-determination is a human right and that includes sexual self-determination .
To that extent it was already topical in 2008 and what was said is particularly unfortunate .
I will read Amendment 2 aloud .
On the one hand , it is about a correction of fact and , on the other , a somewhat more balanced formulation :
' Underlines the importance of promoting sexual and reproductive health rights , as a precondition for any successful fight against HIV / AIDS , which causes enormous loss in terms of human lives and economic development , affecting particularly the poorest regions in the world ; is concerned about declarations made by Pope Benedict XVI , which create the impression that condom use could even lead to an increased risk of contagion ; is of the opinion that those statements will severely hamper the fight against HIV / AIDS ; ' .
The remainder of the amendment remains unchanged .
( Applause from the left )
( DE ) Mr President , the amendment is not as rude in tone as the prototype but the facts are unchanged .
We therefore reject the oral amendment .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
After the vote on Amendment 16
Mr President , forgive me for interrupting your chairing , but my understanding was that Amendment 16 was actually rejected , and yet you announced it was adopted .
Could you just clarify the situation ?
Yes , please excuse me , it was a slip of the tongue .
Indeed , the majority was against .
It was worth having it checked , but the services had already rectified my mistake .
Thank you for your point .
15 .
Development of an EU criminal justice area (
16 .
Institutional balance of the European Union (
- Before the vote
Mr President , first of all , I would like to make a technical remark .
As I understood it , Amendment 1 was not intended to replace the text but , rather , be a complement to it .
It was in that sense that I agreed to this amendment .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the entire Commission for their very close cooperation and to point out how important it is that , under the Treaty of Lisbon , we have close interinstitutional cooperation from the very beginning .
That is why I would also stress that , in the period of transition from Nice to Lisbon , we need to remain in close consultation with the European Council as well if we want to avoid beginning the next term in a state of absolute confusion .
I can in fact confirm that Amendment 1 is tabled as an addition .
17 .
Relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments under the Treaty of Lisbon (
18 .
Implementation of the citizens ' initiative (
- Before the vote
( FR ) Mr President , pursuant to Article 1 of the code of honour of the European Parliament , on behalf of my group I should like to thank you for the sittings you have chaired .
You were one of the best - thank you .
( Loud applause )
It is true that we are coming to the final vote - may I say a few personal words of thanks to you for your confidence and for the friendship you have shown me for so long .
For the last time in this parliamentary term , and for the last time in my existence , I am therefore going to ask you to vote .
We shall then go our separate ways .
I am convinced that , our political differences and our paths aside , we shall all remain true to Europe 's ideals , but you should know that , from my perspective , to have had the good fortune to chair these debates , in this collegial atmosphere , for 10 years will forever remain a very great honour in my life .
( Loud applause )
19 .
Draft Commission Regulation on REACH , as regards Annex XVII
- After the vote
( FR ) I too should like to thank you , and I would point out that Article 2 contains the mistake of no longer including you on the list .
That is a real shame !
( Applause )
Thank you .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the votes : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , the new role of Parliament after the Treaty of Lisbon will be very important , and I hope that Parliament will seize the opportunities it is given to the best of its ability .
As a member of an ethnic minority traditionally present in the European Union , I am particularly pleased that the rights of ethnic minorities are mentioned as individual rights for the first time in Article 2 .
I hope that group rights will follow as quickly as possible .
I am retiring voluntarily , of my own volition , but not without a feeling of nostalgia after five years as a Member of this Parliament and fifteen years as a Member of Parliament in Rome .
As an Italian national , with German as my mother tongue , of Austrian Slovene descent , with a Tyrolean nature - a proper European - I have been particularly pleased that we are all reunited in this Chamber as minorities and that minorities have been given opportunities .
Many have not yet really sensed that they belong to a minority , but I hope they will feel this more and more , including the States .
I am grateful to this House for the understanding for minorities that has been forthcoming .
( LT ) I voted in favour of Mr Leinen 's report and resolution for the following reasons .
We are used to repeating that the European Parliament is the only European Union institution which is directly elected by the people .
However , given that it is an institution elected by the people , in my opinion the European Parliament 's powers have until now been insufficient .
Therefore , I think that what we have adopted today , that is , Parliament 's new powers when applying the codecision procedure , new budget management powers , the new approval procedure , and new supervisory powers , is very important .
I also think that the Treaty of Lisbon will strengthen the European Union 's democratic legitimacy , especially when increasing Parliament 's powers to apply the codecision procedure .

Mr President , now I understand what the tactic is : it is simply to disregard the votes and implement the Lisbon Treaty as though the electorates of France , the Netherlands and Ireland had in fact voted ' yes ' .
One by one , its most contentious articles and provisions are being brought in : the foreign minister and the foreign policy , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the harmonisation of justice and home affairs .
Then colleagues are going to turn around to the Irish electorate and say : ' It is too late to vote " no ” now , because we have implemented the whole thing , so all you would be doing is annoying everybody and isolating yourselves when , in fact , the bulk of the Lisbon Treaty is already in force de facto , if not de jure . '
I do not know whether that is going to work .
That is going to be up to the Irish electorate , but I would be rather disappointed if they gave in to pressure .
It is , of course , for them to take their own decision , but these are , after all , people whose fathers saw off the might of the British Empire .
If they now give in to the European Parliament , I think they would be diminished as a people .
Mr President , may I also add to the growing numbers of tributes that were paid to you earlier on .
Thank you very much for your chairmanship and your patience whenever we have risen to speak .
I think it is very important that we recognise , when it comes to the Lisbon Treaty , that it has not been ratified yet , and we should not behave as if it has been ratified .
We should not ignore the will of the voters who have not yet ratified it and those countries that have not yet ratified it .
Let us also remember the rules at the start of the game and let us not try to change the rules half-way through .
At the start of the constitutional process the rules were that every country had to ratify or it fell .
France and the Netherlands failed to ratify so the Constitution fell .
Also with the Lisbon Treaty , the rules at the beginning were that every country has to ratify , otherwise it falls .
Yet when the Irish people voted ' no ' we decided to continue and to make them vote again .
If you really want the will of the people to follow this , then I suggest to the British Government that they meet their manifesto commitment and have a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr President , the Irish people will certainly be very foolish if they follow the sceptical wing of the British Conservative Party .
I can assure Mr Hannan that the Irish people will not - and have never - followed the sceptical wing of the British Conservative Party .
Its agenda is not even in the best interests of Britain - it is in the best interests of the Conservative Party .
It is a disgrace that a country that gave us Winston Churchill has sent these people to this Parliament to put their own narrow interests before the interests of the British people and the interests of Europe .
It is strange to see these British Conservatives bedfellows of the abstentionist Sinn Fein party , neither of whom have been in this House today or yesterday .
They do not turn up to this House .
They do not participate in the committees of the House .
How they draw their salary and expenses , I do not know , but they told this House that to approve this and other reports was the worst thing to happen in this term , and then they do not even come here to vote .
That is an absolute disgrace .
Mr President , after 15 years this will be my last speech in the European Parliament and I think there are few more important issues than the whole question of asylum and how European countries face this challenge .
There is no easy response to this issue either .
If there was , some country would have found it by now .
In reality , I would suggest that the only way to reduce the number of desperate people who seek refuge or asylum in a country other than their own is to address the root causes that force them to leave their homes and countries of origin .
That is why it is so important that we in the EU , and in all developed democratic countries , offer advice , help and support - including financial support - to those countries that are affected by war , internal violence , lack of human rights or discrimination .
Equally , we have to address the poverty around the world which contributes to migratory pressures .
We should never condemn people who are forced to seek asylum or refugee status .
Instead , we should offer sympathy and offer our support .
That is our challenge today .
Mr President , the right to control your borders is a defining attribute of statehood and the bestowal of residence or nationality rights is a characteristic of nationality .
When we transfer that from national to European level , we are treating the EU as a single jurisdiction with its own external borders and the other trappings of nationality .
This has no mandate : nobody has voted for this creation of a European Asylum Office .
But , of course , what we are doing is creating a new bureaucracy , which will now have a vested interest in the continuous harmonisation of policy at European level down the years , with or without any popular support .
I must just respond - on a different subject - to the words spoken and aimed at me by Gay Mitchell , the MEP for Dublin , a second ago .
He threw Winston Churchill at me and said it was a disgrace for the party of Churchill to be sending to Strasbourg people like me .
Let me finish my speech by quoting Churchill himself on the subject .
He said : ' We have our own dream and our own task .
We are with Europe but not of it .
We are linked but not combined .
We are interested and associated but not absorbed .
And should European statesmen address us in the words that were used of old , " Shall I speak for thee to the King or the Captain of the Host ? ” , we should reply with the Shunamite woman " Nay , sir , for we dwell among our own people ” . '
( FI ) Mr President , very briefly I would like to say that I voted in favour of Mrs Hieronymi 's report .
I also wish to thank Mrs Hieronymi for having done such excellent work in the Committee on Culture and Education in the area of audiovisual issues .
I know that she is to leave Parliament and that this was her last report for us in the European Parliament , at least for a while .
It is very important that the audiovisual component of the MEDIA Mundus programme is extended to make it accessible for third countries as well , including the African states .
This is a way to broaden cooperation .
This is also an excellent form of development cooperation and a way to encourage these countries to move towards a better life and better development .
This is also a means whereby we can assume an ethical responsibility , as is only right , for the African nations .
Most of all , however , this speech of mine is a thank you to Mrs Hieronymi for her marvellous work .
Mr President , I rise in support of the Costa report .
However , I am concerned , and I wanted to bring to the attention of this House how provisions like these are being used to stifle competition rather than protect airlines , the purpose of this legislation .
It is not unusual for airlines to hoard airport slots .
Let me share an example with you : Birmingham airport in my constituency .
We have seen the suspension of direct flights to Amritsar by Air India .
This highly popular and profitable service was cancelled last October , forcing customers into unnecessary travel and inconvenience to go to other airports , the reason being that Air India did not want to lose its highly valuable Heathrow slots .
It really takes your breath away that there are plenty of other airlines who would be filling to fill the slots but are unable to because Air India is holding onto them .
What I hope will happen as a result of this is that we will ensure that airlines do not hold on to slots unnecessarily .
The Commission needs to be vigilant that this legislation is not misused .
It is not just that I have a suspicious mind , but the chances are that the consumer will be left with precious few choices .
( RO ) The situation in the Republic of Moldova is now clear .
We have a Communist party which is behaving in exactly the same way as the Soviet-style Communist parties which enslaved half of Europe in the 20th century .
We have an opposition inspired by democracy which is fighting for a Republic of Moldova attached to European values .
The resolution which we voted on today sends a powerful political signal to Chişinău , but this signal must be clearly backed up by specific actions from the Commission and the Council .
I therefore call on the European Commission to actively cooperate with the democratic opposition in Chişinău to find effective ways of strengthening democratic awareness in the Republic of Moldova .
The most effective way of doing this , in my view , is to lift the visa requirements for citizens from the Republic of Moldova within the Community .
I would like to clearly say to the Council that we must not be under any illusion .
The key to democratisation in the Republic of Moldova still lies in Moscow .
The European Union must take action to reduce this influence .
In fact , history shows us that these actions must be vigorous .
The citizens of Moldova are expecting from the European Union exactly what the citizens of Eastern Europe were expecting from the West before 1989 .
( LT ) I voted for the resolution on the situation in Moldova , because on 5 April I was one of the international observers who monitored the parliamentary elections in that country .
We all witnessed the unrest which occurred after the elections in Moldova , but one month on from the elections , I think that it is particularly important to emphasise once more that relations between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova must continue to be developed and that we want this as we strive for greater European stability , security and well-being , and as we strive for new dividing lines .
However , the European Union 's cooperation with Moldova must go hand in hand with a genuine and clear obligation on the part of Moldova 's governing institutions to strive for democracy and to honour human rights .
( LT ) I am really delighted with the result of the vote on the resolution on the report about the global human rights situation in 2008 .
I am particularly pleased with the position demonstrated by Parliament when voting on the second amendment , which discussed Pope Benedict XVI .
I feel that the language , propositions and vocabulary used in that amendment are completely unacceptable and I would find it hard to imagine a situation where this Parliament could end its legislative term by adopting a statement which condemns Pope Benedict XVI for his statements and for the teachings of the Church .
I therefore congratulate Parliament on adopting this document , an important document on the global human rights situation last year , which underlines the most important problems - capital punishment , torture , brutal , inhumane behaviour , the situation of human rights defenders , the situation of women 's and children 's rights and many other matters .
- ( DE ) Mr President , I am very grateful to this House for rejecting the scandalous attack on the Pope by the Liberals .
Even in the somewhat more carefully chosen words of Mr Graf Lambsdorff it would have been a scandalous statement .
I have to say quite clearly that attempts are being made in this House to place the highest moral authority of the 21st century , which extends far beyond the billion Catholics and provides support for Europe and the entire world , on an equal footing with torturers , human rights abusers and dictators .
These are unheard of matters in hand and will return to haunt the Liberal Group and also the German FDP Party .

Mr President , whenever we discuss human rights we seem to be talking about a virtual EU : a European Union that exists only in Parliament resolutions , Commission press releases and Council communiqués .
It is that wonderful , peaceful , human rights EU that spreads its values not through daisy-cutter bombs but rather through trade accords and partnership agreements .
However , I feel it is incumbent on somebody to stand back and ask where this European Union is in the real world .
In the real world , Brussels is seeking to sell arms to the Communist regime in Beijing and isolating Taiwan , it is cosying up to the Ayatollahs in Tehran , it is refusing to do business with the anti-Castro dissidents in Cuba and it is trying to funnel cash to Hamas .
It is running protectorates - or satrapies as they were in Ottoman days - in Bosnia and in Kosovo , and within its own borders it is disregarding the will of the people in referendums .
Perhaps when we respect that basic right of being able to change your government through the ballot box and change public policy through your vote within the European Union , then we will have earned the moral authority to lecture others .
Mr President , one of the issues that concerns a number of my constituents in London is the massive erosion of civil liberties that we have seen in Britain under the Labour Government since 1997 .
What concerns them even more is when I tell them about the massive erosion of civil liberties arising at the EU level .
We have seen a number of treaties , such as the Prüm Treaty , that have caused great concern .
Fortunately , a recent ruling by the ECJ forced the British Government to hand back the data and profiles of people who were proven innocent , when the Government wanted to keep hold of them .
However , the decision by the British Government to only remove the profiles of innocent people after at least six years shows that it has scant regard for our freedoms .
The decision highlights that in Britain ' innocent until proven guilty ' is treated as a dismissible sound bite , rather than as a fundamental precept of our society .
It is bad enough that British police forces have access to this large amount of data and personal information , but other European governments will be able to access it too .
The Prüm Treaty was forced into European law without proper democratic scrutiny .
It was thought that over 3.5 million people could now have their personal information flung around the EU .
This will fill few people with confidence .
Mr President , I know this place has little concept of what the people of Europe actually want .
It much prefers to tell them how we feel what they should want .
I am being unkind ; I guess Members in this place do understand what our electors want and how they feel about Europe .
However , many of us in this place simply do not care .
They do not care about listening to minorities in this place who believe that the EU is heading in the wrong direction , and they certainly do not care to take on board the votes across the EU that go against them in referenda .
They do not care if they get their way by governments - like the one in the UK - lying to their electorate , getting a false mandate , promising a referendum on these matters and then reneging on that promise .
What people do care about here is time .
Why ?
Why the big rush to get the Lisbon Treaty ratified across the 27 Member States ?
The answer is very simple : to deny the British people a say on this matter .
I leave this place today , hopefully to go back to my Member State Parliament , the House of Commons , to represent people in Woodford Halse , Daventry , Long Buckby , Guilsborough , Brixworth , Earls Barton and elsewhere across the constituency known as Daventry .
They are people who have had enough of being ignored by the current UK Government , by people in this place and by the European Commission .
Should I get to the House of Commons , I will not rest until my constituents have their say on this Treaty .
Fortunately , I am led to believe that that vote in the UK will come quite quickly .
So rush through what you like here .
The people of Britain will get their say .



Mr President , I would like to make an explanation of vote on the Brok report : firstly , as a tribute to the work that Mr Brok has done in this institution ; secondly , to show my support for the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , but , more importantly , to urge my Government , when the Lisbon Treaty is ratified and when we have an extra seat coming to the United Kingdom , to allocate that seat to the people of Gibraltar .
I am proud to have represented Gibraltar for the past five years in this Parliament and I am happy to continue .
But I honestly have to say that it is difficult for the seven Members who have been elected to represent Gibraltar to do full justice over the range of issues that come to us : human rights , whistle-blowing , pensions , cross-border pollution and , of course , bilateral relations with Spain .
Some people argue that the numbers do not work .
It will be giving up too much to give Gibraltar a seat .
Well , for many years in this institution Denmark gave a seat to Greenland .
Greenland has around twice the population of Gibraltar .
Denmark gave 8 % of its seats to 50 000 people .
I am asking the British Government to give less than 1.5 % of its seats to the 26 000 people in Gibraltar .
Mr President , in 10 years in this Chamber I have listened to an awful lot of humbug , but I do not think I have ever heard such unadulterated piffle as I heard in the debate on this report yesterday from Paleo-federalists such as Mr Brok and Mr Corbett , canting about the sovereignty of national parliaments as though they cared about it .


The sovereignty of a parliament is shorthand for the sovereignty of the people .
It is not there to guarantee the privileges of national parliamentarians .
When we elect a parliament we entrust it with the safeguarding of our liberties for a temporary and contingent period .
National parliamentarians have no right to make permanent derogations to those freedoms without going back and asking for an explicit mandate from the people .
We have 646 Members of Parliament in the United Kingdom .
638 of them were elected on the basis of an explicit promise that they would put the European Constitution to a referendum before they ratified it .
When we hear all this stuff about how the European Constitution is now legal because all these parliamentarians have gone ahead with it , that does not invalidate the case for a referendum : it invalidates the case for representative democracy as it is .
If you want to restore honour and meaning and purpose to our existing systems of representative government , we should trust the people and give them their referendum - as we promised .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Written explanations of vote
I voted for the report on gender mainstreaming in EU external relations .
Greater integration of women in politics , particularly in external relations and diplomacy , is essential to the successful implementation of the EU 's external policies , including in the areas of aid , development , enlargement , neighbourhood policy , conflict resolution , security and peace-building , and international trade .
Despite a number of policy documents adopted at EU level on gender equality and women 's rights , the practical commitment to this issue is still weak and the budgetary resources earmarked specifically for gender issues are insufficient .
It is important to underline that gender mainstreaming requires not only high-level policy statements but also the political will of the leadership of the EU and Member States .
in writing . - British Conservative MEPs fully support a policy of equal opportunity and non-discrimination of women in all areas of public and commercial life .
However , this document is over-prescriptive in its approach and tries to micromanage all areas of external action including setting up an EU Institute of Gender Equality without recognising the strides made by all EU institutions to make every opportunity available to female staff .
The report talks of benchmarks and objectives highly suggestive of quotas in all but name , and advocates deploying women on ESDP missions without clarifying their combatant status .
Therefore , British Conservatives abstained on this report .
Parliament voted today on a report on its new role and responsibilities in implementing the Treaty of Lisbon .
The report gathers opinions from different committees concerning the changes that the Treaty of Lisbon will entail .
The report welcomes the fact that Parliament will have more influence on the EU 's legislative work .
We have chosen to vote in favour of this report because the European Parliament needs to prepare itself to be able to implement the changes that will occur in connection with its work if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
However , our votes should not in any way be seen as us pre-empting the individual Member States ' ratification processes .
We fully respect each Member State 's right to decide for itself whether to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - The European Parliament has no role or responsibility to implement the Lisbon Treaty .
Why not ?
Because the treaty has not come into force : indeed , it was rejected comprehensively by Irish voters last year .
Therefore , to talk about the European Parliament 's new role and responsibilities in implementing the Lisbon treaty is breathtakingly arrogant and symptomatic of the institutional imperviousness to democratic opinion that characterises the EU .
I hope that when Irish voters go to the polls later this year they will reject the Lisbon Treaty again .
The leader of my party , the Conservative Party , David Cameron , is committed to holding a national referendum on the Lisbon Treaty if it has not already entered into force .
I would therefore hope that the people of Britain could have the chance to drive the final nail into the coffin of this wretched treaty .
British Conservatives believe in a very different vision of the EU to the one represented by the Lisbon Treaty , and we are rightly forming a new political group in the European Parliament to champion our vision .
I voted for Mr Leinen 's report .
This report presents a detailed analysis of the new powers of the European Parliament in light of the Treaty of Lisbon , particularly the new codecision powers , new budgetary powers , new consent procedure , new powers of scrutiny , new rights to be informed and new rights of citizens .
The end result is that the European Parliament will reinforce its powers , particularly on codecision , and increase its ability to influence decision-making , thus enhancing the democratic legitimacy of the European Union .
This resolution forms part of a package of five resolutions , adopted today by Parliament , which shows the clearest possible contempt for the democratically and sovereignly expressed will of the French , Dutch and Irish peoples , who rejected the European Constitution and the so-called Treaty of Lisbon .
It also forms part of the anti-democratic process and campaign aiming to impose this unacceptable draft Treaty .
With total disregard for the democratic will expressed by these peoples and for the provisions enshrined in the Treaties themselves - which the combined forces of the right and social democrats adopted - they are forcing the Irish people to vote in a new referendum ( at the same time as preventing other people from being consulted in this way ) .
They are also increasing the pressure and interference in order to force acceptance of this Treaty , which will increase the federalism , neoliberalism and militarism of the EU .
Such is our hypocritical and cynical European democracy .
The same people who , ignoring what has been said ( like the Portuguese Socialist Party and the Portuguese Social Democratic Party ) , have denied their peoples a debate and popular consultation by means of a referendum on the proposed Treaty of Lisbon , and who only respect the popular will when it is in line with their own , are now asking the people in each EU Member State to place their trust in them and vote for them in the imminent elections to the European Parliament ...
It is simply barefaced cheek ...
The Treaty of Lisbon , which is 96 per cent identical to the draft Constitutional Treaty , was rejected in the referendum in Ireland .
Prior to that , the draft Constitutional Treaty was rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The majority in this Parliament refuses to acknowledge its political losses .
This is an outrageous crime against democratic principles and an equally outrageous example of the arrogance of power that characterises cooperation in the EU .
Mr Leinen 's report on the new roles of the European Parliament includes steps towards a United States of Europe - as implied by the Treaty of Lisbon - and also proposes that the EU now moves into the area of education as well , including sport and so on .
It would have been desirable if the report had instead dealt with the problem of this Parliament 's lack of democratic legitimacy .
We are once again heading for an election in which voter turnout is predicted to be very low .
The electorate in the Member States still feels little involvement with the super-centralist European Parliament .
For as long as the political debates of representative democracy are focused on the elections to the national parliaments , it should be the national parliaments that are the highest decision-making bodies within the Union - not the European Parliament .
I have voted against the draft report .
in writing . - Why are we even talking about the Lisbon Treaty when it has yet to come into effect ?
Why are we effectively ignoring the democratic will of the Irish people , who voted to reject the treaty a year ago ?
The reason , of course , is that the EU cares very little for democratic opinion and is determined to move rapidly towards ever-closer union despite a lack of popular legitimacy .
Irish voters will have to vote yet again on this treaty because the EU simply does not take no for an answer .
The chasm between the EU and its citizens is growing all the time .
Referring to the Lisbon Treaty as though it were a fact of life merely serves to reinforce this democratic deficit .
For this reason , and many others , I am pleased that British Conservatives will be part of a new political group in the next parliament , dedicated to reforming the EU and challenging the prevailing orthodoxy of ever-closer union which has proved so unpopular and caused so much damage in my region of North-East England .
We have voted in favour of the report on the financial aspects of the Treaty of Lisbon , which deals with the form the budget procedure will take if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
We do not support the parts of the report that deal with the EU having its own resources through power of taxation .
We also oppose the establishment of flexibility mechanisms .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which is 96 per cent identical to the draft Constitutional Treaty , was rejected in the referendum in Ireland .
Prior to that , the draft Constitutional Treaty was rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The majority in this Parliament refuses to acknowledge its political losses .
This is an outrageous crime against democratic principles and an equally outrageous example of the arrogance of power that characterises cooperation in the EU .
I do not believe that the European Parliament should have greater influence on the EU budget .
During my time in Parliament I have noted time after time how the federalist majority wishes to liberally hand out grants for everything from cultural projects to structural support and increased EU bureaucracy .
According to the majority in the European Parliament , all the different interest groups within regional politics , the fisheries sector and agriculture must get a share of the EU 's pie .
In some cases the expenditure is nothing but a PR stunt .
This liberal expenditure policy is being conducted by the EU at a time of financial crisis when Member States are having to cut their expenditure on health care , schools and welfare .
Most importantly , it is fortunate that the European Parliament has not so far had too great an influence on the EU 's agricultural policy .
If it had , the EU would end up mired in protectionism and heavy subsidies to all the various groups within the agricultural sector .
I have voted against the report .
in writing . - UK Conservatives have voted against the asylum package as , while we believe in cooperation in this area , we do not believe in a communitarised approach to asylum and immigration policy .
We believe that the protection of national borders for us remains a key element of public policy at national level .
A fortnight ago the European Parliament adopted a report on a common immigration policy for Europe , thus paving the way for what had already been planned by the European Commission : mass immigration .
Today it is the turn of asylum seekers ; the idea is to establish a ' Europe of asylum ' .
Indeed , the clearly stated objective is to ensure higher standards of treatment for asylum seekers with regard to their reception conditions .
That means not only standardising minimum reception conditions among all the Member States but also providing support for asylum seekers to settle in huge numbers .
To this end , the scope of this future directive will be extended to all persons legally or illegally entering European Union territory .
The administrative restrictions that exist in the Member States with regard to labour market access will have to be completely abolished .
Social , medical , psychological and housing assistance , as well as legal assistance , will have to be provided by the hosting Member State .
Refusal of such assistance will be subject to legal appeals and investigations ... that is often not the case for nationals themselves ...
By adopting this second phase of the ' asylum package ' , Brussels is facilitating and encouraging global immigration to Europe .
We shall always oppose this internationalist vision , the sole aim of which is purely and simply to destroy the peoples and nations of Europe .
For the last vote of this parliamentary term we are being asked to give our verdict on the asylum package .
This marks the end of a process carried out throughout this term of office .
While some progress has been made , the differences among the Member States unfortunately still exist with regard to the recognition of the status of refugees .
Evidence of this is the limits that can be seen in the directive on the reception conditions of asylum seekers .
Again , it is the Member States that are on the front line , to the detriment of the European unity that we require in this area .
I hope that , during the next parliamentary term , at second reading , we shall be able to reverse this state of affairs in order to create a real European asylum law guaranteeing real protection for these particularly vulnerable men and women .
We Conservatives have today voted in favour of Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert 's report on criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for applications for international protection lodged by third-country nationals or stateless persons .
We are aware of and understand that the large influx of people by boat via the Mediterranean puts some of the smaller countries on the southern maritime border of the EU in a difficult situation , and agree that something must be done to resolve the situation .
It is important that the so-called suspension mechanism is not formulated such that there is a risk of removing the incentive for Member States to improve the standard of the asylum and reception process , which would be contrary to the fundamental idea behind the joint regulation .
We Social Democrats welcome any initiative that improves the situation of asylum seekers and people with no documents .
We advocate a generous common asylum and immigration policy centred on people 's needs in accordance with the commitments made by the Member States in the Geneva Convention .
Although the ' asylum package ' involves some good steps being taken , we have decided to vote against the reports by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert and Mr Masip Hidalgo .
We Social Democrats object to the policy on asylum and immigration that is being conducted by the right-leaning majority in the European Parliament .
In particular , we distance ourselves from the matter of oral information not having to be given in a language they understand , of detention not having to take place within the framework of the Geneva Convention , of medical examination in order to establish age and the matter of free legal assistance .
We also consider it regrettable that the right does not wish to give asylum seekers the right to enter the labour market within six months .
in writing . - The establishment of this office is yet another step towards a common EU asylum and immigration policy , which is a policy I totally reject .
I believe that the issue of whom to allow into the United Kingdom should be the responsibility of elected parliamentarians and accountable ministers in the United Kingdom , not the responsibility of the EU .
Handing the EU control of asylum and immigration policy would be deeply inimical to our national interest and would potentially expose us to greater risks from terrorism and organised crime .
The progress towards a common asylum and immigration policy is another sign of the EU 's determination to create a single political entity with uniform rules for everyone .
That 's not the vision that British Conservatives have for the EU , and we will be promoting a very different vision of the EU when we form a new political grouping in the next parliament .
All the asylum-related reports voted on today offer a lax and extensive interpretation of the right to asylum that is ultimately detrimental to those who are in genuine need of international protection , in order to save their lives , their physical integrity and their freedom .
The new social , financial , family and other rights that you wish to force the Member States to grant to asylum seekers will act as a magnet for all would-be economic immigrants , will further overwhelm the services in charge of these problems , and will further slow down the examination of case files .
All this , because you repeatedly refuse to take into account the abuses and the violations of procedures , and because you persist in confusing the rights and the status that recognised refugees could have with that which you wish to grant to ordinary asylum seekers .
Most unacceptable of all , though , is the Lambert report , which creates a European ' support ' office that will be able to distribute asylum seekers among the Member States as it pleases .
We are not against intergovernmental cooperation in these areas , where respect is shown for the sovereign right of the Member States to decide who may enter their territory , and under which conditions , but we are against your policies .
I voted for the Zwiefka report as I believe it is very important to establish a procedure allowing Member States to negotiate international agreements on matters falling within the exclusive competence of the Community , in cases in which the Community has decided not to exercise its competence .
In other words , at the moment Portugal is prevented from concluding international agreements to speed up judicial cooperation , including on issues relating to divorce and annulment of marriages , as the Community is considered to have partially acquired exclusive competence over these areas .
This proposal allows the Commission to authorise the conclusion of such agreements , provided that the Community itself does not intend to conclude or has not concluded an agreement on the same subject with a third country .
I feel that it is very important that this regulation be negotiated as quickly as possible , as it is in the interests not only of Portuguese citizens but also of all citizens in the rest of Europe .
The relationships that have developed between the audiovisual industries of the EU Member States and those of third countries must continue and must be strengthened in the interest not only of professionals but also of consumers .
The audiovisual cooperation programme MEDIA Mundus , as adopted today by the European Parliament , and which I support , comes under this objective .
Indeed , it provides an appropriate framework with which to improve the competitiveness and transnational distribution of audiovisual works worldwide .
Initiated as it was by the European Parliament , this programme should also help to promote cultural diversity while giving real added value to the actions already carried out in this area by the Union and the Member States .
Thanks to the efforts made by our rapporteur to reach an agreement at first reading , new commercial opportunities should soon arise and should offer audiovisual professionals the prospect of forging long-term working relationships with their third-country counterparts .
in writing . - I voted against the Costa report on airport slots , in order to highlight the complete lack of consultation with airport authorities , the lack of debate with MEPs and the rushed nature of the legislation .
This measure will only exacerbate problems in the aviation sector .
I voted for the Deprez report .
This regulation establishes a procedure for the negotiation and conclusion of bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries .
I believe that it is very important to establish a procedure allowing Member States to negotiate international agreements in cases in which the Community has decided not to exercise its competence .
As an example , at the moment Portugal is prevented from concluding international agreements to speed up judicial cooperation , including on issues relating to parental responsibility , maintenance obligations and divorce , as the Community is considered to have partially acquired exclusive competence over these areas .
This proposal allows the Commission to authorise the conclusion of such agreements .
Given the close ties that Portugal has with certain countries , particularly the Community of Portuguese Language Countries , and the high number of Portuguese migrants in various countries , it is very important , in terms of family law , that Portugal be able to speed up recognition of the rights of Portuguese citizens in these countries by concluding or revising bilateral agreements .
Although I have cited the example of Portugal , I feel it is equally important for all EU citizens that this regulation be negotiated as quickly as possible .
The European Court of Justice has established that the Community has exclusive power to enter into international agreements with third countries in certain areas .
Under the same provisions , individual Member States that have previously entered into bilateral agreements with a third country , or that wish to do so in the future , are prevented from doing so because it is not deemed compatible with the EC Treaty .
In exceptional cases , however , the EU may authorise the Member State to enter into bilateral agreements : if the Community has no interest in agreements with the third country , if the individual Member State has a particular interest in the agreement and the agreement does not negatively impact Community law .
The June List is in favour of the realisation of the internal market and supports the work on seeking solutions at EU level to the environmental challenges facing Europe .
In these areas we accept a certain degree of supranationalism .
However , we are opposed to the supranational legislative measures above .
Of course individual Member States must be able to enter into bilateral legal agreements with third countries if they judge such agreements to be better for them than those that exist at EU level !
While it is undoubtedly good that a small possibility of self-determination is now being proposed through the introduction of a negotiating procedure , it is nonetheless small comfort and does not change the clear - even if not explicitly expressed - aim of creating an EU state .
I have therefore voted against the report .
As regards the recent protests against the results of the Moldovan elections , my group has submitted a separate resolution which diverges from the compromise reached by the four groups .
There is no difference between the two resolutions in relation to our calls for free and fair elections , but they do differ in their assessments of the government and the majority party in Moldova .
My group has followed the reasoning that the protests have been organised by non-democratic forces which seek to challenge the repeat vote for the Communist party cast by one half of the electorate .
In addition , it has been assumed that the protests have been organised by Moldova 's neighbour , Romania , which wants to annex Moldova .
In the light of this , the majority of my group will be voting against the joint resolution .
However , I , personally , will be voting in favour of it .
There are many Moldovans who have applied for Romanian nationality .
Our political contacts with the party currently in office in Moldova must not prevent us from respecting the desire of a large section of the Moldovan population for annexation to Romania .
That desire has been stimulated by the fact that public opinion in a number of Member States does not support further enlargement .
Annexation to Romania would , then , be the only way that Moldovans could enter the EU .
Moldova is experiencing great political and economic difficulties .
The dramatic events of 5 , 7 and 8 April on the streets of Chişinău after the elections show that society , and especially young people , wants change and speedy unification with the European Union .
The communists are blocking essential reforms and are negotiating with Russia , even though officially they support rapprochement with European structures .
We should help Moldova on this road .
Greater engagement of the EU will give the government and people of Moldova greater certainty that the EU and the possibility of membership are real .
The government must introduce fundamental reforms to allow normal political and economic development , reforms which will lead to a market economy , democratisation of civil life and observance of citizens ' rights .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the situation in the Republic of Moldova .
I think that it is extremely important that all the political groups gave their attention and proper support to this subject .
As a member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I support the fact that the European Union continues to give the Republic of Moldova all the support it requires to enable it to fulfil its European destiny , in line with the aspirations of its people .
It is important for the Republic of Moldova to develop economically and offer its citizens the best possible living conditions and the chance to fulfil their potential .
I believe that Romania , as a European Union Member State neighbouring the Republic of Moldova , must contribute , under the terms and on the basis of an agreement promoting cooperation , good neighbourliness and mutual respect , to the economic and social development of this country .
in writing . - One of the positive aspects of the EU is the way in which it seeks to spread values of democracy , human rights and good governance throughout the world by way of its relationships with third countries .
It is , however , deeply ironic that the EU places so much emphasis on democracy elsewhere while ignoring democracy within the EU itself , as can be seen by the reaction to Ireland 's rejection of the Lisbon Treaty .
I wish to draw attention to two parts of the world : firstly , Central Asia .
Although I recognise the strategic importance of this region to the EU , I believe that continued engagement on the EU 's part must be matched by advances in human rights and democratisation in Central Asia .
Secondly , I would like to contrast the human rights situation in the authoritarian Communist dictatorship of China with the vigorous and free democracy of Taiwan .
Taiwan enjoys an exceptionally high standard of human rights in east Asia and can serve as an example to China of what societies can achieve when they take the bold decision to become truly free .
in writing . - This report on the Annual Report on Human Rights 2008 evaluates the state of human rights actions around the world and calls for improvements in some key areas .
Regarding Amendment 2 , while I disagree strongly with Pope Benedict 's quoted stance on the prophylactic use of condoms to prevent the spread of HIV / AIDS , I could not support this amendment because of the gratuitous and inaccurate drafting .
I voted for the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2008 .
This report essentially has two objectives .
Firstly , it is intended to supply a documentary reference basis making possible awareness , discussion and evaluation of the year 's actions , with the aim of improvement , correction and expansion in respect of future operations .
Secondly , it is intended to inform the widest possible audience of the EU 's actions to promote human rights worldwide .
I believe it is very important to have a debate aimed at setting priorities , identifying issues which require action at EU level , and maintaining , with periodic evaluation , a list of situations calling for especial vigilance .
This report also includes the issue of women 's rights and shows that there is a gap which must be filled in the development of the EU 's specific actions and policies in favour of women 's human rights .
You only have to look at the contents of the resolution on the situation in Palestine to see the extent to which it is an unacceptable exercise in hypocrisy and cynicism by a majority in Parliament with regard to human rights ( in the world ) .
The resolution does not have a single word of condemnation for Israel 's cruel aggression towards the Palestinian people , which nothing can justify .
The resolution whitewashes the savagery inflicted on the Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip - which the resolution of the UN Human Rights Council denounced and condemned - and does not have a single word of solidarity for the Palestinian people , who are victims of the most brutal violations of human rights , perpetrated by the Israeli Army and by the terrorism of the Israeli state .
The aspects of the resolution with which we may agree cannot override the fact that this annual initiative by the EP is essentially nothing more than a perfidious exercise in the manipulation of human rights and their unacceptable use as a weapon of interference by the EU 's major powers ( and their large economic and financial groups ) against people who are asserting their sovereignty and rights .
Once again we say : you can count on us to defend human rights , but do not count on us for exercises in hypocrisy .
I voted for adoption of the Obiols i Germà report on Human Rights in the World 2008 and the European Union 's policy on the matter .
I voted in favour because the scandalous amendment attacking Pope Benedict XVI had been rejected .
If the Pope were to be considered a threat to human rights it would mean that the world would be standing on its head .
I do not understand the authors of that amendment .
There are , unfortunately , a great many cases of the violation of human rights in the world .
These demand our engagement , condemnation and action .
The Catholic Church and many other confessions are our allies in the fight to ensure respect for human dignity .
Attacking the Pope is only evidence of pre-election cynicism and harmful radicalism .
It is a pity that at the end of this term some MEPs have become entangled in such an embarrassing affair .
An independent foreign policy is essential for maintaining national sovereignty .
Each Member State 's foreign relations must be subject to democratic control .
The EU must not conduct a common foreign policy because such a development risks taking away from people their opportunity to hold their elected politicians accountable for their actions in their relations with foreign countries .
The present report contains a number of important statements supporting specific aspects of human rights .
Naturally I have voted in favour of these .
However , the report as a whole is a means of promoting the EU 's positions on foreign policy .
I have therefore voted against it in the final vote .
I recognise the importance of the resolution 's aim of improving the human rights situation in a number of vulnerable countries .
I share its ambition to abolish the use of the death penalty and improve the working situation of human rights campaigners and NGOs .
At the same time , I agree that requirements must be set of human rights in the countries with which the EU cooperates .
Nonetheless , I cannot vote in favour of the resolution because I strongly oppose the mention of delayed ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is an insult to the Irish population 's rejection of the Treaty .
Moreover , I am opposed to the aim of having joint structures and personnel for creating actual EU embassies .
I believe that the EU does not have competence in this area ; nor should it have .
in writing . - I take issue with amendment 2 , which criticized the Roman Catholic Church and its leader Pope Benedict for his views on the use of condoms , but wisely the House rejected this amendment .
There is little evidence that promoting the use of condoms actually prevents the transmission of AIDS .
Pope Benedict is entitled to his views as his own human right , whether or not others agree with them .
I wonder whether this report would have dared to criticize a leader of another major world religion in the same hostile way .
It is the role of the Roman Catholic Church to lead the faithful , not to be led .
We should accord more respect to a Church and a religion on which the values of our Union are founded .
British Conservative MEPs support high standards of human rights in the world , but overall abstained on the report in the final vote as it included issues like ' Reproductory Rights ' - which effectively mean abortion - and the death sentence , which are individual conscience matters , as well as advocating policy areas like the ICC , and the Lisbon Treaty , which we have a party position opposing .
in writing . - I am the strongest supporter of genuine human rights and therefore have no difficulty with many aspects of this report .
I was personally responsible for introducing a paragraph asking the Council and Member States to take more effective action over the human rights catastrophe caused by the Mugabe regime in Zimbabwe .
However , the report consistently and unaccountably refers to the EU as if it were a sovereign state - references that I and other Members attempted unsuccessfully to remove at the committee stage .
The idea that individual Member States should surrender their national prerogative on matters of human rights to the European Union , whether in the forum of the United Nations or elsewhere , is totally unacceptable .
I also object to the gratuitous and unnecessary references to the Treaty of Lisbon , which Conservatives and many others have consistently opposed .
I therefore abstained on the final vote on the report .
Articles 84 and 96 of the report deal with the human rights situation in Cuba .
It must be said that , despite international pressure , systematic intimidation , interrogation and sophisticated forms of violence have continued against the Women in White even in 2008 .
Several weeks ago the regime attempted in all manner of ways to prevent them from mounting a silent protest on the sixth anniversary of their husbands ' imprisonment .
As a mark of support , a solidarity march for the Women in White and their husbands was held in Bratislava on 28 April 2009 .
Of the 75 activists imprisoned six years ago , whose cause has been backed by organisations including the EU , 54 remain behind bars .
Only if we monitor their plight will we succeed in getting them out of prison before they are reduced to human wrecks .
Let us not forget that we will soon be commemorating the 20th anniversary of the fall of communism in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
What we can do for the Cuban prisoners and their wives now is to leave the paragraphs on human rights ' violations in Cuba in the text of the report .
I feel I have to mention Amendment 2 , which sharply criticises Pope Benedict XVI .
This amendment maligns the head of the Catholic Church .
Besides that , it places his statements on the same level as crimes committed in countries where the death penalty is abused , where people are tortured and killed for expressing their opinions and where there is no respect for the most basic human rights .
Let us reject this amendment .
in writing . - UK Conservatives believe that , while cross-border cooperation in criminal justice is important , the report seeks to create a common justice area at an EU level , which would significantly compromise the traditions of those countries which base their legal system on common law .
Therefore , we cannot support this proposal .
in writing . - Criminal justice is rightly the responsibility of EU Member States .
I can accept that Member States need to cooperate in trans-national matters related to criminal justice but I do not accept the development of an EU criminal justice area .
Extending the EU 's so-called ' competence ' into criminal justice would be an unwarranted and unacceptable intrusion into British sovereignty .
People in my region of North-East England want criminal law to be made by accountable British parliamentarians and applied by British judges .
The fact that the EU is seeking to extend its powers into areas hitherto reserved for Member States exclusively shows the true aim of the EU : to create a federal superstate .
People in my region do not want to see that occurring .
They reject the conventional wisdom of ever-closer union and want to see a looser , more flexible system of intergovernmental cooperation .
I hope the new group in which British Conservatives will sit in the next parliament will be able to deliver what most Britons want from Europe .
Under the guise of combating mafia organisations and organised crime in general , the Eurocrats of Brussels wish to further impose their federalist views , which destroy nations , peoples and identities .
Indeed , while everyone knows that each EU Member State has its own laws , legal traditions , and codes , here we have yet another assault by these fanatical Euro-federalists , in the shape of their desire to create a ' European judicial culture ' .
In order to establish this culture , the following should accordingly be created : a European Judicial School , an academy of European law for judges , prosecutors , defence lawyers , and all others involved in the administration of justice .
What about national judicial schools ?
What about the inextricable differences between the legislations deriving from common law and those from written law ?
No answer is given , obviously .
In practice , it will be the entire judicial and penal systems of the Member States that will disappear in the face of this forced harmonisation - downwards harmonisation , that is .
These sorcerer 's apprentices of Europe 's have not understood a thing ; only the nation states , Europe 's main components , will be able to enrich it and to restore it to its rightful place in the world .
Europe must not be built at the expense of its nations and its peoples .
Parliament voted today on a report on the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on the development of the institutional balance of the European Union .
The report proposes that the additional Members which Sweden and other Member States will be given if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force be elected already in the forthcoming elections to the European Parliament and then be given the status of observers in Parliament .
The report also proposes that the appointment of a new President of the Commission be carried out in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
This means that the choice of the President should reflect the political majority within the European Parliament and that the choice of candidate should be preceded by discussions between the Council and the political groups within Parliament .
We have chosen to vote in favour of this report because the European Parliament needs to prepare itself to be able to implement the changes that will occur in connection with its work if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
However , our votes should not in any way be seen as us pre-empting the individual Member States ' ratification processes .
We fully respect each Member State 's right to decide for itself whether to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted for the report on the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on the development of the institutional balance of the European Union .
This report looks at the Treaty of Lisbon 's impact on the development of the EU 's institutional balance .
It highlights the importance of implementing the new provisions and making the first appointments .
The possible entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon by the end of 2009 calls for a political agreement between the Council and the European Parliament in order to ensure that the procedure for the choice of the next President of the Commission and for the nomination of the future Commission will , in any case , respect the substance of the new powers that the Treaty of Lisbon assigns to the European Parliament on this issue .
As a result , the report sets out a series of recommendations aimed at developing an institutional balance and stresses that the Treaty of Lisbon strengthens each of the European institutions in its area of competence .
This resolution forms part of a package of five resolutions , adopted today by the majority in Parliament , which shows the clearest possible contempt for the democratically and sovereignly expressed will of the French , Dutch and Irish peoples , who rejected the European Constitution and its twin brother , the so-called Treaty of Lisbon , in referendums .
It is also one of the many initiatives aiming to impose this unacceptable draft Treaty .
Instead of burying the Lisbon Treaty once and for all , the EP is again adopting a resolution which glorifies the anti-democratic institutional balance of the European Union proposed in the resolution , concealing the fact that , among many other examples , this :
transfers sovereign powers from the Portuguese people to the EU 's supranational institutions , dominated by the major powers , an example of which is the management of the marine biological resources in our Exclusive Economic Zone ;
extends the application of the majority rule in decision-making , which will reinforce the domination of the major powers and prevent Portugal from vetoing decisions that go against the national interest ;
increases the removal of authority from the national democratic institutions ( the only ones which directly result from the democratic will of the people ) , an example of which is the transfer of powers from the national parliaments , which are losing the power to make decisions in fundamental areas and which are becoming a kind of advisory body without the right to veto Community decisions that go against national interests .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which is 96 per cent identical to the draft Constitutional Treaty , was rejected in the referendum in Ireland .
Prior to that , the draft Constitutional Treaty was rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The majority in this Parliament refuses to acknowledge its political losses .
This is an outrageous crime against democratic principles and an equally outrageous example of the arrogance of power that characterises cooperation in the EU .
It is worth noting that in paragraph 4 of Mr Dehaene 's report it is stated ( quote ) : ' Welcomes the fact that the Treaty of Lisbon stipulates that the European Council may by unanimity , and with the consent of the European Parliament , provided there is no opposition by a national parliament , extend qualified majority decision-making and the ordinary legislative procedure to areas in which they do not yet apply ' .
Notwithstanding the fact that voters in many Member States are clearly sceptical of an increasingly supranational Union , the federalist majority in the European Parliament indicates the possibility of making the Union even more supranational under the Treaty of Lisbon and shifting even more power to the EU without having to agree on a new treaty .
I have voted against the report .
Parliament voted today on a report on the development of the relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments under the Treaty of Lisbon .
This report welcomes the new powers that will be given to the national parliaments by the Treaty of Lisbon .
It also investigates the possibilities for future development of the relations between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
We have chosen to vote in favour of this report because the European Parliament needs to prepare itself to be able to implement the changes that will occur in connection with its work if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
However , our votes should not in any way be seen as us pre-empting the individual Member States ' ratification processes .
We fully respect each Member State 's right to decide for itself whether to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted for Mr Brok 's report .
This report welcomes the new powers given to the national parliaments by the Treaty of Lisbon and examines the possibilities of future cooperation between the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
The adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon in the Czech Republic represents an important step towards its rapid entry into force .
This report shows how important this new Treaty of the European Union is .
We voted against this report firstly because it lacks a purpose : the Treaty of Lisbon does not exist ; it was rejected by three referendums .

We voted against it secondly because it recommends subordinating the national parliaments to the European Parliament : the latter , secure in the strength of its superiority and , no doubt , its unbearable arrogance , would provide its support to the national parliaments - made up in its eyes , no doubt , of philistines and idiots - to examine European texts .
Is this support or pressure ?
It would invite itself to the plenary sessions of national parliaments ; it would play the role of adviser ; it would influence the way in which parliaments transpose texts in order to encourage uniformity ; it would assert itself to make sure that defence budgets are debated ... would it also dictate to them the way in which they should control governments and their activities within the Council ?

Lastly , we voted against it because it is based on a double hypocrisy : the national parliaments have obtained nothing other than a very difficult to implement and hence ineffective right to monitor respect for the principle of subsidiarity ; this principle is an illusion since many supposedly exclusive EU competences are sanctuarised , and the definition of subsidiarity as provided by the Treaties in fact promotes Brussels 's powers .
This resolution forms part of a package of five resolutions , adopted today by the majority in Parliament , which shows the clearest possible contempt for the democratically and sovereignly expressed will of the French , Dutch and Irish peoples , who rejected the European Constitution and its twin brother , the so-called Treaty of Lisbon , in referendums .
It is also one of the many initiatives aiming to impose this unacceptable draft Treaty .
This resolution on the ' development of the relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments under the Treaty of Lisbon ' is a prime example of deceit .
The EP welcomes the ' obligations and rights of the national parliaments under the Treaty of Lisbon ... which enhance their role in the political processes of the European Union ' .
It would be a laughing matter if it were not so serious .
The EP is hiding the fact that , with regard to the supposed enhancement of the role of the national parliaments in the decision-making process , what is actually happening with the Treaty of Lisbon is that these parliaments are losing much more than they are ( falsely ) gaining , bearing in mind the extensive transfer of powers to the institutions of the European Union .
Even the ( pseudo- ) scrutiny of respect for the principle of subsidiarity ( over the exercise by the Community institutions of powers transferred in the meantime to the EU by the national parliaments ) does not give any of the national parliaments the right of veto .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which is 96 per cent identical to the draft Constitutional Treaty , was rejected by the referendum in Ireland .
Prior to that , the draft Constitutional Treaty was rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The majority in this Parliament refuses to acknowledge its political losses .
This is an outrageous crime against democratic principles and an equally outrageous example of the arrogance of power that characterises cooperation in the EU .
Mr Brok 's report praises the Convention that produced a draft Constitutional Treaty .
This Convention has been heavily criticised for having been entirely undemocratic and controlled from the top by its chairman Giscard d 'Estaing .
In my opinion , Mr Brok 's report should have come to the conclusion that , for as long as the political debates of representative democracy are focused on the elections to the national parliaments , it should be the national parliaments that are the highest decision-making bodies within the Union - not the European Parliament .
I have voted against the report .
Parliament voted today on a report requesting the Commission to submit a proposal for a regulation on the citizens ' initiative as soon as the Treaty of Lisbon is ratified .
The citizens ' initiative will mean that one million citizens coming from a significant number of Member States will be able to take the initiative to request the Commission to submit a legislative proposal .
This will give citizens the same right as the Council to request the Commission to initiate legislative proposals .
We have chosen to vote in favour of this report because the European Parliament needs to prepare itself to be able to implement the changes that will occur in connection with its work if the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
However , our votes should not in any way be seen as us pre-empting the individual Member States ' ratification processes .
We fully respect each Member State 's right to decide for itself whether to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - I and my Labour delegation colleagues support the introduction of the Citizens ' Initiative in the event of the successful ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
It would strengthen citizens ' rights of participation in the European political process and be additional to the valuable existing right to petition the Parliament .
However , I am concerned that Mrs Kaufman 's proposals would lead to the citizens ' initiative process becoming bogged down or hampered by onerous bureaucratic requirements ( like Member States having to check every signature and pre-certification by the Commission that it is legal ) .
To encourage more participation , we should follow the spirit of the Citizens ' Initiative - namely that it should be as accessible and easy to use as possible .
Therefore , we had no alternative but to abstain on this report .
I voted for the report on the implementation of the citizens ' initiative .
The Treaty of Lisbon introduces the European Citizens ' Initiative or , in other words , the right of citizens to take part in the European legislative process .
This is a completely new instrument which strengthens democracy and the rights of citizens .
It is undoubtedly a way of bringing European citizens closer to the European institutions and raising their awareness of and increasing their participation in the decision-making process .
The Kaufmann report aims to direct the way in which we implement a ' citizens ' initiative ' , as defined in Article 11 of the abortive Treaty on European Union : ' citizens of the Union numbering not less than one million who are nationals of a significant number of Member States may take the initiative of inviting the Commission , within the framework of its powers , to submit any appropriate proposal on matters where citizens consider that a legal act of the Union is required for the purpose of implementing the Treaties ' .
The report therefore lays down precise conditions of admissibility and concrete procedures that make the process of achieving such an initiative extremely difficult .
I should like to put the citizens on their guard here .
This new ' right ' is an illusion .
It provides for only one thing : the possibility of asking the Commission to enact new European laws , but not to repeal or to change those that already exist ; not to change the policies .
And , in any case , there is absolutely no obligation for the Commission to listen to them .
If the Eurocrats are so keen to give rights to European citizens , they should start by respecting their vote and by finally realising that ' No ' means ' No ' in French , Dutch , English , Gaelic and every other language .
This resolution forms part of a package of five resolutions , adopted today by the majority in Parliament , which shows the clearest possible contempt for the democratically and sovereignly expressed will of the French , Dutch and Irish peoples .
It is also one of the many initiatives aiming to impose the unacceptable draft Treaty of Lisbon .
This resolution is characterised by its absurdity and its hypocrisy .
The EP may well rhetorically extol the ' smooth , transparent and effective exercise of the right of participation of the citizens ' and the so-called ' citizens ' initiative ' introduced in the draft Treaty , now known as the Treaty of Lisbon .
The truth is that the forces guiding and promoting this European integration and this Treaty of Lisbon have done and are doing everything they can to prevent the people from debating and understanding the content of this draft Treaty and from being consulted through a referendum .
What is more , following the Irish rejection of this federalist , neoliberal and militaristic draft Treaty , they are doing everything they can to force another referendum to be held in that country ( as many times as necessary until the Irish people say ' yes ' ) .
In other words , they are preventing the people from expressing their democratic and sovereign will through a referendum and then , with honeyed words , they are throwing up a smokescreen by extolling a so-called ' citizens ' initiative ' , which , on the face of it , will right from the start be subject to many conditions .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which is 96 per cent identical to the draft Constitutional Treaty , was rejected by the referendum in Ireland .
Prior to that , the draft Constitutional Treaty was rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The majority in this Parliament refuses to acknowledge its political losses .
This is an outrageous crime against democratic principles and an equally outrageous example of the arrogance of power that characterises cooperation in the EU .
Mrs Kaufmann 's report counts its chickens before they are hatched .
It shows an exceptional arrogance towards democracy , and above all towards the Irish population , which is once again to be forced into a referendum because - in the view of the political establishment - they gave the ' wrong ' answer last time .
In this situation there is no point in discussing this report in the European Parliament .
The proposed citizens ' initiative is in itself an extremely unclear proposal for citizens ' influence in respect of elected politicians .
The latter can choose to disregard these initiatives entirely if it suits them .
I have voted against the report .
Although this is a good resolution , I have voted against it because the European Parliament has agreed , in the resolution , to the Commission exempting certain electrolysis installations from the asbestos ban .
I think that , if you say that there is an absolute ban on asbestos in Europe , you have to be consistent with that and allow no exemptions .
We still have people who are critically ill because of exposure to asbestos , and I find it incomprehensible that the Commission has failed to take that into account .
I have therefore voted against the resolution out of solidarity with the victims of asbestos .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Iran : the case of Roxana Saberi
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Iran : the case of Roxana Saberi .
author . - Madam President , Iran is notorious for its human rights record , as was noted just yesterday during the debate on the human rights situation in the world .
Today we are addressing the case of Roxana Saberi , a journalist who had her trial just three weeks ago and was condemned to eight years in prison for so-called espionage .
The fact is that Ms Saberi has had no access to her lawyer for more than a month .
There was no chance of a fair or transparent trial , because the trial was held in camera .
She was on hunger strike for at least two weeks .
It is true that she has ended this , but her health is in a very precarious state .
Therefore , we are here today to address a message to the Iranian authorities that we clearly condemn the sentence pronounced by the Iranian Revolutionary Court on 18 April 2009 and ask that Ms Saberi be immediately and unconditionally freed on the basis that the trial was held in camera , without legal process .
I would like to add that Iran is notorious for its massive , systematic public executions , whether by stoning or by hanging , including of juvenile offenders .
That , too , is part of our message .
Two and a half minutes , Madam President .
Over the last five years , we have had many debates on Iran .
My group had sympathy for the revolution at the end of the 1970s , not because of any affinity with the religious extremists of the time , but because the previous government , led by the Pahlevi family , did not represent the people .
That government was only able to survive because of its close links to the United States and Europe .
Because the previous government to that , which had been led by Prime Minister Mossadeq and which had enjoyed more popular support , had been removed as a result of foreign pressure , the huge swathe of the population which was opposed to the government acquired an extreme anti-Western attitude .
The West was not seen as an ally in the fight for democracy and progress , but as a colonial profiteer and oppressor .
Nowadays , there is no longer any doubt that power has fallen into the hands of groups which not only seek conflict with the United States and Israel , but are also extremely conservative , intolerant and undemocratic .
They oppress their own citizens , they have brought the judiciary and the army under the firm grip of religious fanatics and they are preventing the electorate from voting for people who hold more moderate views .
The rights of women and the rights of ethnic and religious minorities have been shoved to one side and the death penalty is often carried out in public , in the cruellest of manners , as a means of suppressing non-conformist behaviour .
Moreover , opposition activities within Iran can result in detention .
Members of the opposition who have fled abroad are being persecuted and discredited by the governments , media and public opinion of the countries where they now live .
This can be seen from their attempts to place the opposition in exile on a list of terrorist organisations , as well as their attempts to close the Ashraf refugee camp in Iraq .
Quite rightly , this Parliament has recently spoken out against these two practices .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , the first of May , which is a day of celebration for us in the West , unfortunately continues to be a day of struggle in Iran .
This year it was marked not only by the usual brutal repression of demonstrations by Iranian workers , but also by the execution of a young woman aged 17 , Delara Darabi , who was convicted of a crime , despite everything pointing to the fact that she did not commit this crime .
According to Amnesty International , on the day before her execution , this young woman had told her mother of her plans for the future , in the expectation that the huge campaign for her release would be successful .
Delara Darabi is yet another martyr of religious fanaticism , like so many others whose execution we have denounced in this House .
Human rights organisations have also this week confirmed the information , published on 1 May by the National Council of Resistance of Iran , about the stoning in Lakan prison of a man accused of adultery , and announced the imminent stoning of another man in the province of Gilan , once again belying the supposed Iranian moratorium on this barbaric practice .
As reported by the movement which fights for the abolition of the death penalty , Tire as Mãos de Caim , Iran is the country with the highest number of executions per capita in the world .
Just this morning , four people were executed in Evin prison , with another eight having been executed in Taibad prison on 2 May .
The imprisonment of nationals of third countries , such as the American , Roxana Saberi , is also a routine practice in order to blackmail other countries into granting diplomatic concessions .
In this regard , the comment made by the Secretary of Tire as Mãos de Caim , Sergio D 'Elia , is extremely pertinent and highlights the most important point : the brutality of the Mullahs ' regime is not only the responsibility of the Iranian fundamentalist regime .
European governments are consenting to this through their silence , tolerance and constant desire to appease , and they are succumbing to the Iranian political and commercial blackmail .
The Tehran regime is threatening the peace and security of the whole world and , even more clearly , of its own citizens , through acts which have been practised for decades .
Instead of taking this into account , Europe is making Iran the solution to the problems of the Middle East , when it is actually the main problem .
On this final occasion that I will speak before the European Parliament , I call on those who will be here at the next sitting not to abandon the Iranians to their jailers and not to abandon the people of the Middle East to the abyss of religious fanaticism .
author . - Madam President , I will not repeat what was said already regarding the ruthless Iranian theocratic regime .
I agree with those positions , but I want to approach the subject from an angle similar to that used by my fellow MEP , Mr Mayer , who has just left .
Iran , a country with thousands of years of civilisation and culture , is today in a sorry state of affairs as far as democracy , civil rights and justice are concerned .
Some of our countries in the West are not free from blame for this situation .
Let us not forget that governments such as those of the USA and Britain have for years supported , armed and kept in power the well-known monstrous dictatorship of the Shah of Iran .
It was inevitable that , when the Shah was finally overthrown by popular uprising , Islamic extremists would find fertile ground to root themselves in power and cultivate feelings of hate towards the West .
Then came the excessively aggressive behaviour of successive US administrations and the position of drastic sanctions , which only caused further suffering to ordinary Iranian people and further aggravated their hostile feelings towards the West .
Hopefully the new President of the USA , Mr Obama , who has shown signs that he prefers to fight with his brain rather than with his fists , as the previous President , Mr Bush , so unsuccessfully did , will give new hope for the improvement of the likes of the Iranian people and the betterment of relations with the West .
Such an approach will help ordinary Iranian citizens understand that the West wants to be their friend , not their enemy , and eventually the people of Iran will themselves overthrow the Islamic fundamentalist regime that so undemocratically controls their lives and causes them so much suffering , as in the case at the centre of our debate here today .
Madam President , Roxana Saberi is a 32-year-old journalist with dual American and Iranian citizenship , and is a graduate of several universities in the United States , the United Kingdom and Iran .
She was working as a journalist in Iran and continued to do so following the expiry of her accreditation , and was arrested and sentenced to eight years in prison on a false charge of spying for the United States .
In protest at the false charges and the lack of a fair trial she went on hunger strike .
She is very emaciated .
She began to drink sweetened water under medical care and has now ended her hunger strike , and is waiting for her appeal to be heard .
Her health and her life are still in danger .
Iran is well known for its draconian punishments , and also for carrying out public executions , including on juveniles .
We call for the release of Mrs Saberi .
We appeal for her to be given a fair trial .
I think that the international community should put pressure on Iran to end these draconian practices .
We are talking about Roxana Saberi , an American-Iranian journalist who worked for ABC Radio , the BBC and South African television .
Accused of spying , sentenced to eight years and imprisoned , she went on hunger strike .
On 1 May , very weak , she was transferred to the prison hospital .
We know that for five weeks she was denied access to a lawyer .
Her trial was neither fair nor transparent .
Yesterday the BBC announced that next week , on 12 May , the Appeal Court will hear Roxana Saberi 's appeal , but that this would again take place in a closed-door session .
We condemn the Iranian Revolutionary Court 's unfounded decision on Roxana Saberi .
In addition , I think it is very important to once again urge Iranian Government institutions to comply with the provisions of all international human rights instruments ratified by Iran , in particular , the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which both guarantee the right to a fair trial .
On the last day of this legislative term , such a beautiful spring day , it would be nice to hope that somehow this subject , human rights violations , will one day no longer be on Parliament 's agenda , that we will no longer have to discuss it in this beautiful Chamber .
However , sadly , this is just an illusion and today , as always , our agenda is overloaded and does not even contain all of the painful cases from various countries around the world .
This is not the first time we have discussed Iran in this plenary session .
This time we are concerned about the unlawful imprisonment of Roxana Saberi .
She was first arrested for an apparently minor offence - purchasing wine - although in Iran it is an offence .
Then , however , there was the charge that she was working as a journalist without official accreditation , which later turned into the charge that she was a US spy .
The Iranian Government organised a one-day closed-door trial without witnesses or concrete , publicly declared charges .
This is not the first time the Iranian Government has trampled on human rights , imprisoned people unlawfully and passed verdicts which contravene international standards .
The execution of Delara Darabi , the detention of the journalist Maryam Malek and defenders of workers ' rights - these are but a few examples .
We must recognise that Iranian fundamentalists continue to organise political trials in an attempt to further intimidate free thinkers .
It is regrettable that Iran is continuing its policy of self-isolation in this way and is failing to exploit initiatives by the international community and the new US Administration to normalise relations .
I have always said that dialogue and mutual understanding are better than confrontation , but this time I propose that we react in a very strict , hard manner to this case and that we demand that the Iranian regime 's court respect all international standards .
Madam President , the jailing of the journalist Roxana Saberi on trumped-up spying charges is shameful and another appalling crime in the long list of criminal abuse by the fascist regime in Tehran .
Last Friday , as Paulo Casaca told us , their executioners took a 23-year-old girl from her cell and led her to the gallows without first allowing her access to her parents .
They hanged Dilara Darabi for a crime she denied committing at the age of 17 .
This is what passes for justice in Iran .
The medieval torture and execution of women - even pregnant women - and children is commonplace .
The abuse of human rights is a daily fact of life , and yet we have people in this Parliament who support this corrupt and evil regime : just like those European companies which continue to do business with Iran , their eyes and ears are closed to the screams of the oppressed .
Shame on them and shame on the brutal mullahs .
They should remember the lessons of history : every fascist regime is doomed to fail ; freedom and justice will always prevail over evil .
( NL ) Madam President , my original speaking time was unfairly cut short as it approached the two-and-a-half-minute limit , but the conclusion of my argument was that you cannot create change through foreign interventions or other forms of military violence .
It was exactly that kind of approach in the past which led to the birth of the current regime .
If you threaten Iran with foreign interventions , many people in Iran who hate the current government will actually rush to the government 's support in order to defend their fatherland .
However , we must not go to the other extreme , either .
It is wrong to seek cooperation with this regime in the belief that the current grouping will remain in power permanently or that supporting stability in this country will benefit the European energy supply .
Consistently standing up for human rights and lending support to the democratic opposition are the only ways to bring about improvement .
That will also include the kind of improvement which will benefit the victim who has been the subject of this debate .

Madam President , I wish to support my colleague - even though he is Scottish - Struan Stevenson .
Persia , as we all know , was one of the great civilisations of our continent and this world .
There are many Iranians who are decent and good people .
Struan spoke from the heart , and he is right .
No man kills women and children and lives to boast of it .
What are we going to do ?
We are merely Members of the European Parliament .
We can merely shout in rage against this form of brutality , this form of inhumanity .
My only conclusion is that we should support those democratic , civilised Iranians and work with them to secure a decent , humanitarian , civilised government for the good people of Iran and let the murderers be condemned .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is following closely the case of Ms Roxana Saberi , including the preparations for the appeal process that will begin early next week .
The Commission is concerned about Ms Saberi 's health , weakened by a hunger strike that , according to Ms Saberi 's father , she started after she was sentenced to eight years in jail for alleged espionage by the Revolutionary Court of Tehran last month .
The Commission considers that Ms Saberi 's trial , held behind closed doors , did not meet the minimum standards required for a fair and transparent trial .
The Commission fully supported the declaration issued by the Czech Presidency of the Council on Ms Saberi 's case on 22 April 2009 .
We hope that the Iranian judiciary will ensure a fair and transparent appeal trial without any delay , with all the guarantees provided by the Iranian legislation .
The Commission is deeply concerned at the steady deterioration of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Iran .
The recent execution of Ms Delara Darabi , hanged on 1 May for a crime she allegedly committed when she was a minor , is another confirmation of this dismal situation .
Also in this case the EU issued a statement strongly condemning the execution .
The Commission has repeatedly urged , and will continue to do so , the Iranian authorities to respect their international commitments on human rights , including in relation to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Universal Declaration on Human Rights .
The improvement of the human rights situation in Iran is , for the Commission , essential to enhance its political dialogue and cooperation with Iran in the near future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The sentencing of Roxana Saberi on 18 April 2009 for ' spying ' was done without her having any access to a lawyer and on the basis of a trial that was neither fair nor transparent .
I am not naive .
The US does engage in spying but , if Roxana Saberi was a spy , the Iranian authorities by their actions did nothing to convince anyone of that case .
The bias and manipulation of the trial and the accused were a travesty of any sense of justice .
I can only welcome the resolution 's demand that Roxana Saberi should be released immediately on the grounds that the trial was held in camera without due legal process and there was a complete failure to comply with international norms .
2 .
Madagascar
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Madagascar .

Madam President , as can be seen from the resolution itself , after two months of violent clashes , Andry Rajoelina , former mayor of the capital of Madagascar , staged a coup d 'état on 17 March of this year ; he was supported by the army and a self-proclaimed ' High Authority of Transition ' , over which he presides , and he suspended the national assembly and the senate .
Furthermore , pressure from rebels forced the democratically elected president to leave Madagascar .
However , last February Mr Rajoelina , who had been elected mayor of Antananarivo in December 2007 , had , in turn , been forcibly removed from power by the previous government .
I should add that the malaise felt by the population was exacerbated by the former government 's plan to rent one million hectares of land in the south of the country to a Korean firm .
Of course , we also condemn the coup d 'état and any attempt to seize power by undemocratic means .
We also believe that the United Nations Security Council and international organisations of which Madagascar is a member do not recognise this de facto regime and we want constitutional order to be restored .
We ask , too , that legal and constitutional systems be immediately re-established in the country and we call on all Malagasy parties to fully comply with the provisions of the constitution of Madagascar in order to overcome this crisis .
However , we also consider that democracy does not simply consist in holding elections and we should report major irregularities in the - a priori - legitimate government of Madagascar .
Nevertheless , we are convinced that when constitutional order is restored it should be based on the objectives and principles that already appear in Recital K of this resolution , that is : a clear timetable for free , fair and transparent elections ; the participation of all political groups and social stakeholders in the country , including the legitimate President Marc Ravalomanana and other key figures ; thirdly , the promotion of a consensus between Malagasy parties ; fourthly , respect for the constitution of Madagascar ; and lastly , compliance with the relevant African Union instruments and Madagascar 's international commitments .
What is clear is that we are once again facing a situation in which human rights are systematically breached .
While the leading classes of Madagascar engage in a power struggle through coup d 'états and fight over important , lucrative business contracts , 70 % of the population is living on less than one dollar a day .
That , and that alone , is what we need to resolve .
Let us hope , then , that the European Union assumes its proper role in this matter .
Madam President , changing the subject completely and taking advantage of the fact that Commissioner Orban is present in the last session of this term , I would like to thank him personally for his management of his Directorate-General .
Madam President , Bavaria and its municipalities have many contacts all over the world , as does the Catholic University of Eichstätt .
I should therefore like to welcome a delegation of mayors from this region .
Madagascar is a country with which we work closely and intensively .
There are many cultural , economic and scientific contacts and a strong and supportive ecclesiastical presence .
That is why it is all the more regrettable that , in this scenically beautiful and culturally rich country , such appalling abuses are being committed .
There is a real danger that Madagascar , in its strategically important location , will become a failed state , like others we know of in Africa , first and foremost of which is Somalia .
It is therefore important that orderly and democratic relations are restored there as quickly as possible .
That is why I am pleased that we met the contact group a few days ago to discuss first concrete steps .
We must create an appropriate structure to prepare for new elections under the leadership of the ousted democratically elected president , whom we continue to recognise as the only legitimate head of state .
A dialogue must be opened , which must include the prime minister , who is currently in prison and who must be released immediately .
Not only humanitarian aid but also vital development aid , especially medical care , must continue to be given to the fullest extent .
For all these reasons , we in the European Union are called upon to be involved in the negotiations there , not only as a humanitarian factor and not only as an economic factor , but especially as a political factor bringing about peace in the region .
To achieve this , we count on the cooperation of the African Union , which once again has the opportunity to establish itself little by little as a factor in democratic stabilisation - stabilisation can in fact also be anti-democratic - which we will intensively support with the means at our disposal .
( Applause )
Madam President , in Madagascar , the incumbent president was forced to step down by popular protest .
He came to agreements with foreign companies that brought short-term revenue to his government but were detrimental to his people .
That made his position untenable .
Afterwards , with the help of the army , the leader of the opposition , who had previously been the capital 's mayor , was appointed interim president , despite the fact that , by law , he was too young to be appointed to that office .
This process , in particular the intervention of the army , has led to criticism .
The African Union has called this an illegal coup and rejects the new government .
However , I think that we could also draw a comparison between this and recent events in one particular European country , Iceland .
In that country , too , the government had to step down in the face of popular protest .
A minority government of a totally different political persuasion then took power , but nobody considered that a coup .
Since then , a new election has been held and the new government has secured a large majority .
Such an outcome is also possible in Madagascar , provided that an election is held within the foreseeable future .
author . - Madam President , I speak on behalf of the Socialist Group and as the Party of European Socialists ' shadow rapporteur on the Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) with the group of southern African countries that included Madagascar .
In April we overwhelmingly approved that Economic Partnership Agreement with reservations about the situation in Zimbabwe .
If we were debating that EPA today , we would have to enter our reservations regarding Madagascar .
Yet only 15 years ago there seems to have been the potential for Madagascar to be so different .
I can remember in 1993 the visit of the then newly elected President Albert Zafy .
But , of course , by 1996 he had been impeached for corruption and the abuse of power .
Since then , Madagascar has been troubled by unstable governments with threats of secession and impeachment punctuating a rough politics .
Now we have a situation - an army coup d 'état - partly triggered by a plan by the former government to lease one million acres of land in the south of the country to a Korean firm for intensive farming , when a substantial majority of the population live on less than one euro a day .
This unconstitutional change of government is a serious setback for democratisation .
We welcome the fact that the UN has appealed for nearly USD 36 million worth of humanitarian aid , anticipating the food shortages that will result later this year from the current political events in Madagascar , but we strongly condemn the coup d 'état and all attempts to seize power by undemocratic means .
We call for the immediate restoration of the legal and constitutional order in the country and ask all Malagasy parties to comply fully with the provisions of the constitution .
We want to see the suspension of the National Assembly and Senate lifted and urge that the mandates and immunities of parliamentarians be respected .
But this is only going to happen if the international community can work together to step up its efforts and exercise pressure to end the political violence and the political impasse in that country .
Madam President , we cannot keep silent regarding the situation in Madagascar and we shall not be the only ones to condemn it .
The African Union , the Southern African Development Community , the International Organisation of French-Speaking Countries , the Interparliamentary Union , the European Union , speaking via the Commission , the United States , and a large number of countries , including my own and Norway - to speak of countries from the European continent - have condemned the coup d 'état - for that is what it is - which has taken place in Madagascar .
We cannot keep silent and we are calling for a return to constitutional order .
We are simply asking for a ' back-to-basics ' approach with , where necessary , arbitration by the Malagasy people through consultation in the form of a presidential election or a referendum .
It is the responsibility of the assemblies and the politicians of Madagascar to decide on the most effective form of consultation .
Thus , what we are calling for with this joint motion for a resolution is to add our voice to that of the international community in order to make it clear to those who have seized power in a totally undemocratic fashion , in the form of a coup d 'état - as disguised as it may be - that Madagascar 's constitutional order must be restored , as one of the guarantees of the future development of this large island in the Indian Ocean .

Madam President , the political crisis in Madagascar has led to an unconstitutional change of government . This was accompanied by unrest , in which over 130 people lost their lives .
Madagascar was under French rule until 1960 .
It is a country in a difficult situation .
It is in need of humanitarian aid , and especially food aid , and this help has been given to Madagascar .
The authorities and successive elections which they organised were supported by the army .
President Ravalomanana lost support , and he stood down on 17 March 2009 .
Power was seized by Rajoelina , who was designated by the army .
The European Union does not recognise the new government because of the undemocratic way in which this change was made .
The African Union has suspended Madagascar from membership , and is critical of the removal of Ravalomanana by force .
It has threatened to impose sanctions if constitutional order is not restored within six months .
We call for restoration of constitutional order in Madagascar .
We appeal to the international community to support efforts to restore the legal basis of the function of this state .
I think that the electoral process should be closely monitored and observed by representatives of international organisations , including in particular Members of our Parliament .
Madam President , in the first weeks of March we were witnesses of a dramatic coup d 'état in Madagascar .
The rivalry , which has existed for several years , between the deposed president and the leader of the opposition led the island to the brink of civil war .
On 17 March 2009 , the day following capture of the Presidential Palace by the army , Andry Rajoelina declared himself head of state .
The Malagasy Supreme Court stated that the former Mayor of Antananarivo holds this office in accordance with the Constitution .
Doubts have been raised about this , if only because there is a clause in the organic statute which says that to be president a person must be at least 40 years of age , and the new president is only 34 .
The assumption of power and the decision of the Supreme Court have aroused universal controversy .
The swearing-in ceremony was boycotted by most foreign diplomats , and the African Union has suspended Madagascar from membership .
The political crisis has led to general chaos and destabilisation in the country , where most people have lived for years in terrible poverty on USD 1 a day , and have limited access to food and water , basic medical services and education .
I lived in Madagascar for six years , and I became thoroughly acquainted with these problems , and therefore I very strongly support the UN appeal for urgent humanitarian aid for the people of Madagascar .
The European Parliament should strongly condemn the coup d 'état and all attempts at taking power which break democratic principles .
The European Union should call for a renewal of the work of both houses of parliament , which have been suspended by the new regime .
We should also support the efforts of the special envoy of the African Union and representatives of the UN in their talks with representatives of local political parties and all interested groups in order to bring about an immediate restoration of constitutional order in the country , and the international community should decidedly increase its efforts at bringing humanitarian aid to the people of the island , who are living on the brink of poverty .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Madagascar , which is a former French colony , seems to be undergoing the sad - but not unusual - post-colonial turmoil in its political life , with the consequent suffering for its people .
Many other colonies of European countries have suffered - or are still suffering - for the same reason .
There are many examples .
My own country , Cyprus , is one .
Having partly gained independence from its colonial master , Britain , in 1960 , British foreign diplomacy hawks managed in 1963 to manipulate an inter-community struggle which eventually resulted in the division of the island in 1974 .
This is a division that persists today and a state of affairs which suits Britain .
A divided Cyprus cannot successfully attempt to get rid of the remaining two British colonial areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia , which Britain uses for military purposes , and which the British Government has in fact managed to disgracefully keep outside the EU so that the acquis cannot be applied to the thousands of Cypriot civilians - now EU citizens - who live there .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , firstly I would like to underline the Commission 's great concern at the current volatile situation in Madagascar .
I would also like to stress the Commission 's continued commitment to the Malagasy people .
The situation in that country after the forced removal of President Ravalomanana on 17 March deserves and requires our full attention and , like the European Parliament , the Commission is following events very closely .
The Commission has fully endorsed the Czech Presidency statement issued on behalf of the European Union on 20 March condemning the transfer of power and calling on the Malagasy parties to comply fully with the provisions of the Constitution of Madagascar .
The Commission considers that there has been a flagrant violation of essential elements of the Cotonou Agreement and that this is a ' case of special urgency ' within the meaning of Article 96 of that Agreement .
The Commission has therefore launched the procedure to propose to the Council to open consultation with the authorities in power in order to examine possible solutions to the crisis , aimed at the re-establishment of constitutional order .
The Commission will continue to use all the dialogue means it has at its disposal to find an overall solution to the current crisis .
To that end , it is enhancing the political dialogue , based on Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement , with all the relevant stakeholders in Madagascar .
It is also participating in the main international efforts deployed , notably in the framework of the international contact group set up recently by the African Union .
At this stage , the prevailing view is that the relevant Malagasy political stakeholders agree on a road map for a return to constitutional order and the holding of elections .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
Venezuela : the case of Manuel Rosales
The next item is the debate on three motions for resolutions on Venezuela .
Madam President , Commissioner , I have signed this resolution and asked to speak in this plenary because I was a witness to the so-called ' expulsion ' of our colleague Luis Herrero , which was , in fact , a kidnapping .
What is more , I had a chance to see how political persecution , abuses of power by the Chávez regime , intimidation of the opposition , threats , disregard for human dignity and the misuse of justice are all a normal part of life in Venezuela .
The case of Manuel Rosales was the last straw and the catalyst for this resolution , but there are thousands of cases just as bloody as his ; some of them are quoted in the resolution and others are not , like the case of Eligio Cedeño who was born in the poor Caracas suburb of Petare , a notoriously dangerous area well known for electing a mayor who was not from the Chávez regime .
Eligio was educated with the help of others , in particular , from Citibank ; he managed to set up his own business , the Bank of Caracas , and then lived a normal life , also providing help to the most needy .
Today , however , he is illegally imprisoned in a Caracas jail following two years of detention with no coherent case being made against him .
His only crime was to be a part of the economic oligarchy .
Another case is that of Nixon Moreno , a student leader at the University of the Andes , elected to the university council several times and president of the Federation of University Centres .
In 2003 he won the Federation election against the current Minister of Interior and Justice , and that is his crime .
Today he is accused of attempted murder and lewd violent acts , despite having been exonerated of the accusations .
Cases such as these are a feature of everyday life in Venezuela , where persecution of the opposition with the aim of excluding them from political life and of suppressing dissidents has become part of normal life .
Nevertheless , we need to send a message of hope to Venezuelan democracy : despite the challenges , I am sure democracy will be established and President Chávez will be voted out .
author . - Madam President , the case of Manuel Rosales is another example of the arrogance and paranoid behaviour sometimes exhibited by the increasingly more authoritarian Government of Venezuela .
The political persecution of Mr Rosales and many others is regrettable and should be condemned in the strongest possible terms .
We will call on the Government of that country in earnest to start behaving sensibly and democratically and to stop violating the human rights of its citizens .
Madam President , since this is the last time I will be making a speech in the plenary , permit me to take the opportunity to thank you and all our colleagues who have faithfully attended the Thursday afternoon human rights debates and have contributed towards making our world a better place to live in .
Let me also take the opportunity , as I have so often done in the past , to remind my colleagues of the plight of my own country , Cyprus , which for the past 35 years has been suffering under the military occupation of its northern part by Turkey .
The citizens - EU citizens - of areas such as Kyrenia , Famagusta , Karpasia and Morfou have been living in exile since the devastating Turkish invasion of 1974 .
We are looking towards the EU for the fulfilment of their humble wish to return to their homes and live there in peace and security .
I hope the EU will not let them down .
Madam President , when political changes point to restrictions on the rights of the opposition to free public expression , we should be on our guard .
It is a strong signal that democracy is under threat .
Arresting the opposition is an even stronger signal .
That is what is happening today in Venezuela .
Manuel Rosales , Mayor of Maracaibo and opponent of President Chávez in the 2006 election , has had to flee the country .
Shortly after President Chávez won a referendum making it possible for him to hold office for further terms , a warrant was issued for the arrest of Mr Rosales .
He managed to escape to Peru , where he is in hiding .
This matter should be the subject of the next sitting of EuroLat .
Venezuela is obliged to respect conventions which it has signed in which it guaranteed to respect human rights .
Madam President , 20 years ago socialism collapsed at the pan-European picnic on the Austro-Hungarian border .
I had the honour of being allowed to take part in the relevant preparations and I will never forget , a short time later , the Chancellor of Unity , Helmut Kohl , and Pope John Paul II , two spearheads of this development , striding through the Brandenburg Gates and saying that socialism should not be replaced by predatory capitalism but by freedom and a social market economy .
Today , we are witnessing in Latin America a dangerous regression into socialist dictatorship and oppression .
The germ from which this comes is , I am afraid to say , Venezuela .
President Chávez is attempting to stifle freedom throughout Latin America by means of oil money .
That is why the case of Manuel Rosales is so important .
Mr Rosales is not only an outstanding democrat , whom we must defend ; he is also a symbolic figure for democracy in Latin America .
We shall support him and continue to stand up for the freedom of the Latin American people .
By means of yet another grotesque exercise in the distortion of reality , we are once again faced with an ignoble attempt by the European Parliament to interfere in Venezuela .
In essence , this attempt forms part of the manoeuvres conducted by those conspiring against the democratic and sovereign process of emancipation and social progress initiated a decade ago by the Venezuelan people and reaffirmed in 14 electoral processes .
Once again , what is really bothering the authors of this initiative is the fact that , despite all the problems , threats , dangers and interference , the Venezuelan people have been an example of the fact that it is worth fighting and that it is possible to build a fairer , more democratic and more peaceful country , and world .
This is being demonstrated by the development of widespread popular participation , the reduction in levels of poverty , social inequality and unemployment , the fight against illiteracy and the extension of education to all levels , access by millions of Venezuelans to health , the national network of food markets at subsidised prices , the de facto nationalisation of the state oil industry and strategic sectors of the economy , the use of productive land by farmers , and solidarity with other peoples , among many other examples .
We have to ask ourselves : in the end what right does this Parliament have to give lessons in democracy and respect for human rights , when it wants to impose a draft Treaty rejected by the French , Dutch and Irish peoples , when it adopts the inhumane Return Directive which violates the human rights of migrants , many of whom come from Latin America , and when it does not have a single word of condemnation for the barbaric aggression of Israel against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip ?
For the umpteenth time we say : stop pretending that you can give lessons to the world .
( NL ) Madam President , I used to live in Venezuela myself and I am familiar with that country 's past and , in particular , the dictatorship of Marcos Pérez Jiménez in the 1950s .
Poverty and injustice were the hallmarks of life at the time , and I consider Hugo Chávez 's government to be a very significant and much-needed improvement .
Nevertheless , I am of the view that even a sympathetic government should behave decently towards its opponents and avoid employing any techniques which make life extra-difficult for its opponents .
I will be voting in favour of the joint resolution for exactly that reason because it is critical with regard to protecting democracy in general and because it was not formulated with the aim of overturning what in my opinion is the beneficial regime of Hugo Chávez .

( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to correct Mr Guerreiro who is misinformed because , according to figures from the United Nations Development Programme , in the last 10 years Venezuela has not reduced poverty one iota .
President Chávez has brought demagogy and dictatorship , unfortunately with support through the ballot boxes , but also with a great deal of intimidation of the people , as once again shown by this case of Manuel Rosales .
I have met Manuel Rosales .
I had the honour of meeting him on a visit to Venezuela .
The fate that has befallen him is a great shame , because he wants to be a free man in his own country , but he cannot be a free man in his own country .
That is the problem with Venezuela .
I met him when he was governor-elect of the State of Zulia .
He was elected by his people as Mayor of Maracaibo , but cannot live in his own country because , in Venezuela , people are persecuted and slandered .
They are slandered , as is unfortunately happening with Manuel Rosales .
It is the worst punishment that can be inflicted on a politician and we , who are politicians in this House , must all be aware of this .
We can fight for our ideas , but we do not have the right to slander anyone , persecute them or throw them into jail .
This is exactly what is happening in Venezuela .
It is time , ladies and gentlemen , that we defined a strategy for Latin America .
This must be a strategy of active diplomacy for Latin America .
It must certainly be on the side of social progress , in line with the many millions that we invest every year in development and cooperation , but it must be 100 % on the side of democracy , 100 % on the side of pluralism , and 100 % on the side of fundamental freedoms .
Long live a free Venezuela !
( SK ) Poverty always provides fertile soil for totalitarian leaders wishing to pose as the saviours and defenders of their people .
In reality they do this only for their own benefit . At first , Hugo Chávez did not talk about socialism but only about the right to a better world .
With the passage of time , however , he did start talking about socialism .
His opponents were not invited to cooperate and they became his mortal enemies and later on political prisoners .
He then interfered with media freedoms and those who would not toe the line were shut down . One-sided information , the leader-defender , violations of human rights , lack of freedom : this all adds up to totalitarianism .
The case of Manuel Rosales only confirms what I am saying .
Other leaders playing the same game as Hugo Chávez include Castro 's heirs , Lukashenko and the like .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members of the European Parliament for sending a clear signal to the whole world via these Thursday afternoons during the plenary session that the European Parliament will never tolerate human rights violations anywhere in the world .
Madam President , I would like to thank you for chairing our meetings in the European Parliament , for your cooperation and for your personal friendship .
( PL ) Madam President , the current term of the European Parliament is drawing to a close , and so the time has come for a certain summing up .
We can say objectively that we have done a huge amount of work , and that among the results of our work we can clearly see a commitment to protecting human rights and the effects of this .
This is especially visible in third countries .
We are capable of making a very thorough analysis , as we are doing today , of the situation in Iran , Madagascar and Venezuela .
We can adopt suitable resolutions and even give them public effect .
These resolutions do not always bring the desired results , but we are working at a long distance from the countries and societies which have these problems , and our communication and ability to implement and convey our ideas is not always particularly good .
It is worse , ladies and gentlemen , with democracy and the protection of human rights within the European Union .
This is an unpleasant and embarrassing matter .
Today millions of people are working illegally .
So what has happened to human rights ?
The trafficking of children and women is flourishing .
So where are human rights in the EU ?
How are we protecting them ?
Why are we not effective ?
It must also be said that an unpleasant incident occurred when here in this Chamber we demonstrated for a referendum , and Mr Pöttering called in security , which was a breach of human rights and our right to demonstrate and express our views .
Nevertheless , the overall result is positive , and I think that we should definitely continue this kind of debate , and this kind of action , in the next parliamentary term .
Madam President , I rise on a point of order under our Rules of Procedure to make a personal statement .
This is my valedictory speech to the European Parliament , since I was first elected a quarter of a century ago and my father was elected 30 years ago - Peter Beazley , a Member of the European Parliament for Bedfordshire and North Hertfordshire .
I wish to thank all my fellow Members of this House , particularly our President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , with whom I had the honour of securing British Conservative membership of the Group of the European People 's Party .
I wish to recall the service of Lord Plumb - Henry Plumb - as President of this Parliament , of British Commissioners of all parties - Roy Jenkins ( President ) , Arthur Cockfield , Chris Patton , Prime Minister Ted Heath and Winston Churchill - all true Europeans .
The leader of my party , Mr David Cameron , has made a serious mistake .
He is in error : he thinks that by becoming anti-European in the House of Commons this will secure him the premiership of my country .
I , as a British Conservative , reserve the right to object - that is my final word .
There are British Tories , Socialists , Liberals .
We are Europeans .
We will stand with our partners and our allies and , if my party leader seeks to rip up 30 years of work by British Tory pro-Europeans , he is wrong !
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation . )
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is closely following the situation in Venezuela with concern .
The Commission is aware of the case of Manuel Rosales .
He was granted political asylum in Peru after being charged with corruption in Venezuela .
The Commission has taken note of the explanation provided by the president of Rosales ' party , according to which he has gone into hiding for his own protection .
The Commission believes that the request for asylum made by Manuel Rosales , and its acceptance by the Peruvian Government , is a bilateral case and that it is not for the Commission to pronounce itself on the merits of this request .
We are aware that recently the judicial institutions have opened some judicial processes against opposition leaders in Venezuela .
We know that some sectors of Venezuelan society have criticised the proliferation of measures which they consider adversely affect the right to freedom of expression and the freedom to exercise political rights .
This same sector considers that the Government is showing an intolerant attitude towards criticism .
We are conscious of these facts and we are closely following the political situation in Venezuela .
I would like to underline the importance that the European Union attaches to freedom of expression and opinion , a fundamental human right and a cornerstone of democracy and the rule of law .
We hope that the democratic institutions of Venezuela will respect the rule of law and preserve democracy in the country , whilst complying with the obligation arising from the international agreements signed and ratified by Venezuela , including the American Convention on Human Rights and , specifically , the provisions on political rights set out in Article 23 .
I wish to assure Parliament that the Commission will continue to follow developments in Venezuela closely .
The Commission 's commitment to supporting and strengthening democracy and the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms will continue to be reflected in our cooperation policies and relations with Venezuela .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law
1 .
Iran : the case of Roxana Saberi
Madam President , my proposal is that the words ' Iranian authorities ' at the beginning of paragraph 3 should be replaced by ' Appeals Court at its hearing of 12 May ' .
Paragraph 3 would then read : ' Urges the Appeals Court at its hearing of 12 May to release Roxana Saberi ... ' .
author . - Madam President , after this joint motion for a resolution was agreed and submitted , the news came of yet another disgracefully brutal case of stoning to death of a citizen in Iran .
Therefore we thought it was appropriate to add to paragraph 7 the following : ' in this context insists that the authorities of Islamic Republic of Iran urgently abolish the practice of stoning ; condemns strongly the recent execution by stoning of Vali Azad , and expresses great concern over the pending execution of Mohammad Ali Navid Khamami and Ashraf Kalhori ; ' .
I understand that this meets with the approval of the other groups ' representatives .
2 .
Madagascar
author . - Madam President , concerning the next vote , on ' Venezuela : the case of Manuel Rosales ' , the Socialist Group , of course , has withdrawn its signature from the compromise resolution .
We have not taken part in the debate and we will not take part in the vote .
3 .
Venezuela : the case of Manuel Rosales
Thank you very much .
This was a emotionally charged sitting , not only because of the human rights issues , but because it was our last sitting .
Thank you for your participation .
( PL ) May I , on behalf of all Members of the European Parliament , and also our Parliamentary services and assistants , offer you , Madam President , our sincere thanks - to you personally , to the Bureau of the European Parliament and to the entire administration - for chairing the debates so well , for good cooperation and for mutual understanding .
We wish you further success , re-election to Parliament , much satisfaction in your public activity and happiness in your personal life .
Thank you very much .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank everyone in Parliament 's services for their valuable work .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the sitting : see Minutes
Written declarations included in the register ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Dates of forthcoming sittings : see Minutes
Adjournment of the session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 4.15 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting ( first sitting of the newly elected Parliament )
Ladies and gentlemen , under the terms of the Act concerning the election of the representatives of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage , I declare the first sitting of the European Parliament following the elections open .
( Applause )
I would ask you to rise for the European anthem .
Ladies and gentlemen , I warmly welcome you to the first sitting of the European Parliament following the elections and congratulate you all : the re-elected Members and the newly elected Members .
A little under half of the 736 Members have been elected to the European Parliament for the first time .
It is particularly heartening that 35 % of the Members are women - a percentage that has never been as high before in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
170 million citizens turned out to vote , and our work serves a great purpose : to unite our continent !
In this work , we must never forget that the European Union is based on values .
Human dignity , human rights , freedom , democracy , the rule of law and peace are the foundations of our actions .
We are bound together by solidarity .
I would ask you to ensure that mutual respect forever remains our guiding principle .
If we do this , we are sure to succeed .
Now let us get to work !
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Order of business : see Minutes
Formation of political groups : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Election of the President of the European Parliament
This morning , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , we must elect the President .
According to Rule 13 of the Rules of Procedure , candidates for the office of President of our Parliament must be nominated , with the consent of the people concerned , by a group or by at least 40 Members .
Under the conditions provided for in the Rules of Procedure , I have received the following nominations for the office of President of the European Parliament :
Mr Jerzy Buzek
Mrs Eva-Britt Svensson
The candidates have informed me that they consent to their nomination as candidates .
Both candidates will now introduce themselves briefly , starting with Mrs Svensson .
( SV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate all my fellow Members on the trust that has been shown in you by the citizens of your respective Member States .
This is an enormous amount of trust and hence it is also an enormous responsibility for us all to meet our citizens ' expectations and demands for the changes that are needed and to build a citizens ' Europe .
Democracy , the right to choose their elected representatives , is the most important instrument that our citizens have .
To be able to talk of true democracy requires more than the right to vote .
It requires openness , transparency and an open debate .
I would therefore like to say that it is extremely important for us now to ensure that we reform the first reading procedure .
We must take the trust shown in Parliament seriously and demonstrate the openness that is also required with regard to the first reading procedure .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are facing huge challenges : an economic crisis with higher unemployment , increased exclusion and social insecurity .
We have a climate crisis that has already resulted in climate refugees .
As usual , it is the poorest people that are hit first and hardest .
We see an EU and a world full of injustice and poverty .
There are , however , political solutions to these crises , but they require a change in policy .
The policy that has been pursued up to now has not solved the problems that we have been responsible for solving .
On the contrary , in many areas it has helped to create the crises .
We need a change in policy .
We need a policy for a social Europe , a policy that promotes workers ' rights to protection against social dumping .
We need a policy that prevents social marginalisation and poverty .
We need a policy that safeguards the participation of all citizens .
We need a policy that does not discriminate against any citizen , regardless of ethnicity , disability , gender , age or sexual orientation .
I would like to see an EU that protects the interests of all its citizens .
I want to see a policy that creates new jobs - new green jobs .
We need to invest in green technology , which - in addition to creating the new jobs that are needed - will also help to create growth and put a stop to climate change , which is one of the most fundamentally important tasks that humanity and Europe are facing .
I want to see an EU that takes responsibility for ensuring fair and responsible international trade .
I want to see an EU with a humane asylum and immigration policy that protects immigrants and their rights .
I want to see a diverse Europe .
This is how we generate development .
I want to see a diverse Europe in which every citizen receives protection .
I want to see a Europe , an EU , that takes responsibility for human rights .
When human rights are repressed , regardless of where in the world it takes place , we can never , ever compromise .
These rights are inviolable and this applies to every single human being .
Regardless of whether it is a question of freedom of expression , public access , privacy or whatever else , human rights are always inviolable .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is our responsibility to stand up for human rights , wherever in the world they are under threat .
I was pleased to hear the President say that the elections in June increased the representation of women in this Parliament .
This was made possible by the joint efforts of both men and women .
We worked together to increase the representation of women .
We are now going a step further and ensuring that we increase the influence of women , including when it comes to positions of responsibility in Parliament and the other institutions of the EU .
This is our opportunity .
Together , ladies and gentlemen , we can show the citizens of Europe that we are assuming responsibility and demonstrate the emergence of a modern , diverse society .
Today , each one of you has the power of your vote .
You have the power to send out a strong message to our citizens that we are now building a citizens ' Europe , a social Europe , to demonstrate to both our citizens and the world around us that the EU is prepared to take responsibility for global justice , human rights and the global environment and to demonstrate the power we have with our votes to send out the message that European citizens are expecting of this Parliament .
( Applause )
I will now announce the result of the vote .
Number of voters : 713
Voting slips that were not filled in or were invalid : 69
Votes cast : 644
Absolute majority : 323
Jerzy Buzek received 555 votes .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mrs Eva-Britt Svensson received 89 votes .
( Applause )
Jerzy Buzek has therefore received the absolute majority of the votes cast .
I will therefore repeat in my own language what I tried to say in Polish : I congratulate Mr Buzek most sincerely on his convincing election and wish him all the best in the wonderful job that he is about to take over , and I would ask him to take his place here in the President 's chair .
( Applause )
Dear colleagues , thank you for electing me President of the European Parliament .
For me it is both an enormous challenge and a great honour .
Thank you to those who voted for me ; I will do everything not to disappoint your trust .
For those of you who did not vote for me , I will try to convince you to me .
I wish to work with all of you , regardless of political conventions .
I count on your support .
Thank you , Mrs Svensson , for taking part in this election and for our discussions .
To our colleagues , Mario Mauro and Graham Watson , who stood as candidates and resigned early in order to strengthen the unity of our House , this was a profound gesture .
Mario , I know how important for you human rights are .
In my homeland , Solidarność was born , a great movement for human rights , ...
( Applause )
... which was possible thanks to the lesson of John Paul II .
For me , human rights will also be a priority .
Graham , you spoke about the necessity of change in the European Parliament , of the need for reform , of the need to involve in the European project our citizens , who are becoming more and more indifferent .
I will make sure that , together , we will do everything we can to change this .
( Applause )
Mr President , it was unexpected , but it is a joy - I believe - for everyone here no longer to have an Eastern or a Western Europe for the first time in this Parliament .
We simply have a Europe that is symbolised by our President , who is in the Chamber today .
( Applause )
This is unity ; this is also where our responsibilities lie , as you said earlier , Mr Buzek .
Forgetting about East and West , in the two and a half years of your presidency , and speaking only of a single Europe - that is my wish , for you and for Europe .
Mr President , on behalf of our group I would like to congratulate you on your election .
We supported your election and , even though we should be careful not to overuse the term ' historic moment ' , I believe that your election as President of the European Parliament is indeed an historic moment .
( Applause )
The fact that 20 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , six years after the accession of your country and many other Central and Eastern European countries to the European Union - which was after all a process that you yourself initiated as Prime Minister of your country , as the accession negotiations took place during your term of office - the fact that 20 years after putting an end to the division of the world into two heavily armed blocs , after overcoming the Stalinist dictatorships of the states which had to suffer 40 years longer under these dictatorships than the western part of Europe did under the fascist dictatorships , the fact that 20 years later it is only natural that Members from Poland , Hungary , the Baltic states , the Czech Republic or Slovakia should be sitting together with Members from France , Portugal , Finland , Germany , Austria or Italy in this Chamber and that we are able to elect as head of this assembly a representative of Solidarność , a democratically elected head of the Polish Government , in a free , secret and fair election - that is in my view an historic moment , which proves that Europe - this great continent in which 27 states have united to become the European Union - actually represents something , and that is that the dream of democracy and freedom can become reality if we do not merely dream , but also actively work to bring it about , as you have done in your life .
I therefore believe that your Presidency is also an appeal to all of us and that the values on which this Union was founded are the values that drove the dictators to the wall and overcame the dictatorships .
It is the wish of our group that your Presidency will be based on these values .
My sincere congratulations , Mr Buzek .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all congratulations from the Liberal and Democratic Group on your election .
I can tell you that you have the full support of the Liberal and Democratic Group for the forthcoming years in your work .
Your work , from our point of view , means the creation of a more integrated European Union and a European Union that uses the community method .
You have become President at a very difficult time : we have to ratify the Lisbon Treaty ; we have to find a single strategy against the economic and financial crisis .
It is a huge task in which you have the full support of our group .
You should know that you have behind you a large pro-European majority in this Parliament .
You should be aware of that .
( Applause )
The only request we have is to use it , this large pro-European majority . To go forward with Europe and also to say what you have to say in the European Council , that you know so well - as I do .
I hope that you can make your voice heard there and have more ' Europe ' in that institution also .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on behalf of my group .
We are also very happy about your election .
I think that it is a slight understatement , Mr President , when you say that it is an honour for you to take up the position to which we have elected you today .
It is , on the contrary , an honour for us - at least from the point of view of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - to have you as President .
Everything you have done in your political career has helped you to achieve your current position , and we are all putting our trust in you .
I am not sure if it will be possible in two and a half years to overcome the division that still exists between East and West , but I believe that , with you at the head of this House , we can strengthen bridges between East and West .
I personally would like it to be clear to the Members from Western Europe that Poland is in the middle of the continent , that you come from a country at the heart of the continent and that the work to forge links with the East must now be carried out much more intensively than it has been in the past .
You are in the best position to do this .
I was very pleased to hear you say that we need to get closer to our citizens .
We in the Group of the Greens will always support you in this .
Strengthening Europe from within is important , but it is also important to think about Europe on a larger scale .
Allow me to express yet another personal wish .
As I got to know you particularly well on the streets and in the squares of Kiev during the Orange Revolution - and you were a very courageous politician even then - let us not forget Ukraine in our consideration of the countries to the east of the EU .
The situation there also needs to improve .
Something I would like to do during the European Football Championships - which are not long away now and which will be hosted in Poland and Ukraine - is to watch one or two matches with you .
I wish you every success in your new role !
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , may I congratulate you on your presidency and in particular welcome the fact that in your remarks you have referred to history - and others have referred to it as well .
You certainly seem to be someone who will value the freedoms which this House wishes to have : the freedom of expression , but also the freedoms of looking ahead , of change and reform in Europe , and that this House must change and reform with Europe .
The fact that you have a history of which you are proud , and rightfully so , from 1980 in Solidarność and onwards , where you brought Poland into NATO and then started the negotiations for membership of the European Union , you are someone who can embrace the changes that Europe needs now .
We welcome you .
We will do our very best to help you in the job that you have taken on .
( Applause )
Mr President , I am pleased that a neighbour from Poland has become President of this House .
I come from eastern Germany and work near Słubice .
Słubice and Frankfurt / Oder are both part of a united Europe .
I would like to thank you for focusing in particular on the continued integration of Eastern and Western Europe .
There is still much to do in this respect , as we are all aware .
However , I would also like to mention the important contribution in terms of Polish culture that you can make to cooperation and cultural diversity in Europe .
I hope that I will soon be able to speak to you in more depth .
I have started to work towards this .
Two of my sons speak Polish .
I once had the honour of presenting the Andrzej Wajda film prize to the director Andreas Dresen and of making a speech to mark the occasion .
Andrzej Wajda and other Polish directors are part of our European culture .
I hope that Western Europe and Eastern Europe will not forget the special achievements of Eastern European culture .
Mr President , you have our respect and our support !
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate you on being elected although I feel that this morning it has been more like a papal inauguration .
If this Parliament were a proper Parliament , it would actually select Members to sit in the chair on ability and not have the usual big group stitch-ups .
That is rather a shame .
I think the signs for change here are not very good .
Just yesterday we had armed Eurocorps soldiers carrying the European flag round the courtyard outside , a sort of European Union version of trooping the colour .
We had an orchestra , we had the anthem , we had a choir ; we started today , did we not , with the anthem .
This is the same flag and anthem that you said had been dropped after the French and Dutch very sensibly said ' no ' to the dreaded EU Constitution .
You are not even pretending any more .
You are pushing ahead with all the symbols of statehood and trying at the same time to lie and cheat to the Irish by giving them a series of guarantees that are not worth the paper that they are written on .
Well , I can tell you that many of us in this Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group will do all we can to help the ' no ' side in that Irish referendum .
( Heckling )
The future of European democracy rests very heavily on Irish shoulders .
Mr President , you fought against the Soviet Union .
You fought for democracy .
You fought for national self-determination .
If you continue to ignore the democratic voice of countries like France , the Netherlands and Ireland , then you will turn the European Union back into that very Union that you fought so hard against .
Listen to the people , please .
( Mixed reactions )
Thank you for your speech , Mr Farage .
European parliamentarianism has always provided a forum for various opinions .
This is what discussion in Europe is based on .
The speeches of those Members who wished to speak have now ended , but I think that the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , is signalling that he would like to say a few words .
Mr Barroso , please take the floor .
Mr President , I should like , both personally and on behalf of the European Commission , to congratulate you most sincerely on your election to the presidency of the European Parliament .
The path that you have taken has led you courageously to defend freedom , democracy and the rule of law in order to help impose them in your own country , Poland .
Your political career has taken you as far as the office of prime minister , before you were elected as an MEP .
You are the first President of this House to come from a Member State in Central or Eastern Europe .
It is armed with this wealth of exceptional experience and with the values that you uphold that , today , you assume your new role as President of the European Parliament .
Twenty years on from the fall of the Berlin Wall , and five years on from enlargement , your election is a victory for reunified Europe .
There are many of us here who know of and appreciate your personality , your political vision and your campaign work .
There are just as many of us who believe that your personal qualities naturally predispose you to play the role of a President who actively and passionately defends the interests of Europe and its citizens .
This experience and these values will mean that the handover from Mr Pöttering - who knows this institution better than anyone - to you will be a harmonious one .
I send Mr Pöttering my best wishes now that he is leaving office ; he has carried out his role with extraordinary dignity and with an unwavering belief in Europe .
At a time of difficulties , and given the complex political model that we have , we shall have to work now more than ever in a positive , constructive and united spirit , in order to make progress with Europe .
The power and the competences of this Parliament will also be strengthened with the Treaty of Lisbon , which an overwhelming majority of Parliament , and the Commission , want to adopt ; in fact , a treaty that has already been adopted by 26 parliaments of our Europe deserves the respect of all MEPs .
Our institutions must strengthen one another for the sake of the European project .
This is particularly true as regards the relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission .
We know perfectly well that it is the cooperation between our two institutions that moves the European project forward .
Mr President , my dear friend , all that remains is for me to wish you , and the new Parliament , success in your work towards establishing a Europe that more fully promotes the values of freedom and solidarity .

( FR ) Mr President , I had resigned myself to being overlooked to some extent , in the same way as my non-attached colleagues , for whom I certainly speak in offering you the congratulations that are due to yourself , but rather less , it must be said , to the method of your election , since your triumphant election is , in a way , the result of an agreement between the two main groups of this House , which oppose one another rather artificially at election time and then go on to jointly manage Parliament for five years .
Mr President , I hope that you are the master of your victory , that you do not become a slave to these two main groups , that you are able to defend the rights of minorities and , in particular , the rights of dissidents such as ourselves , of those who are concerned about the effects of economic globalisation on their identity , and of the universal mixing of people , goods and capital , who do not believe that this necessarily brings benefits and who condemn the indefinite increase in the European Union 's powers with regard to their national freedoms .
We are , in a way , dissidents just as you once were .
We hope that you will protect the rights of dissidents and , in particular , that you will attach great importance to respect for these Rules of Procedure , which should not be systematically amended , since it is clear that they can benefit those who are , I believe , the true defenders of the freedoms of the European nations .
( Applause )
Election of Vice-Presidents ( deadline for submitting nominations ) : see Minutes
Ladies and Gentlemen , please take your seats .
We will start in three minutes .
Election of Vice-Presidents ( first , second and third ballots )
Mr President , I would like to ask whether there is any minimum requirement for the vote .

Mr Szájer , there is no minimum number : you can leave one person or two persons ; it does not matter .
Dear colleagues , allow me to say a few words at the beginning .
During the break in the sitting it came to my attention that an Italian soldier was killed today in Afghanistan in the NATO-led mission there .
His death comes after 15 British soldiers were killed in the past month .
I think we always need to remember our men and women in the armed forces who are on missions abroad , often in dangerous situations , so that they know they are not forgotten .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , I am truly sorry but , for the sake of a clear vote , since we do not have a display and we have tried to keep up with your very quick delivery , please could you read out the names and the votes again a little more slowly ?
Mr President , put the numbers on the screen so that we can all see them .
It is not very difficult .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I would urge you very strongly to ring the bell , as I see that a lot of Members from all groups are not here .
Many people are under the impression that the vote is not due to start until 19.30 .
I would therefore ask you to ring the bell one more time .
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 20.40 )
Opening of the sitting
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
( FR ) Mr President , the Lithuanian Parliament voted yesterday for a law on homosexuality , on propaganda on homosexuality and bisexuality .
The Lithuanian President had already refused to sign this law .
It was referred back to the parliament .
This law is in direct opposition to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and Article 6 ( 1 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I call on you , Mr President , on behalf of this Parliament , to protest against this law in the name of European values , since the Charter of Fundamental Rights , as reproduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , provides for non-discrimination in relation to sexual orientation , and this law discriminates against sexual minorities .
On behalf of this Parliament , I call on you to write to the Lithuanian Parliament to state that this law goes against the common idea of Europe .
( Applause )
Thank you .
We proceed to a presentation of the order of business .
( FR ) Mr President , can you tell me whether or not you are going to act ?
I have asked you to do something ; you should tell me whether or not you are going to do it .
That is what I asked you .
I will find out what the Lithuanian Parliament has adopted and then I will decide what to do .
I will be in touch with you about this .
Order of business : see Minutes
Outcome of the European Council ( 18-19 June 2009 ) - Term in office of the Czech Presidency ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the European Council report and the Commission statement on the outcome of the European Council ( 18-19 June 2009 )
the statement by the outgoing Presidency of the Council on the term in office of the Czech Presidency .
I would like to take the opportunity to welcome the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic , Mr Jan Fischer .
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to the President of the European Commission , Mr José Manuel Barroso .
We have before us the statement by the outgoing Presidency of the Council on the term in office of the Czech Presidency .
Please allow me to say a few words at the outset .
Yesterday we inaugurated the seventh term of the European Parliament .
You entrusted me with the job , the responsibility , the great privilege and the honour of presiding over the European Parliament for the next two and a half years .
I would like , today , on this second day , to thank you very warmly once again , to thank you for the trust which you have placed in me .
I will do everything to convince you that your decision was the right one .
In the first half of 2009 the Presidency was held by a second country from the group which acceded to the European Union barely five years ago .
We have , therefore , opportunity to become increasingly united and to come closer together .
We are conscious that it was a difficult Presidency because of the crisis and also because of the energy problems .
There was also a crisis in Gaza .
We also had the elections to the European Parliament .
However , as you know , during elections to the European Parliament there is less contact between the Presidency , Parliament and the European Commission .
Today we want to hear how the outgoing Czech Presidency sees the past six months and what conclusions and principal comments it has about what we should do in the near future .
I would like , therefore , to ask the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic to speak and to present the opinion of the Presidency on the past six months and on what should happen in the near future .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to be able to greet you at the opening of your five-year mandate .
The Czech Presidency has come to an end and a new European Parliament is just starting out .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election and on the fact that you have been entrusted by the voters in your countries to represent them in this important European body .
I congratulate Jerzy Buzek on his election as President of the European Parliament , along with all of the Vice-Presidents elected yesterday , and I wish you all much success in your important work and in the fulfilment of all the ideas with which you commence your work in the European Parliament .
The Czech Republic is drawing up an account of its six-month leadership of the European Council for a different Parliament to the one that was in place when it assumed the role .
This changes nothing in terms of our own assessment of our Presidency , of course .
On the contrary , I see it rather as a confirmation of continuity in European politics .
In the same way , by tackling the effects of the global economic crisis and the issues of energy and energy security , the new Swedish Presidency will continue to fulfil two of the main tasks which occupied us .
The first half of this year will go down in the history of the European Union as a period of demanding tests arising from a complex economic and political situation .
We anticipated some of these tests , in particular the continuing and already full-blown economic crisis and the need to complete the institutional reform of the EU .
Others were unexpected and some were entirely unexpected , such as the conflict in Gaza and the crisis over Russian gas supplies in the very first hours of the Czech Presidency .
Our ability to run the Presidency was then put to the test , of course , due to events on the domestic political scene , when the Czech Republic changed government just as we were two thirds of the way through the Presidency .
Unlike many people , I do not think that the political crisis in the Czech Republic seriously damaged the EU as a whole , although I agree that the fall of the government was unfortunate .
Nevertheless , I firmly believe that we handled the administration of our Presidency without faltering and that we managed over the entire six months to fulfil our priorities - the planned tasks arising from the EU agenda - and to deal with unexpected topical issues on a continuous basis and with total engagement .
This was also due to the fact that the specialist teams in the Czech Republic all carried on working with total commitment , loyalty and one hundred percent professionalism .
It was also due to the fact that the Czech Presidency received full backing from the Commission following the change of government .
I benefited personally from the support of Commission President José Manuel Barroso and I also received strong support at the time - if you will allow me to add a personal note here - from various Member State representatives .
This was an enormous help at the time , both for the Czech Government and for me personally .
I would like to give notice that I shall not be indulging in any philosophical or political analyses .
I do not want to weigh up the political dimensions or cogency of EU leadership under large versus small countries or old versus new countries or the pros and cons of political versus bureaucratic governments in the country holding the Presidency .
I will leave that to others and for the rest I will say only that a decent and open-minded analysis requires a certain amount of distance and the falling away of emotions and short-term interests .
From now on I will eschew grand words and pathos .
I would rather concentrate on bare facts backed up by statistics where appropriate - as statistics is after all my life-long profession and possibly even my passion - or on what Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk , the first President of the Czechoslovak Republic , called the small everyday tasks .
As you know , the , Czech Republic expressed its main presidential priorities as the ' Three Es ' : the economy , energy policy and the EU 's role in the world .
Circumstances , I think , have demonstrated clearly that these were highly topical , valid themes and their validity is by no means limited to the first half of 2009 .
They are areas that will continue to require all of our combined efforts in the future , in order for the Union to stand its ground even in times of instability and to benefit its citizens - which is the main reason for it being here .
They are priorities which put the idea of integration to the test , demonstrating in practice how faithful we are to the values which were there at the birth of the Community and which define Europe as a common area of freedom , security and prosperity .
We selected the motto of ' Europe without barriers ' to represent this effort symbolically .
The economic crisis tested our faithfulness to the idea of integration to the full , adding an even more urgent significance to the Czech Presidency 's motto .
The results of the many discussions held over the past half-year and the conclusions of the European Councils show that the twenty-seven Member States passed this test with flying colours .
Under the Czech Presidency we turned our backs on protectionism and we agreed on a common and coordinated approach to dealing with the effects of the crisis both in an EU context and on the international stage .
In the same way we succeeded in fulfilling a task which many thought us incapable of ; the issue of institutional reform .
The Czech Republic itself successfully completed the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon by both chambers of parliament .
This was a clear and convincing expression of political will and it opened up the possibility of a credible solution to the question of the Irish guarantees .
I firmly believe that , as a result of the guarantees agreed on at the June European Council , there is a good chance that Ireland will complete the Treaty ratification process as well , so that it can enter into force by the end of 2009 .
The Czech Presidency also took a serious approach to a task that is connected with the election of this new European Parliament , namely initiating the process of appointing a Commission for the next legislative period 2009-2014 .
At the June European Council a clear political consensus was achieved on José Manuel Barroso as the candidate for President of the next Commission .
The authority for the Czech Presidency and the incoming Swedish Presidency to hold talks with the European Parliament creates the preconditions for preserving institutional continuity .
Overall , the Czech Presidency has managed to achieve a series of concrete results or visible progress in all three priority areas .
In the legislative area , negotiations over more than 80 concrete measures were brought to a successful conclusion , thanks above all to close cooperation with the Member States and EU institutions , particularly the European Parliament .
In the non-legislative area a series of notable successes were also achieved , including the handling of the foreign policy and energy crises at the beginning of the year , the rejection of protectionist tendencies , decisive measures in support of the European economy , steps towards diversification of energy supply and climate protection and the results of negotiations with key partners in the European Union .
As far as the individual priorities are concerned , the most important task in the economic sphere was to deal with the effects of the global crisis and to continue implementing the European plan for economic recovery as one of the main instruments for restoring economic prosperity .
We also passed muster concerning the measures adopted for stabilising the banking sector .
The measures we adopted are effective .
Through guarantees and recapitalisation , Member States provided the banks with potential support amounting to more than 30 % of the European Union 's GDP .
The compromise achieved over the EUR 5 billion package for projects in the area of energy and broadband internet and measures to verify the efficiency of the common agricultural policy provided a positive message from the spring European Council .
The agreement over the contribution of EU Member States towards the EUR 75 billion loan for boosting International Monetary Fund resources was of key significance in terms of tackling the global economic crisis .
Under the Czech Presidency , the EU , with strong support from the Commission , made a major contribution to the excellent preparations for and successful course of the G20 summit in London , which produced agreement over the major boost to IMF resources and over the resources disbursed through other international institutions to combat the effects of the global economic recession .
The EU also gained a strong position at the summit thanks to the common conclusions adopted at the spring European Council .
In this way it confirmed its ambition to be a strong global player .
As I said earlier , all of the measures aimed at combating the crisis during the Czech Presidency must be viewed against the backdrop of the joint and unequivocal rejection of protectionism .
In the area of legislative measures , the Czech Presidency managed to achieve a consensus within the framework of the recovery plan over the possibility of applying reduced VAT rates for labour-intensive locally-provided services .
This agreement makes a significant contribution towards maintaining employment in the most vulnerable sectors of the economy and should help small and medium-sized companies in particular .
The changes to financial market regulation and market supervision represent a whole chapter in the effort to combat the current financial and economic crisis .
During the Czech Presidency major progress was achieved in restoring confidence .
We completed negotiations on all of the key legislative proposals which the Presidency established as its objectives .
Chief among these was the Solvency II Directive for the areas of insurance , regulations for rating agencies and others .
In the challenging debate on the regulation and supervision of financial markets , agreement was reached over the basic elements of reform , which should provide stability at the Member State level and at the level of individual financial institutions and their rules .
The June European Council confirmed the direction taken by the Commission .
The support voiced for the Commission 's plans should lead to concrete legislative proposals being drawn up and approved in the autumn of this year .
Energy policy , the second priority of the Czech Presidency , was severely tested in the very first days of the Presidency .
At the same time , we saw that it is not always sensible to tackle the problems of energy crises on an ad hoc basis , since a crisis blows up every six months or so .
We should rather adopt systematic measures so that the EU can be secure and resilient in terms of energy supplies .
Under the Czech Presidency we took steps to boost energy security , focusing on activities that will increase diversification of energy sources and supply routes through the so-called southern corridor .
The support for energy efficiency included in the revised regulations for the European Regional Development Fund also makes a significant contribution to energy security .
It enables financial investments to be made in greater energy efficiency and in the use of renewable energy sources in residential buildings .
This provides a link to the Swedish Presidency , which has energy efficiency as one of its key priorities .
The continuity necessary to the work of the entire EU is again apparent here .
Last , but by no means least , the March and June Councils confirmed in full that it would not be sensible to abandon our ambitious goals for reducing greenhouse gas emissions or for financing mitigation and adaptation measures in developing countries .
At the same time , we established clear priorities and goals which must be fulfilled ahead of the UN climate change conference in Copenhagen this December in order for the EU to defend its position as a leader in climate change .
The third priority - or if you will the third ' E ' - of the Czech Presidency was about the EU in the world , and events demonstrate clearly how important it is for the EU to develop and pursue a common foreign policy .
There was ample confirmation of this during the course of the Czech Presidency .
While the EU succeeded in solving the gas crisis thanks to its unity , the second crisis from the start of the year , the crisis in Gaza , again showed that if the EU wants to be a truly global player it must learn to speak with one voice .
Both of these crises occurred under the one Presidency , which goes to show that the issue of who is actually leading the EU does not matter so much as the unity of all twenty-seven Member States .
The Czech Presidency succeeded in kicking off the Eastern Partnership project which is a continuation of the neighbourhood policy , this time in an eastward direction .
The main foreign priority of the Czech Presidency was to continue the process of EU enlargement .
This mainly involved a European perspective for the countries of the Western Balkans .
Due to the situation in the region , the Presidency had limited room for manoeuvre .
However , despite the suspension of accession talks with Croatia , progress was achieved in the process of visa liberalisation .
I have presented a brief and matter-of-fact summary of the priorities of the Czech Presidency and their fulfilment .
More detailed information is of course available and I am now available myself to respond to your questions and comments .
Mr President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the first plenary session of a newly elected European Parliament is a unique political moment .
It opens a legislative term that will influence the daily lives of hundreds of millions of European citizens and the fate of an entire continent .
I should like sincerely to congratulate all the MEPs who have just been elected .
Your presence in this Chamber is the result of the greatest exercise in transnational democracy ever staged in the world .
I wish you every success for your term of office .
The challenges faced by Europe and those that it will have to take up over the next few years are immense .
Firstly , there is the economic and financial crisis , which requires us to continue the systematic coordinated action that we have embarked on .
There is the social cost of this crisis , which is our top priority .
There is the fight against climate change and the transition to a green and sustainable economy , which shows the political direction we need to go in .
All these challenges have also distinguished the Czech Presidency , which has just come to an end .
I should like to congratulate Prime Minister Fischer and his predecessor , Mirek Topolánek , on the results obtained during a particularly difficult phase .
I thank them and their entire team for their excellent cooperation , despite some internal political difficulties .
I should also like to highlight the political significance of this Czech Presidency .
For the first time , a country which , only a few years ago , was a member of the Warsaw Pact has been in charge of our European project of freedom and solidarity .
This is a very important point , which shows the extent to which we have progressed within our Europe .
During the Czech Presidency we have been able to achieve some impressive results in practice : 54 texts have been adopted by codecision .
I should like to mention in particular the agreement on a wide range of measures on regulation of the financial markets and on the EUR 5 billion in the context of the European recovery plan , and you are all very well aware of how hard we , the Commission and Parliament , have had to fight to achieve this .
I would also mention the review of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I welcome the development of the internal energy market and of the internal transport market .
In all of these areas there were ambitious proposals from the Commission , which were supported by this Parliament .
I welcome the unanimous support of the last European Council for the road map that the Commission proposed on the subject of supervision of the financial markets .
We now have an ambitious consensus that no one could have hoped for a few months ago when I convened a group of high-level experts under the chairmanship of Mr de Larosière .
This will enable us to spearhead the reform of the international financial system .
Moreover , it was in this same spirit that we took part in the G20 in London , prompting some very important decision-making .
Beyond its legislative work , the Czech Presidency has also been able to confront challenges of a political nature , some of which were extremely sensitive , indeed extremely serious .
We have had to manage the gas crisis between Ukraine and Russia , which has again highlighted the need for Europe to strengthen its energy security .
Over the last six months we have made much progress , for example by developing the Baltic interconnection plan .
The day before yesterday I attended the ceremony of the signing of the Nabucco project between Turkey and four of our Member States - Austria , Hungary , Bulgaria and Romania - in the presence of many countries from which we hope to import gas in the future .
This is a truly European project , and I am proud that the Commission has been able to act as a facilitator in it , since this role has been recognised as essential for all the participants .
Mr President , during the Czech Presidency there were also very important developments concerning the Lisbon Treaty .
The last European Council agreed the necessary guarantees that allow the Irish Government to call a second referendum , fully reassured that the concerns expressed by Irish people have been addressed satisfactorily .
Let us not forget that it was also during the Czech Presidency that the Czech Senate finalised parliamentary ratification , bringing the total number of Member States that have completed the parliamentary approval process to 26 .
The Czech Presidency has now passed the baton to the Swedish Presidency , but the challenges Europe faces continue and go well beyond the scope of a single presidency .
The European project has always been a long-term one .
We make progress when we work as a team .
Like a team , every member is vital to success : the Council , the Commission and Parliament all have an important role to play in meeting our common European ambitions at the service of Europe 's citizens .
The Europe we must continue to build together is a strong Europe , an open Europe , a Europe of solidarity .
It is a Europe that offers a maximum of opportunities to its citizens ; a Europe that builds on its continental dimension and draws full benefit from the potential of its internal market , so crucial for consumers and for small- and medium-sized companies ; a Europe of knowledge and innovation ; a Europe that respects the environment and ensures its energy security ; a Europe that reaches out to other global actors in a spirit of partnership in order to tackle shared challenges together .


In this time of global crisis , we need a strong Europe more than ever before - and a strong Europe means a united Europe ready to seize and shape its destiny .
Let us work together - Parliament , Council , Commission - to show that the expectations of Europe 's citizens are safe in our hands ; that their desire for freedom , justice and solidarity will not go ignored .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel deeply moved as I stand here in the European Parliament as the first deaf person able to address you in my mother tongue , Hungarian sign language .
I do so not only for myself and the deaf community , but also for every disadvantaged person .
I am now beginning to feel that I belong to a European community where even minorities can achieve success .
Just take Robert Schuman as an example , who was from Alsace-Lorraine and went on to become the founding father of the EU 50 years ago .
Around the end of the EU 's outgoing Czech Presidency , a turn of events unfortunately took place which I would also like to bring to the attention of the EU 's incoming Swedish Presidency .
Two weeks ago the Slovak Parliament adopted a regulation which will seriously restrict the rights of the minorities living in that country to use their own language .
As a user of sign language , I feel it is my duty to stand up for the rights of people in Europe to use their own language and for the importance of this .
This is the reason why I am going to be working here in the European Parliament .
However , I want to give a message to every European citizen .
I want a Europe where everyone is guaranteed the right to live their life to the full and fulfil their potential .
I want a Europe where deaf people represented by me or any person living with a disability , for that matter , really do enjoy equal opportunities .
I would like to say a particular word of thanks to Joseph Daul , Chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , for giving me the opportunity to address you on this special day .
This also proves that Europe really is about diversity , tolerance and equal opportunities .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( CS ) Prime Minister Fischer , Commission President Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , in January this year I warned this honourable assembly that the Czech Presidency would not be easy and that it would probably be marked by major instability .
The reason for my fears was the instability within the Czech Government coalition , the disagreements between government and opposition and the disputes between government and president .
I would like to say briefly that the speech made by Czech President Václav Klaus to this honourable assembly unfortunately confirmed my fears of instability , showing that the Presidency would indeed be marked by instability , and not just through the collapse of the government .
Despite this , some things have been successful over the six months , others less so .
On the plus side I would mention the energy policy referred to earlier .
I think that the Czech Republic managed very well in resolving the gas crisis of January this year .
The signing of the Nabucco agreement , mentioned here by Mr Barroso , was also the result of work done by the Czech Presidency .
Unfortunately , the handling of the economic crisis did not fulfil the expectations of Europe and the European Parliament .
Let us recall the speech of former Czech Prime Minister Topolánek , when he sent US President Obama to hell , along with his economic policy .
Despite this , I would like in conclusion to thank Prime Minister Fischer in particular for rescuing the Czech Presidency .
The June summit is proof of this , since the entire agenda of the summit was successfully implemented .
I would also like to thank the hundreds of Czech officials , not only in Brussels but in all of the Czech ministries .
In my opinion these officials did a very good and professional job and they cannot be held responsible for what was happening on the Czech political scene .
Mr President , allow me , first of all , to congratulate you on your election .
I wish you every success over the next two and a half years .
I was even able to understand your last request to keep to our speaking time without using headphones .
Prime Minister , your predecessor did not have an easy or positive start .
The emphasis was quite rightly placed on energy , economy and external relations , but as is so often the case in life , what happens in reality is sometimes very different to what we had planned .
In the Gaza conflict , the Council Presidency rushed straight in without first having agreed on a common European approach .
In the gas dispute between Russia and Ukraine , millions of people were freezing before your government stepped forward and acted as an intermediary , with very successful results .
Despite the criticism , you were also successful in other areas .
It is a lasting achievement of the Czech Presidency that the European Union did not make the mistake of sliding into protectionism , as was the case in the 1930s .
That was and still is a real danger .
On this issue the Presidency took a clear line , supported in particular by the Competition Commissioner .
Many people want to use the crisis to promote a new economic nationalism .
That would be catastrophic .
For Liberals and Democrats , free and fair competition , as provided for in the Treaties , is the way to growth and prosperity .
However , if our citizens are to accept free competition , they want and need to be certain that the rules are the same for everyone .
The distortion of competition , foreclosure , a preference for a state 's own national companies - all these things will lead not to the end of the crisis , but straight up a blind alley .
During its Presidency , the Czech Republic , as a new Member State , rightly had to issue many old Member States with a call to order , which was unfortunately necessary in view of the fact that the internal market must not be eroded and rules must be followed .
The Czech Government proved ultimately to be helpless in the face of the constant harassment from Prague Castle and the vote of no confidence .
Its fall in the middle of its presidential term was unprecedented .
The whole of Europe looked to Prague in amazement .
With this move , the Czech political class did a disservice both to its own country and to Europe .
Prime Minister , you have however shown that , in politics just as in football , a game can still turn even if substitutions are not made until it has gone into extra time .
In the European Council in June the course was set for an overhaul of financial market supervision .
It is now the task of the Commission to carry this initiative forward with determination .
You have negotiated the guarantees for Ireland so that , hopefully , the referendum on 2 October will be successful .
The Member States have formally agreed on a candidate for the office of President of the Commission and thus met an important demand by our group .
Prime Minister , you personally have done a good job and gained a great deal of respect .
However , the first Czech Presidency will probably not take the place in the history books that we had all hoped it would .
What we nevertheless ought to remember is your motto : ' Europe without borders ' .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , President of the Commission , it is not easy to weigh up the progress that ought to have been made during the period of the Czech Presidency .
I have tried very hard to do this on behalf of my group , but what we would have liked to have seen - namely the Czech Presidency rising to the challenges - did not actually happen .
With regard to the financial crisis , when we reconvene here in September after the summer break we will have been talking about the required new regulation of the financial markets for a whole year , but we will have made virtually no progress in this regard .
A lot of statements have been made that are intended to reassure citizens , but not very much is actually being done .
As regards the economic crisis , the European recovery plan - I find it almost embarrassing that this is mentioned so often - is however merely a token programme to enable us to talk about European recovery planning , but it lacks any real substance .
It runs to a mere EUR 5 billion and then there is the petty dispute about how this EUR 5 billion should be used .
I do not think that this is something we ought to be proud of .
A programme that we have worked hard on , namely a consistent programme for energy efficiency in Europe , which would safeguard millions of jobs , has not been given any real consideration .
I now turn to the climate crisis and I hardly need to ask green politicians to evaluate the policy in this area .
Ivo de Boer , the United Nations ' top climate change official , and Ban Ki-moon impressed upon us after the last conference in Bonn that all of countries of the world which have claimed that they would take a leading role in this global policy to combat the climate crisis have fallen far short of doing what would actually be needed .
If we take the European energy policy as a measure of what we as Europeans are actually willing to do , I do not believe that we can really regard the constantly competitive strategy that was so clearly employed in connection with the North Stream and Nabucco projects to be the starting point for a common future-oriented European energy policy .
Why is this ?
What are the reasons for this ?
I believe that the criticism for this should not really be directed at you , Mr Fischer .
The country which the chairman of my group , Mr Cohn-Bendit , visited carrying the European flag in his rucksack so that he could give it to the President was in reality weak .
And unfortunately , Mr Barroso , even though there is often talk about your strength , where was this strength during the times of weakness of this Council Presidency ?
We did not see any evidence of it .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( CS ) Prime Minister , Commission President , it is a great honour for me to be able to stand up today as the first speaker from the many new groupings of European conservatives and reformers and also as a Czech MEP talking about the Czech Presidency .
However , I will be speaking as a Member of the European Parliament and not just from a narrow national perspective .
At the same time , I will be speaking as a representative of my group and therefore I will take account of its political priorities .
I have already had an opportunity to speak at the plenary session in January , when Czech Prime Minister Topolánek presented the priorities of the Czech Presidency here , and I am speaking today as Czech Prime Minister Fischer submits the report on what the Czech Republic has achieved .
I do not mention this by chance .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the Czech Government has succeeded in preserving both the political and the organisational continuity of the Presidency , despite the collapse of the Government , which was the result purely of internal political factors .
I would like at this point to applaud the tone of the Prime Minister 's speech , as it was exactly the tone of the Czech Presidency itself , matter-of-fact and results-orientated .
In my opinion , some of the critical assessments were based on the subjective feelings of certain European representatives or media figures and have contributed nothing to our much-vaunted European cohesion , belonging instead to private political campaigns targeted at domestic audiences .
I would now like to turn to the three priorities of the Czech Presidency .
In relation to the economy I would like to emphasise again that the Czech Republic has succeeded in heading off an ominous wave of national protectionist measures which would have seriously undermined the fundamental values of European integration and particularly the principles of the unified single market .
Concerning energy policy , the issue of secure and maintainable supplies for the energy sector proved to be a well chosen theme .
In the first days of the Czech Presidency an imminent crisis over gas supplies was successfully warded off , bearing in mind of course that any real progress over this issue will require long-term strategic measures , including diversification of supply and liberalisation of the internal energy market .
From the symbolic perspective of the other aim of EU foreign relations I would like to emphasise the summits with major global players , in other words the EU-US summit , which reaffirmed the fundamental importance of transatlantic relations , and also the EU-Russia summit and the EU-China summit .
I would also like to stress the importance of the Eastern Partnership initiative and its implementation .
In conclusion , I believe that the Czech Presidency can be summed up , on the whole , as providing proof that medium-sized countries and so-called new Member States can manage such a role with honour and to a high standard .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) I would like to say that the Czech Presidency was actually rescued by Mr Fischer 's government and by Mr Fischer himself .
I would like to emphasise that the Presidency coincided with the twentieth anniversary of the political changes which the media characterises as a liberation , but we have also had twenty years of unfulfilled promises , because levels of competence in the administration of public affairs have plummeted in the Czech Republic .
I would also like to say that from this standpoint the government of Mr Fischer has been a pleasant surprise .
He is a prime minister and a man who refuses to lie .
His name first came to my attention when he was taking a stand against the falsification of statistical data in the Czech Republic .
He is a man who avoids the grand phrases we have heard here under various presidencies , and who acts with deliberation .
In my opinion it is a very good thing that such a man finally came to lead the Czech Presidency .
As we are now marking the 500th anniversary of the birth of Calvin , who was born in France on 10 July 1509 , I would like to say that the only thing that will truly save us in this difficult situation with two crises ... ( the President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the Czech Presidency has followed a depressingly familiar pattern : continuity , more of the same , the continuing obsession with climate change and the continuing drive to have new legislation .
You said that under this Presidency legislation in 18 new areas had been worked on and you seem to be proud of that .
I would have thought it is about time we took a couple of steps back and said that what we have in the European Union is an over-regulated model that is serving us very badly during the depths of a recession .
And yet more status quo .
You supported the idea of shooing in Mr Barroso without there being any sort of proper contest , but it is on the Lisbon Treaty that I was most interested .
You ratified the Treaty through your own parliamentary chambers , without of course the thought of giving the people in your own country a referendum to express their opinion .
But it is when it comes to Ireland that I really get interested .
You said that you wanted there to be a credible policy for Ireland with their second referendum , and so you produced these guarantees , and here they are - guarantees on the right to life , on taxation , on security and defence .
This document has no legal force whatsoever .
It is not worth the paper that it is written on .
You are the author of a disgraceful attempt to con the Irish into voting for this Lisbon Treaty in their forthcoming referendum .
Of course you have been supported by Mr Barroso on that .
He never respects the result of democratic referendums whether they are in France , the Netherlands or Ireland .
He says we must ignore them , we must continue .
It is all about power .
It is all about him and the EU institutions getting more power at the expense of the Member States .
I hope the Irish tell you all where to go in the second referendum on 2 October - and they just might !
( Mixed reactions )
However , I do not wish to be mean-spirited , because there was one wonderful , bright , uplifting moment during the Czech Presidency , a moment when all of us that believe in nation states , that believe in democracy , that believe genuinely in the rule of law could come into this Chamber and feel for the first time in my experience proud of the fact that we were part of this European Parliament .
I am of course referring to the visit of Václav Klaus .
What a wonderful speech that was : coming into this Chamber and telling a few home truths and pointing out that European parliamentarians and leaders are not listening to the peoples of Europe - at which 200 of you got up and walked out of the room .
So at least for Václav Klaus we thank you very much for the last six months .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - Madam President , I should just like to put a question .
I am not criticising , but is it allowed to have flags in the Chamber ?
( Objections .
Mr Farage held up a Union Flag . )
Because , if it is allowed , I should just like to put the European flag here today , if I may do so .
( Mr Barroso placed a European flag on his desk .
Applause . )
( DE ) Madam President , in terms of European integration , it is without doubt a good thing that one of the new EU countries , in this case the Czech Republic , held the Council Presidency .
Less welcome , however , was the chaos which the Presidency is partly responsible for leading us into .
Of course , we could hardly expect perfection from a new country with little European experience , but we could at least expect a minimum degree of sensitivity .
The arts scandal at the start of the Presidency could not have been blamed on the government in Prague , but the Council Presidency can be held fully responsible for its half-hearted response and the fact that the artworks remained on display .
However , the Czech Presidency showed political leadership in particular when dealing with difficulties and in crisis management .
In this regard in particular there were considerable shortcomings : a 20-day energy crisis in Europe during the gas dispute between Russia and Ukraine could have been overcome in one way or another ; management of the Middle East crisis was , in my opinion , more than a little clumsy .
And if the US missile shield in the Czech Republic was not bad enough , dependence on the US was also reflected in the Presidency , for example in the way that the Israeli offensive in Gaza was trivialised as defensive action .
Even the Treaty of Lisbon was only half-heartedly criticised and delayed by the Prague leadership .
As a result , we missed an important opportunity to bring more democracy back into the European Union .
The fact that ultimately no agreement could be reached between Slovenia and Croatia with regard to the sea borders is also extremely regrettable .
After all , Croatia is no less prepared for accession to the EU than the ten new Member States were at the time of their accession .
On the contrary , it may even be better prepared .
Even more regrettable , in my opinion , is the fact that Sweden does not wish to continue the attempts at conciliation .
Croatia does not deserve that .
Overall , our conclusions about the success of the Czech Presidency are somewhat mixed .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to respond very briefly on behalf of the Council and the former Czech Presidency .
Firstly - on a personal note - to be confronted with the atmosphere of a Parliament , whether the Czech Parliament or the European Parliament , is always a great lesson for a man who is essentially a specialist and who has strong academic leanings .
It is a lesson in how different ideas can be at times concerning the speed and intensity of European integration , or the nature of the EU .
All of this simply reflects the very broad spectrum of your views and I think it is part and parcel of true democracy .
I would therefore like to thank you for expressing your views and ultimately also for the critical suggestions which you have presented here .
As far as the speech of Mr Kósa is concerned , I do not wish to comment on it in detail , but I think it reflects the importance of our motto ' Europe without barriers ' and I hope that the EU will continue to live up to this motto .
I firmly believe that the measures aimed at mitigating the effects of the very severe economic and financial crisis were adequate and sensible at the time of their adoption .
Criticisms have been levelled here at the pace of financial market regulation .
We have adopted fundamental measures in this area and they were agreed on after a very serious , challenging and controversial debate , where we juggled with the details right up to the European Council in June , producing a result which perhaps did not satisfy everyone , as there are some who consider the world to be over-regulated .
We are nevertheless ready for the Commission 's draft legislative solutions to financial market regulation and banking supervision in a European format this autumn .
The fact that there have been no manifestations of protectionism is - I repeat again - of fundamental importance , as is the fact that we have managed to agree on applying the principles of solidarity , especially towards certain countries where the economy has got into the greatest difficulties .
I will be meeting with President Klaus this evening and I will convey to him the praises of the honourable Member .
Otherwise , the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon in the Czech Republic has of course proceeded fully in accordance with the Czech constitution .
The treaty was ratified in both chambers of parliament and we await the signature of the President of the Republic .
I hope it will be final , decisive and correct .
The fact that no referendum was held in the Czech Republic to ratify the Treaty is entirely an internal matter for the Czech Republic and is a matter fully compatible and fully in conformity with the Czech constitution .
This ends my digression into domestic affairs .
I would like to thank the many speakers who praised the level of continuity achieved by the Czech Presidency .
Personally I considered it a great challenge for my cabinet and for myself as well .
It was a test for the new cabinet and for all of the ministers and the teams of specialists , and everyone passed the test with flying colours - as has already been pointed out in my own speech and in the appraisals of certain honourable Members .
I regarded my one third share of the Presidency as a personal task and I am delighted that the Czech Presidency has carried if off with honour .
( CS ) Commission President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I am proud of the fact that the Czech Presidency will go down in the history of the EU as the model of an accommodating , professional , non-partisan and well prepared administration .
In defiance of indiscriminate criticisms from the European media and the Czech opposition , the Czechs successfully managed to finalise agreements over dozens of legislative standards .
The Czechs accomplished this at half time - before Parliament ended with the election period .
The agreements covered , for example , roaming , the energy package and measures to combat the crisis .
It was the Czechs who finally managed to crack the nut of introducing a lower VAT rate for labour-intensive services , which is a pro-growth and counter-crisis measure .
The Czechs also managed not only to assist with the resumption of oil and gas supplies from Russia to Europe , but also to reach agreement on the Nabucco southern gas pipeline and to prepare it for signing together with the Commission President .
Unfortunately , the Czech Republic will also go down in EU history as an example of political instability , because the social democrat Paroubek placed his own ambitions above the interests of the EU and - together with several turncoats - engineered the downfall of the Czech Government half way through its successful Presidency .
I would like to thank the teams of Prime Ministers Topolánek and Fischer as well as the Czech mission in Brussels for their hard work in furthering the interests of the EU and the Czech Republic .
The teams showed that these interests are not mutually exclusive , even in times of crisis .
In addition , they convinced the French President , among others , that protectionism is a dirty word .
I would like to congratulate you and all of us for that .
I would now like to call on the Swedish Presidency to begin talks immediately over the suspension of Canadian visas for Czech citizens .
I believe that these talks will also be a success .
After all , solidarity is the greatest strength of the European Union .
( PT ) Madam President , Prime Minister Fischer declared that the Czech Presidency was very successful .
Mr Fischer , I regret to say that I do not agree .
The Prime Minister will hold the least responsibility for this , but the Czech Presidency was not at all consensual .
I would firstly mention the controversy about works of art , a controversy which was favourable to artists , but not to the Presidency .
Then there was the domestic political instability , which tarnished the image of the European Union or , in other words , of all of us .
Mr Fischer , it is true that the Czech Republic managed to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon , but this is still missing the signature of President Václav Klaus , and we are all agreed that having a Euro-sceptic president while you are holding the Presidency of the European Union is no help at all .
The Czech President sent out various signals of Euro-scepticism , primarily by refusing to use the EU flag .
However , more important is his failure to sign the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is an act of disrespect towards all of us and towards the people of Europe .
However , the Czech Presidency was particularly wrong on the directive on maternity leave .
I know what I am talking about , because I was the rapporteur for this report .
The Presidency 's involvement in this issue was extremely negative and it was greatly assisted by Mrs Lulling , who boycotted the vote on my report .
The Czech Presidency was against extending the duration of maternity leave to 20 weeks and it was against including paternity leave , which is essential to ensure that family responsibilities are shared between men and women and therefore to promote gender equality .
Prime Minister , men are needed in the home just as much as women are needed in the labour market .
Men have just as much right to see their children develop as women have to enjoy career success .
Prime Minister , please do not devalue the rights of women or their skills .
( GA ) Madam President , an overwhelming number of people voted against the Treaty of Lisbon last year , because it was believed that a better Europe could be achieved : a Europe that is democratic and responsible ; a Europe that promotes the rights of workers , that defends public services and that seeks a positive role in the world .
We are told that the European Council has agreed a package of legally binding guarantees that address the concerns of the Irish people , but what has been published is just a clarification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It does not change in any way the body or the substance .
When we vote on this matter in October , we will be voting on the exact same Treaty that was rejected last year - without any amendment , without any additional matter , without any deletion .
The exact same Treaty of Lisbon that 53 % of the voters rejected .
We need a new Treaty for a new era .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Czech Presidency for its efforts , which can perhaps be interpreted precisely as a parable of the situation in which our institutions currently find themselves .
We all recognise that the European Union is the only possible platform for tackling some of the major challenges we are facing .
No one can think , for instance , that Malta on its own , or Italy with 5 000 km of coastline , can resolve the problems of immigration , just as so many other countries cannot resolve the problems linked to the supply of energy .
However , it is precisely the affairs of the Czech Presidency - namely , contending with major internal difficulties , but also with a different interpretation of Europe - that give us a better understanding of what it is we are being asked to do .
I have not brought any flags with me this morning , but I know this for sure : I distrust obtuse nationalism and I also distrust bureaucratic monsters that can rip the heart out of our political experience and make us forget what we are being asked to achieve .
The truth is that we are paying the price for indecision .
We are paying a tragic price for not having the courage to take certain decisions that , today , are momentous decisions , and this is perhaps also reflected in the fact that we do not have the strength right now to tackle the most immediate circumstances , which are those linked to the start of a very problematic new parliamentary term .
However , I believe that we have a great opportunity .
Some did better than others in these elections , but we all know for certain that we will be unable to rise to any challenges if we do not work together .
I therefore believe that we must assume our responsibilities and give these institutions the strength to be able to reconnect with our citizens , because one thing is certain : what we are paying for most is the fact that we are paying in the first place , because this leads to the estrangement of our citizens , who are distancing themselves from our ideals .
( CS ) Prime Minister , Madam President , Commission President , ladies and gentlemen , we are gathered here in order to evaluate the previous Presidency .
This Presidency had two faces .
Let us not forget either of them , even if there are some things we would perhaps like to forget .
Many people here complain that the Czech Presidency was not active enough in combating the financial crisis .
Others recall the controversial parliamentary speech of President Klaus .
Others yet complain about the tactless description of Barack Obama 's crisis programme as a road to hell .
However , the Czech Presidency was also connected with some definite progress .
Let us recall , for instance , the environmental package and the progress over adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Czech Presidency had two faces and symbolically it had two premiers .
Today the more successful of the two stands before you .
Prime Minister , I would like to thank you and your government for the efforts you have made and I would like to thank the officials at European and Czech institutions for the work they have done .
Ladies and gentlemen , a big hand please for the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic .
Madam President , this Parliament is dominated by a cynical grand coalition between the principal party of European capitalism , the EPP , and the Social Democrats masquerading as a left but in reality implementing the same neo-liberal agenda of forcing working people to pay for the current crisis of international capitalism .
Now this grand coalition wants the Lisbon Treaty forced on the Irish people and the people of Europe because Lisbon represents the neo-liberal agenda - including attacks on workers ' rights - and the enhancement of militarisation and the armaments industry .
The so-called guarantees given to the Irish people change nothing , mean nothing and are irrelevant .
As an Irish Socialist , I challenge this coalition .


I challenge President Buzek , Mr Barroso , Mr Schulz , and Mr Verhofstadt : come to Ireland in September , debate with us in front of audiences of workers why they should support your Lisbon project , which is entirely hostile to their interests .
( GA ) Be prepared for a vigorous campaign against the Treaty of Lisbon in Ireland .
We will be speaking on behalf of the millions of Europeans who did not have a chance to vote against the Treaty of Lisbon , a Treaty that is not for the benefit of the majority of the people of Europe , but for the benefit of bureaucrats , of large corporations and of military industries .
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , during this debate many people have expressed their gratitude to the Czech Presidency for the fact that it has still managed to complete a few projects , in administrative terms , by the end of its term of office .
I ask myself in all seriousness : have we really become so modest in our expectations ?
We are in the business of politics .
What we actually expect , in the greatest economic crisis for decades which is combined with environmental challenges , is a Presidency which shows leadership and vision .
That is what we really expect .
We have seen that the administrative work has been completed for what is still on the table at end of the term of office .
I really would have expected more .
Prime Minister , if you meet with President Klaus this evening , please tell him that had an opportunity during these six months to make the Czech national identity and sovereignty clear to Europe by showing strong leadership .
He did of course promote the importance of national sovereignty here in Parliament .
Unfortunately , he missed the opportunity .
Mr President we have only a minute so I shall dispense with the pleasantries .
I should like to defend your honour against one of my Irish colleagues , Joe Higgins .
I would remind Mr Higgins that you , in your work in the Solidarity movement , defended workers and their rights , and I think the historical facts should be reflected it in this House .
A little bit of controversy is no bad thing but it is quite extraordinary that this morning we have Nigel Farage on the one side and Sinn Féin and Joe Higgins on the other side - the extremes of the right and left -talking against the Lisbon Treaty .
I think that should be a good enough reason for the rest of us to vote ' yes ' to the Lisbon Treaty and for Irish voters , who will be making up their own minds on 2 October , to listen to the voices who are urging them to vote ' no ' and to listen very carefully to judge what they stand for , and then to listen to the voices of reason and reflect on the fact that the European Union has been very good for Ireland and Ireland good for it , and that we will continue to remain at the heart of Europe by supporting this Treaty .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Fischer , Mr Barroso , your Presidency , Mr Fischer , shows , once again , how urgent it is for the European Union to have a stable presidency .
Moreover , this is what the Treaty of Lisbon provides for .
I have found you to be rather quiet , Mr Fischer , and I should like to know your opinion of the programme of the Troika , which your government signed in June 2008 with France and Sweden .
We are also eager to hear about Sweden 's work programme on this subject , and on three issues in particular : the Doha Programme , the Millennium Development Goals and the Union for the Mediterranean .
What is your feeling , Mr Fischer , about this instrument and what is your assessment of the Troika , which is already the first sign of a stable presidency of the European Union ?
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the short , sharp exchange which took place between group leader Mr Farage and President Barroso was extremely enlightening from the perspective of Europe 's future .
It made it glaringly obvious that the ultimate destination of the course being mapped out by the Treaty of Lisbon was the abolition of the nation states , which also explains why President Barroso would have been annoyed at seeing a national flag in this Chamber .
We share , of course , the same common European objective .
But , in doing so , we want to make it clear that , instead of proclaiming the slogan given here , ' United in diversity ' , we want to strive for cooperation in diversity , which means that we are in favour of preserving the nation states .
This is the framework within which we want to work for a single Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to state once again that , under conditions for which neither Prime Minister Topolánek nor Prime Minister Fischer was responsible , the Council Presidency was more successful than it appears to have been , and I would also like to thank Saša Vondra for preparing for this Presidency .
I would like to make one further comment and that is in response to Mr Higgins .
The Treaty of Lisbon contains a horizontal social clause .
It gives us more social rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
If we do not get this Treaty , we will have a Europe with fewer social rights .
I believe that this should be made clear , so that the people of Ireland cannot be told any more lies .
We should tell the truth .
Without the Treaty of Lisbon we are left with the Treaty of Nice and with fewer social rights in Europe .
We should therefore stop this awful campaign and tell the people of Ireland the truth .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to point out that the Czech Presidency has not only achieved more than it has been given credit for , but that it was also very varied .
First-rate officials and outstanding ministers , such as Karel Schwarzenberg , Saša Vondra , Ondřej Liška and others , as well as Prime Minister Fischer have done an excellent job .
I would like to thank them for that .
This country has only one problem and that is President Klaus , who has seriously damaged his country by consciously and deliberately undermining this successful Presidency .
I would like to thank Prime Minister Fischer for the masterful way in which he rejected this , went to the Brussels Summit himself and successfully concluded this Council Presidency .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this time my response really will be very brief .
I would like to thank you for your contributions to the discussion .
They have demonstrated once again the diversity of opinion and breadth of different ideas in Europe ; how difficult and yet how necessary it is to look for some sort of common denominator and common voice .
However , I believe that this diversity is invigorating for our continent and for the process of integration and that it belongs here .
You will doubtless be carrying your positions , your analytical viewpoints and your assessments with you from this place and perhaps there is no scope for me to convince you otherwise , since this is not an academic debate .
Both my government and - let it be said - the previous government really did everything possible to fulfil our programme and our agenda for the Presidency and we did it with great perseverance , regardless of the progress made by the Czech Republic in ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to make that very clear .
As far as the troika is concerned and the work of the troika involving France , the Czech Republic and Sweden , I value this mechanism highly .
We were able to cooperate very closely on the day-to-day agendas .
It is a mechanism which contributes enormously to the continuity and smooth handover of the Presidency and I appreciate it very much .
As far as the ambitions of the Czech Presidency are concerned and the extent to which the Presidency was technocratic , showed leadership , was visionary or whatever - I am sure it began with a vision for the EU and with a programme and also that it succeeded in fulfilling that programme .
It is up to you to judge the extent to which this was achieved .
For my part , however , I remain firm in the belief that this was a Presidency which fulfilled its goals and ambitions , although there will always be some criticisms and some areas where - for whatever reason - we fell short .
Once again , I would like to thank you for the debate and for the critical remarks , and I would like to thank all of you who showed understanding and appreciation , both on a political level and on a personal level . Once again , I wish you every success in your work .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , some concrete questions were raised .
First of all , regarding the reintroduction of visa requirements for nationals of the Czech Republic travelling to Canada , the Commission regrets that Canada has reintroduced this visa requirement .
I discussed this issue with the Canadian Prime Minister in the margins of the last G8 meeting .
I expect this measure to be temporary and I hope that full visa travel between the Czech Republic and Canada will be established soon .
I asked Commissioner Barrot to meet Czech officials to discuss this urgently , and I understand that the first meeting between Commission officials and Czech foreign affairs officials took place in Brussels yesterday .
On that basis , the Commission will examine the situation carefully and will report on this in the visa reciprocity report that will be issued , probably , in September 2009 .
In cooperation with the Czech Government , we will consult the Canadian authorities in order to get more information on the reasons behind their decision and we will make all the necessary efforts to restore visa-free travel .
Concerning the issue of the regulation and supervision of the financial market , which was also raised during the debate , of course there is still an agenda to complete , namely what was adopted at the European Council as a consensus based on the de Larosière report - a report I commissioned from that high-level group - but we also have to take note of the progress that has been made .
The Commission proposals on capital requirements , deposit guarantees , credit-rating agencies and on the Solvency Directive for the insurance sector have all been adopted by the European Parliament and by the Council .
The Commission has presented draft legislation on hedge funds and private equity , on securitisation and remuneration in the banking sector .
It is now for the European Parliament and the Council to adopt them - if they agree - rapidly .
Another point that was mentioned during the debate was the issue of resistance to protectionism .
In fact , it was a very important topic at the 1 March European Council .
During the last half of 2008 there was a dangerous drive for some protectionist internal measures in the European Union .
I think it is fair to say that the Czech Presidency and many Member States made it clear that we cannot accept this kind of fragmentation of our internal market , so the discussion that took place during those months was also a very important development .
Finally , concerning the critics of the parliamentary ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , let me tell you I cannot understand how someone who has been elected to a parliament can call into question the parliamentary ratification of a treaty .
A parliament is the basis of democracy and ratification by parliament is as legitimate as a referendum .
( Applause )
I would like to say once again to the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic : thank you very much for your presidency , for your summary and for your participation in the debate here today .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.35 and resumed at 10.40 )

Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) The world is facing one of the most serious crises of capitalism , with dramatic consequences for workers and people in general .
In the EU , this crisis is the result of neoliberal policies which are still being pursued .
These policies are enshrined in the Treaties and in the so-called ' Lisbon Strategy ' , which the Treaty of Lisbon is trying to institutionalise , with greater depth and scope .
Instead of properly tackling the causes of the crisis , the Council is reiterating the fundamental lines of those policies which caused the crisis , in what constitutes a worrying and irresponsible attempt to continue with these policies despite all the evidence .
As a result , the Council is supporting :
the intention to adopt the Treaty of Lisbon , now by means of deception , which involves passing off exactly the same thing , which has already been rejected by the Irish people , as something different ;
free and unregulated movement of capital and the existence of offshore financial centres ;
liberalisation of the markets , privatisation of public services and growing financialisation of the economy ;
deregulation of labour relations , devaluation of wages , intensification of exploitation and defence of flexicurity ;
the failure to properly tackle unemployment , by persisting in channelling huge sums to support the financial sector , without paying the same attention to the productive sectors .
Presentation of the work programme of the Swedish Presidency ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on presentation of the work programme of the Swedish Presidency .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SV ) Mr President , honourable Members , allow me first to congratulate you on the election of your new president .
I am looking forward to working with Jerzy Buzek during the Swedish Presidency - and of course also in the time thereafter .
It is an honour for me to address the European Parliament as President-in-Office of the European Council .
I know that approaching half of you have been elected to this assembly for the first time .
Collectively , you all give a voice to 500 million Europeans .
There are great expectations of you .
I am addressing you during a challenging period .
Rarely has the EU cooperation faced harsher tests and tests so varied in nature .
In the short term we aim to ensure a smooth transition to a new treaty - the Treaty of Lisbon .
Now and in the slightly longer term , we must continue to manage the economic and financial crisis .
Under the surface is the threat of a growing climate crisis which , in the long term , is the greatest challenge we face .
One thing is clear .
If the Swedish Presidency is to succeed in the many challenges facing it , we must work alongside you - you who work at the heart of European democracy .
We hope for your support and cooperation , and that you are prepared to take on the challenges together with us .
When we talk of the history of the EU , we tend to maintain that the cooperation has created a foundation for peace in a Europe that has so often been characterised by the opposite .
I would like to tell you that my grandfather was a Swedish soldier posted to the Norwegian border during the Second World War - a war in which Sweden was neutral .
The nearest my grandfather got to the war was to occasionally get a glimpse of it - from a safe distance .
For a long time , that was Sweden 's relationship with Europe : observing from a distance .
While Europe was left in ruins after the Second World War , Sweden was untouched .
We were richer economically - but poor in terms of European community .
Twenty years ago the barbed wire between Austria and Hungary was cut .
The Berlin Wall came down , and Europe changed almost overnight .
A number of countries then set out on the journey that resulted in representatives of 27 countries sitting in this room today .
Sweden was one of these countries .
If you are a late starter , you need time to catch up .
In the late 1980s political commitment for Europe began to mature in Sweden .
Slowly the realisation of Sweden 's closeness to and dependence on Europe grew .
Sweden 's foreign minister Carl Bildt played a decisive role in the work on bringing Sweden into the European community - in other words , accepting openness , globalisation and free trade .
He was driven by a firm conviction that Sweden belonged in Europe .
Eighteen years ago we made our application for membership of the European Union .
We had finally matured in our conviction that people 's lives and our future could best be served by cooperation and community with others , that we had something to contribute - and that we had much to learn .
We were no longer afraid of cooperating .
We dared to be part of Europe .
These years from the mid-1980s onwards , which were revolutionary for Sweden , ran in parallel with a deepening of my own political commitment .
I had a strong yearning for Europe , as did many of my generation of Swedish politicians .
I remember how as a young , newly elected member of the Swedish parliament I was invited to visit the European Parliament .
It was a sign of Parliament 's openness and accessibility - despite the fact that at that time Sweden was not a member of the Union .
A few years later , in 1997 , after Sweden had joined the Union , I was involved in putting together the PPE Group 's youth organisation , Youth of EPP , and I myself became its first chairman .
It enabled me to see how European cooperation worked in practice .
Together we sought European solutions to European problems .
We got to know not only each other , but also each other 's history and culture .
It enabled me to get to know the capital cities of Europe - and I can hardly count the number of churches I visited in Europe in the process .
In 20 years Sweden has gone from observing at a distance to being an active part of the European cooperation .
This has in turn had an effect on the Swedish population .
Ten years ago , one in three Swedes thought EU membership was good for the country , but just as many thought the opposite .
Today that has reversed .
Nearly two in three Swedes believe that EU membership is good for Sweden .
In the elections to the European Parliament in June , more that 45 per cent of Swedes turned out to vote .
That is eight per cent more than in 2004 , and it is above the average for Europe .
Today Sweden is a country that appreciates and takes a positive view of EU membership .
We woke up to it a bit late , but we have worked hard to catch up .
That is a victory for all of us who believe in European cooperation .
( Applause )
Mr President , honourable Members , we are facing the question of the fate of our generation - a social problem which , unlike many others , is growing slowly - and only in the wrong direction .
Our planet has a fever .
Its temperature is rising - and it is up to us to react .
The Greenland icecap is shrinking by more than 100 cubic kilometres every year .
The icecap in the Western Antarctic is melting at an increasingly fast rate .
We know that the shrinking Greenland ice alone could result in an increase in sea levels of up to two metres .
The effects will be dramatic .
If the sea level were to rise by just one metre around the world , a hundred million people would be forced to leave their homes in Asia alone .
The most vulnerable are those in Bangladesh , eastern China and Vietnam .
There would also be other serious consequences , however .
The weather will change , with the risk that many species of flora and fauna could become extinct .
This is the case even if we stay within the 2 ° C target set by the UN , which was backed last week both by the G8 and by the Major Economies Forum in L 'Aquila .
Our climate is under threat from both our use of and our dependence on fossil fuels .
That is the bad news .
So what is the good news ?
Although time is short , it is still on our side .
We must act now , however .
We already have everything in place to expand renewable energy and the technology to improve energy efficiency .
According to the International Energy Agency ( IEA ) , more than half of the measures required in order not to exceed the 2 ° C target can be taken using the technology we already have .
Moreover , measures to counter climate change have very useful side effects - effects which in themselves justify the measures .
If we consume less energy , we will save money .
We will improve public finances while at the same time households will have greater resources .
If we invest in renewable energy and energy efficiency , we will improve our energy security .
We will be less dependent on imports from countries that are sometimes both politically and economically unstable .
Our investments in the green economy will create new job opportunities and drive growth in the decades ahead .
Allow me to give a specific example .
In January , many EU countries were affected by the gas crisis in Ukraine .
Last week I spoke to President Yushchenko concerning how we can try to avoid a similar thing happening again .
At the same time , it is important to be able to turn the viewpoint around .
If Ukraine invested in energy efficiency so that the country reached the same level as the Czech Republic or Slovenia , the amount of energy saved would correspond to the entire country 's gas imports for its own use from Russia .
Ukraine could then become completely independent of gas imports from Russia and save a great deal of money besides - simply by improving its own energy efficiency .
This is where we must seek the answers where the climate is concerned .
( Applause )
Twelve years ago a coalition of the willing was formed in Kyoto .
However , voluntary agreements are not enough .
If we are to succeed in getting an international agreement on climate change in place , then the journey from Kyoto to Copenhagen must move from being a coalition of the willing to being everyone 's responsibility .
So how do we get there ?
Europe must act together and collectively .
We must show leadership and keep our promises .
Europe is crucial to getting others to join an international agreement .
All over the world we must set a price on emissions .
We must start using national carbon taxes and emissions trading .
The environmentally friendly alternatives will then emerge .
If the price of using fossil fuels is set without regard to climate impact , global warming will continue .
The alternatives will not emerge .
Measures to increase energy efficiency will not become economically worthwhile .
That is not enough , however .
We need to have a wider answer to the question of ' how ? ' .
It is not enough to limit emissions in a group of countries that voluntarily agree to reductions , but which together account for just 30 per cent of emissions .
Neither is it sufficient to have solutions that are based only on restrictions in the most developed countries .
Even if the so-called Annex I countries were to reduce their emissions to zero , the rapidly growing emissions of the developing countries would still take us above the 2 ° C target .
That is why we must discuss the financing of investments in the developing countries .
We need to ensure rapid technology transfer and we need to make sure that the developing countries also make commitments to check the development for which they are currently heading .
In addition , we will need clear commitments in the medium term for countries outside Europe too .
The responsibility of the few must now become the responsibility of all .
I know that the European Parliament will accept its responsibility .
The Swedish Presidency sees you as our allies .
We now want to write the story of how the climate threat was averted , and we want to write it together with you .
Mr President , honourable Members , the economic and financial crisis spread like wildfire around the world within the space of a few weeks .
Some people had given warnings , but for most people it came as a surprise - particularly its extent and depth .
In a global world , problems also spread quickly to others .
The force of the downturn is such that nobody has a miracle cure for getting out of it quickly .
Coordinated action on the part of the EU is the best tool we have to meet the challenges of the crisis .
Moreover , there is still much that can go wrong .
In the circumstances , the EU has succeeded in showing leadership through these testing times .
We agreed on guarantees and rules of the road for supporting the banks .
We agreed on a common recovery plan to stimulate the economy .
President Sarkozy and the French Presidency played an important part in this work , but I would also assert that the European Parliament was a driving force .
Now we need to devote the autumn to discussing continued measures to take us through the crisis .
The economic situation remains difficult , and public finances are now stretched in all the Member States .
According to the Commission 's forecasts , the deficit within the EU will exceed 80 per cent of GDP next year .
We cannot close our eyes and pretend that it is not a problem .
In the middle of all this we must not forget either that behind these figures are people who are concerned about their jobs and who are wondering how they will manage to pay for their homes and to maintain their standard of living .
It is our task to answer them .
When millions of Europeans lose their jobs and become excluded , our entire welfare comes under threat , and this at a time when our welfare is already under great pressure .
We are living longer , while at the same time we are working less and having fewer children .
If this trend continues , in 50 years ' time there will be twice as many older people as children in Europe .
So what can we do ?
We must restore confidence in the financial markets .
We must quickly get effective supervision in place to prevent similar crises occurring in the future .
The Swedish Presidency will work towards agreement on this in the Council by the end of the year .
We are hoping for your help in achieving this quickly and conclusively .
Our citizens will not accept the repeated use of tax revenues to rescue financial institutions that have acted irresponsibly .
We must rapidly get ourselves out of the growing public deficits through a coordinated exit strategy and a gradual return to the rules of the Stability Pact .
Otherwise , short-term imbalances will be followed by chronic deficits .
Large cuts await us , as are already a reality in parts of the EU ; and we have previous experience of this in Sweden .
Mass unemployment , social unrest and growing tax pressure then await us .
We must ensure a social dimension to European policy that is based on healthy public finances and on getting more people into the labour market .
This is by far the best way to safeguard our welfare system .
I know that this is an important matter not least here in the European Parliament .
It is unsustainable for three out of 10 Europeans of working age to be excluded from the labour market .
Our aim must be an active labour market policy that , together with well-functioning social security systems , is able to manage change effectively .
We must strengthen the individual 's employability and ability to assert him- or herself in the labour market .
In addition , we must activate and reactivate the unemployed .
With more people in work there will be more support available for those who are not .
We must also concentrate on reforms , modernisation and adaptation to a new reality .
The world outside the EU is not standing still .
It is moving forward at a tremendous rate .
That is something we should acknowledge and accept .
A review of the EU 's Lisbon strategy could contribute to a necessary reform agenda .
We will initiate this discussion in the autumn .
In the wake of the economic crisis we can see ideas of increased protectionism .
The WTO confirms that the number of trade-restricting measures has increased considerably in the past three months .
Consequently , I welcome the L 'Aquila agreement on restarting the Doha round - in order to ensure that the countries of the world again take the free trade-friendly path that we know benefits us all in the long run .
The objective must be an EU that comes out of this crisis stronger .
Mr President , honourable Members , when I travel around Sweden and talk about EU cooperation , I get few questions about the institutions of the EU .
The questions instead tend to concern curved cucumbers , snuff and other everyday matters .
Nonetheless , the institutional framework is important because it defines what we can do and in which areas .
That is why the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is so central .
The Treaty will make the EU more democratic , more transparent , more effective and more influential in the international arena .
Most important of all , however , is the fact that having the Treaty of Lisbon in place will close the chapter on an inward-looking phase of EU cooperation .
It is now time for the EU to look outwards and forwards .
The Swedish Presidency is prepared to carry out all the preparatory work to ensure a smooth transition to a new Treaty , but naturally that requires the Treaty to have been ratified by all the Member States .
Let us hope that that becomes a reality in the months ahead .
International criminality is growing ever stronger .
Criminal networks no longer see their activities bounded by national borders .
We can see how the drugs trade and human trafficking are spreading .
This is a threat to our democratic values and a threat to our citizens .
At the same time , the freedom to move freely across borders is fundamental to our community - to study , work and live in another EU country .
New times call for new answers , however .
Consequently , this autumn we will draw up a new programme in this area that we will call the Stockholm Programme .
The Stockholm Programme will sharpen the instruments that create security in the EU and that fight organised crime and terrorism .
At the same time , we will create a better balance between these instruments and the measures that ensure legal certainty and that protect the rights of individuals .
It will also ensure that those seeking asylum in the EU face a common , legally certain system - with greater consistency in the way they are received and the way their case for asylum is examined and greater consistency as regards repatriation policy .
The dream of a future in Europe is a strong one for many people .
At the same time , the population of Europe is getting older and older .
A flexible system for labour immigration could bring together these two realities .
Mr President , honourable Members , just over 50 years ago six countries laid the foundation for European cooperation .
There are now 27 of us .
We have grown in strength and influence , and we have grown in prosperity and diversity .
Europe has been enriched .
As a result , we are also better equipped both to exploit the opportunities presented by globalisation and to meet its challenges .
Together we are strong .
We talk of membership ' negotiations ' .
In the final event , however , membership is about sharing common values and following common rules .
This is currently being pondered on by those that remain outside - from Reykjavik to Ankara via the western Balkans .
The two leaders on Cyprus are facing a historical opportunity to agree a solution that will reunite the island that has been divided for far too long .
For those inside , there is a temptation to allow the membership process to become an opportunity to resolve long drawn out disputes .
In such cases we must find solutions that benefit both sides and open up the way ahead .
Otherwise we jeopardise our progress towards our aim of continued European integration .
The Swedish Presidency will work to advance the enlargement process in accordance with the commitments made by the EU , and strictly on the basis of the applicable criteria .
We will act as an ' honest broker ' .
Mr President , honourable Members , with strength and influence comes an international responsibility that we are still striving to shoulder .
It is accompanied by a duty to use this responsibility in everyone 's best interest .
The EU must work for peace , freedom , democracy and human rights .
We have a responsibility to support the poorest and most vulnerable countries of the world , a responsibility to live up to the UN 's Millennium Development Goals .
We also have a responsibility to support the work of the UN in other areas , to work together with our strategic partners , to become involved in the world 's crisis hotspots - whether it is the peace process in the Middle East , Iran , Afghanistan , Pakistan , North Korea or the great challenges on the African continent .
However , we also have a responsibility for regional initiatives such as the Mediterranean Union and the eastern partnership that are creating stability and cooperation between neighbouring countries with different circumstances .
I am particularly grateful for the European Parliament 's driving role where the Baltic Sea cooperation is concerned .
Parliament presented a draft strategy for the region back in 2005 .
We now hope that this initiative can be crowned with the adoption of a Baltic Sea Strategy at the European Council meeting in October .
The conflicts in the Balkans in the 1990s became the starting point for the EU 's involvement as crisis manager - an involvement that is now continually growing .
Today the EU is involved in 10 or so crisis initiatives around the world .
These days the world 's problems come knocking on the EU 's door .
All around our world - and not least in the areas closest to us - many people 's hope for their own development is linked to our cooperation .
Let us together meet their expectations .
( Applause )
Mr President , honourable Members , as a result of European cooperation , today our continent lives in peace and prosperity , in freedom and stability .
We have open borders and a social model that combines a market economy with consideration for each other .
This is our shared Europe .
Our citizens also want to know , however , that Europe is borne by ideas for the future and that our cooperation not only has a historical purpose but is also forward-looking .
That is why we , as their elected representatives , have a responsibility to say what we want to do with Europe .
Let me tell you how I see the Europe of the future .
I want to see a Europe that acts forcefully for democracy , peace , freedom and human rights in the international arena and which dares to act on the foreign policy stage .
For there are those among us with experience of what it is like to live without democracy and freedom , which gives us the credibility to act .
I want to see a Europe that takes the lead in the fight against climate threats , which resists the temptation to compete on the basis of an industry that does not pay for the emissions that are destroying our climate and which provides incentives that make green technology worthwhile , so that our children and our children 's children get to experience nature as we know it .
I want to see a Europe that takes responsibility for the economy .
' Lending for spending ' cannot be the only motto .
Neither can it be the case that ' profits are private and losses national ' .
Let us build up our public finances again , regulate sound financial markets , and secure the economic reforms that we need for growth and for industry that will continue to be competitive in the future .
I want to see a Europe that develops its social model further , a Europe that combines a well-functioning welfare system with growth - with social cohesion , a Europe that through work , enterprise and healthy public finances creates room to maintain and develop our welfare models , in the best interests of all our citizens .
I want to see a Europe that does not allow itself to be lured by the short-term crusades of protectionism , a Europe that safeguards the internal market that formed the basis of our EU cooperation and that allows goods and services to flow freely across our borders , for the benefit of ourselves and of the rest of the world .
I want to see a Europe that is humbled by inequalities , that is open to the arguments of others and that has a strong will to find compromises , all to serve the common interest .
Such a Europe will be strong whatever the times .
( Applause )
Mr President , honourable Members , it is an honour for me to stand here with you and represent European democracy .
Many people have said to me that this will be the most difficult presidency for many years .
There are many challenges , and we must prepare for the unexpected .
Many ask whether a country the size of Sweden can shoulder this responsibility .
Not alone - but together we can face these challenges .
Let us do so with vision and drive , with initiative and courage .
Europe needs it .
The people of Europe need it .
The European project is about the dream of solving people 's problems together .
This dream makes Europe strong .
This year , 2009 , is a fateful year for European cooperation .
We have the chance to take the next step .
The Swedish Presidency is ready to take on the challenge .
Let us take it on together !
( Loud applause )
President of the Commission . - Mr President , these are no ordinary times and this will be no ordinary presidency .
In addition to the usual legislative work , the Swedish Presidency will have other kinds of highly political challenges to deal with , and no one better to tackle these challenges than Prime Minister Reinfeldt and the Swedish Presidency team .
Today I want to highlight two of the biggest policy challenges facing the European Union in the next six months : dealing with the economic crisis and negotiating an ambitious international agreement on climate change in Copenhagen .
The worst financial and economic crisis in living memory continues to have devastating effects within our communities and families , with unemployment in particular continuing to rise .
Getting the economy back on track remains the top priority .
The European Union 's collective action has led to an unprecedented fiscal effort that is producing concrete results .
We have also shown solidarity amongst Member States , for instance by doubling the ceiling for balance of payments support for non-eurozone Member States to EUR 50 billion .
We now need to fully implement the recovery package in all its aspects and make sure it translates into the creation of jobs and the promotion of economic activity on the ground .
I believe it is essential to prioritise measures that limit unemployment and get people back to work .
Here we can build on the results of the employment summit held in May as part of a Commission initiative with the Czech , Swedish and Spanish Presidencies .
We need to put into practice the shared commitment to youth and to employment .
Of course , responsibility for labour market policies lies with Member States , but we can and should use existing European instruments to help Member States keep people in employment and train them for the jobs of the future .
That is why the European Commission is about to make a proposal to simplify Structural Fund procedures and waive the need for national cofinancing from the European Social Fund for 2009 and 2010 .
We will also redeploy resources in order to fund a new microcredit facility for employment and social inclusion .
I hope this Parliament will support these proposals .
The Commission proposals building on the de Larosière report I commissioned last October will form the basis for strengthened financial market supervision and regulation .
With the proposals already made - many of them already approved by this Parliament and by the Council , some still in our decision-making process - we are indeed taking the lead globally in the reform of the financial international system .
We will continue to do so , I am sure , at the G20 in Pittsburgh in September .
Moving all these dossiers forward over the next six months is essential to build a new economy , because - let us make no mistake - the post-crisis economy cannot and will not be the same as the pre-crisis economy .
We need to rebuild our economic model and put the values back at the heart of our social market economy , where they belong .
We need to build an economy and a society based on opportunity , responsibility and solidarity , an economy which will have to reinvent new sources of growth because we cannot rely for ever on monetary and fiscal stimulus ; a Europe of open and well-performing markets ; a Europe of smart , green growth ; a Europe with more effective regulation and supervision of financial markets ; a Europe that deepens its single market and uses its potential to the full ; a Europe that resists the trends for fragmentation or protectionism .
Concerning climate change , Europe is already the first region in the world to implement far-reaching , legally binding climate and energy targets .
I am proud of the way the Commission worked with the last Parliament and the Council to put this legislation in place , and I want to work closely with you and the Presidency in the run-up to Copenhagen .
Our leadership role was very much appreciated in the meetings last week in L 'Aquila in the G8 , and in the Major Economies Forum .
You will have heard about the progress made at these meetings .
For the first time , all participants committed to capping the temperature increase at 2 ° C to respect climate science .
This is certainly a welcome step forward , but we should not delude ourselves : our ambition and our commitment are not yet matched by others .
Europe is far ahead of the curve in relation to the rest of the world and , frankly , 145 days from Copenhagen , that worries me .
In the coming weeks we will step up our work with international partners to secure clear commitments in Copenhagen .
We also need to make progress on the necessary means to support developing countries and boost technology transfer .
In September the Commission will put its proposals for financing on the table so that we can build a European consensus and negotiate with others .
The climate change agenda is , of course , closely linked with another priority : energy security .
Today , the Commission will adopt proposals to strengthen our rules governing the security of gas supply and reinforcing solidarity between Member States , which I trust the Swedish Presidency will take forward with your support .
These are the headline priorities - and rightly so .
But there is plenty of other important work to be done over the next six months .
Let me just flag the Stockholm programme , where the Commission has recently tabled an ambitious vision putting the citizen at the heart of our justice , freedom and security policy , balancing security with the protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights .
For most of this decade the European Union has been engaged in internal institutional debates .
Changes to our governing Treaty are absolutely necessary to equip the enlarged European Union to work democratically and effectively .
I hope that we will see the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in the coming months so that we can put its provisions to work and so that we can move on with the policy agenda I have just outlined .
It is important to discuss procedure , but I believe it is even more important to discuss substance .
The Swedish Presidency , as well as the next Spanish Presidency , will have to oversee - hopefully - a complex transition to the new Treaty in which the Commission and Parliament will have to play their full part .
The European Union has constantly reinvented itself , from the initial vocation of healing a war-torn continent to the building of the internal market and then on to the reunification of Europe .
During these last 50 years Europe has consistently exceeded expectations , confounding doubts .
I am sure that we will also rise to the new challenge we face : laying the foundations for the smart , green economy of the future .
We will succeed if we respect the key lesson from half a century of European integration : the European Union advances when all its parts cooperate in a spirit of openness , trust and partnership .
The Swedish Presidency programme recognises this ; the European Commission stands ready to play its part and so , I am sure , does this Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , I do not usually address you , but for the first time today , I am going to devote one minute to you .
Firstly , Mr Buzek , I salute you as a man of resistance and as one of the founders of Solidarność , as the man from Silesia who never forgot his roots , his history or his values .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is also proud to have convinced the vast majority of MEPs from all political backgrounds - Mr Schulz included - to make you the spokesman for 500 million citizens .
Yes , Mr President , your election is the symbol of this open Europe , of this tolerant Europe , of this political Europe championed by the PPE Group and by the majority of our fellow Members here present .
President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , what we expect of you is that you will make action the dominant theme of the Swedish Presidency over the next six months - in other words , faced with the twin challenge of the economy and climate change , we are saying that we need to do more , and faster , in order to come out of the crisis , by bringing our social market economy model fully into operation .
I firmly believe that it is the vitality of the economy and that alone that will enable us to conduct the true social policy that we need .
If we want a recovery and if we want it to come from Europe and not from Asia , as is anticipated , then we absolutely must speed things up today .
When the crisis ends , the winners will be those who gambled on innovation , on training - in short , on action .
In this regard , the PPE Group proposes , among other things , to increase the support given to small and medium-sized enterprises , which are key to maintaining and creating jobs .
Furthermore , the economic crisis - I would insist on this point - requires not a national response but a European response .
Moreover , our fellow citizens are convinced of this , one need only look at the opinion polls in the various countries : more than 66 % of Germans and more than 70 % of Europeans are convinced .

To do more , and faster , Mr Reinfeldt , Mr Barroso , that is also what the PPE Group expects of you where the fight against global warming is concerned .
It is the responsibility of Europe , under your leadership , to lead the world in this action , which everyone here recognises as being urgent and a priority .
And what better opportunity to act and to speed things up than the climate-change conference to be held in December in Copenhagen , in other words , on our own territory !
On the issue of climate change , Europe has proved beyond any shadow of a doubt that it can take action when it wants to .
The task now is to capitalise on this , to make the other world powers join us .
I am of course thinking of the United States , which must turn its words into deeds , but I am also thinking of the emerging countries , be it China , India or Brazil , which can no longer ignore the fact that they are heavily responsible for global warming .
We shall therefore judge the Swedish Presidency on the ways in which it copes with the crisis and in the light of its results regarding the environment .
I shall conclude by saying that , in order to act strongly on these two fronts , Europe must be equipped with appropriate institutions .
The last year has shown us that , with the same treaty and with the same outdated principle of unanimity , it was possible to make progress with Europe but that it was also possible to reach a deadlock .
It is a question of political will , Mr Reinfeldt , Mr Barroso .
Speed things up : that is what the PPE Group is asking you to do over the next six months , and we have faith in the Swedish Presidency .
Speed things up : that is what Europeans asked for in electing this Parliament and that is what we must give them if , in five years ' time , we wish to see more of them turn out to vote .
( Applause )
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister Reinfeldt , ladies and gentlemen , the Swedish Presidency comes at a time of new beginnings for the institutions .
It is not only this Parliament that is starting anew ; Europe is in a period of transition between the Treaty of Nice and the Treaty of Lisbon , and - as we all know - it is a time of uncertainty in which we nevertheless need clarity with regard to economic , financial , labour market and climate policy decisions in the European Union and its Member States .
You have talked about this and I agree with much of what you said .
Climate change is , of course , the most important issue and you have given it the right level of priority .
It is , of course , also the case that the jobs crisis requires an immediate and relevant solution .
Therefore , we ask you during your Presidency to urge the Member States to take the investment plans and the economic recovery plans more seriously than they have done so far .
What we need above all is the safeguarding of jobs - now , not next year , as the threat to jobs is present here and now .
Job security is vital for the internal stability of society .
We therefore expect you to give the utmost priority to jobs and job security in whatever form , for example by combining environmental protection and industrial policy , which is a highly intelligent solution .
On the subject of job security , I would like to say this to you , Mr Reinfeldt : what seriously jeopardises jobs in Europe and is an even greater threat to social cohesion is the case law of the European Court of Justice .
As you have just said , you travel a lot in Sweden and in Europe .
So do we and what we hear from our citizens is that they do not want a Europe where companies move from country to country cutting wage levels .
We therefore need initiatives from the European Union .
( Applause )
We need these initiatives as a consequence of the rulings of the European Court of Justice in the Laval , Viking , Rüffert and Luxemburg cases .
These are measures that you - and you in particular , because Sweden is affected by this misguided policy , this misguided case law - need to tackle during your Presidency .
You also need to deal with another institutional issue , namely that of how the next Commission will be appointed .
In this regard , I have to say that to some extent I get the general impression that not only you , but also all of your colleagues in the Council have been affected by the new institutional beginnings and the uncertainty about which Treaty we should actually be using as the basis for our actions , and that no one really knows where we are .
It is a little bit like Astrid Lindgren 's Pippi Longstocking in her Villa Villekulla - I will make the world the way I want it to be .
Wonderful !
If we appoint the President of the Commission on the basis of the Treaty of Nice , we will have 20 commissioners .
In that case , I would like to know which country will have no commissioner .
To this , the Council will naturally say ' no , we certainly do not want to start a bloodbath behind closed doors .
So , we have a wonderful solution - we will nominate the commissioner initially on the basis of the Treaty of Nice .
It will take a couple of months for the Commission to be set up and by then the people of Ireland will have voted and we will have the Treaty of Lisbon .
Then we can vote on everything else on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Great ! '
We are a community based on law - or at least that is what I thought until now - in which the basis is the law in force .
The law in force is the Treaty of Nice .
Incidentally , there is someone who , as guardian of the Treaties , must first of all clarify which legal basis is to be used .
That is the President of the Commission , but I have not heard a word from him on this matter .
I would therefore like to state very clearly what we are expecting . My proposal , Prime Minister , was that you should not take the formalisation decision straight away , but first send your candidate to Parliament so that he can tell us what he wants to do to restore the economy , safeguard jobs , combat climate change , introduce an employment pact , an initiative for a public services directive and an initiative to improve the Posting of Workers Directive and establish a guarantee between the Commission and Parliament regarding an evaluation of the social consequences of the Commission initiatives .
We could have already discussed everything with the candidate weeks ago to see whether he would receive a majority vote in this House on the basis of his proposals .
Then you could have made a decision regarding formalisation .
However , you took a different route .
You said ' no we will take the formalisation decision first and then send the candidate ' .
I fear that this was another error and I also fear that this candidate , unless he makes a considerable effort , will not receive a majority vote in this House .
( Applause )
I would like to make this very clear so that what will probably be the biggest contentious issue during your Presidency is perfectly clear between us right from the start .
We expect institutional clarity , we expect socio-political commitment , and I believe that we will be with you with regard to climate policy .
Mr President , just for you I have kept to my speaking time exactly .
You will see that in a few seconds my six minutes will be up .
You will not need to reprimand me - I knew that that was what you intended to do and I did not want to give you that pleasure .
( Applause )

Mr President , firstly I should like to say to Mr Reinfeldt that our Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will fully support the priorities of the Swedish Presidency , that is to say , the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , which we naturally expect to be implemented quickly and in full ; the preparation for the climate-change summit in Copenhagen , which has already been mentioned and which is a priority that we fully support ; and , lastly , the Stockholm Agenda .
Furthermore , and this is the subject of my speech , Mr Reinfeldt , I should like to refer to an issue that is addressed in every speech in this House - the fight against the economic and financial crisis - in order to say to you that you are assuming the leadership of the European Council at a very precise moment in time .
It is a good thing that it is Sweden that is chairing the Council because you have specific experience in this area .
In the 1990s Sweden experienced exactly the same economic crisis that we are experiencing now throughout Europe and the world .
You have experienced a crisis in the real estate sector .
In the 1990s you also experienced a financial crisis , and you resolved all these problems by directly tackling the problems in the financial sector .
My message to you is that you must act in exactly the same way today at European level because that is what we are lacking .
We are trying to combat the economic and financial crises using 27 different approaches in the various countries , and that will never work .
We expect you , Mr Reinfeldt , to use the experience you gained in Sweden , because it was a success , unlike in Japan , which has been economically stagnant for a long time .
Sweden came out of the crisis because you immediately tackled the problems in the financial sector , something which is not being done for the time being in Europe .
The thinking is that the United Kingdom can nationalise the banks while others - France , in particular - can recapitalise them .
In Germany , work is under way to create ' bad banks ' ; in the Benelux countries a bit of everything is being done at the same time .
The result is that there is no single approach .
The United States is stabilising its banks and eliminating the toxic products while we continue to have problems .
My request to you , therefore , is to take advantage of your experience in order to present a single rescue plan for Europe 's financial sector , which will form the basis of the economic recovery .
Without it , there will never be an economic recovery ; the banks will not starting lending money again , and so on .
This must be your absolute priority .
The second point is that we hope that you , together with the Commission , can also present a new recovery plan , because 27 different recovery plans will not produce the necessary results in the coming years .
It is absolutely essential that the Council and the Commission together take the lead in this .
I know there are now 27 recovery plans at national level , but we see a number of protectionist measures inside those national plans .
It is your responsibility , Mr Reinfeldt , to say to your colleagues that a better way to deal with this is , together with the Commission , to devise one single recovery plan and to invest in sustainable energy and in the new economy .
I think that , with your experience in Sweden during the 1990s , you are the right man in the right place to do what we have not done so far : devise a single strategy in the European Union to combat this economic and financial crisis .
( Applause )


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Reinfeldt , Mr Barroso , my fellow Member Mr Schulz said everything there is to say about the institutional concerns that my group has had for a long time with regard to the forthcoming election of the President of the Commission .
We agree with what he said .
We want the whole of the Commission and all of the top-level staff of the European Union to be elected according to the conditions of the Treaty of Lisbon and we will not give an inch on that .
However , Mr Barroso , I would like to take the opportunity to explain the political reasons behind my group 's doubts and its belief that you are not capable from a political point of view of doing what we feel to be necessary in the current situation in Europe .
Take , for example , the frequently mentioned need for the new regulation of financial markets .
We have had G8 summits , G20 summits , extended G8 summits , European summits .
How far have we come ?
If we look at the picture today and draw a comparison with the game of Monopoly that we are all familiar with , the banks have been re-established , they have passed ' go ' and did not go to jail , they have taken hundreds of millions with public approval and then simply started the game again .
I do not think that people are being doom-mongers when they say that as a result of this the next crash is inevitable .
Mr Barroso , what happened to your forceful intervention ?
Where are your genuine results ?
We have seen no evidence of them .
( Applause )
As regards climate policy , you know that during our entire European campaign we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have advocated the Green New Deal .
We are absolutely convinced that it is utterly wrong to do what you have repeatedly done in the last five years , Mr Barroso , and that is to play economic strategies off against environmental and climate strategies .
We believe this to be very much rooted in the past and it must stop .
We need to think about economic development in a sustainable way and we must bring climate protection targets into line with environmental targets .
That will benefit the economy and will create hundreds of thousands or even millions of jobs .
Mr Piebalgs has demonstrated once again that this is the case in the energy sector in his study over recent months .
In our experience , Mr Barroso , you are not in a position to set forth this Green New Deal .
In summary , I can only say that , with regard to climate protection , Europeans have been conspicuous on the international stage in recent months as a result of their new-found hesitation - how far do we really want to go with the reduction targets ? - and new tight-fistedness , and that , unfortunately , also applies to Sweden .
The establishment of the International Climate Protection Fund for the poorer countries has gone extremely badly .
The fact that it is still a secret that the Swedes want to take money from the development pots , for example , to put into this climate protection pot - that is a zero sum game and , from the point of view of the poorer countries , it is totally unacceptable .
We must quickly put an end to this new tight-fistedness and new hesitancy in the European Union .
( Applause )
Finally , Mr Reinfeldt , I can say something positive .
We are prepared to tussle with you over the new definition of the Lisbon strategy and to work with you on this .
You have said you will do this by the end of the year .
We will help you in this .
We will also support you if you wish to do more with regard to Eastern Europe and Russia , but the focus on a genuine climate policy must not merely be a matter of headlines , it must also be corrected in the small print of the Swedish programme .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like first of all to offer my sincere congratulations on yesterday 's election , the election of a splendid president - the new head of Parliament .
I do this , as you very well know , Mr President , as a Polish politician , but also as a person .
You know that it was thanks to you that I met my wife , and that is still the greatest achievement of my life .
Congratulations , and I wish you much success in your work .
The European Conservatives and Reformists Group listened carefully to your speech , Prime Minister , and I am glad to be able to say that we share your views on very many matters .
I consider your announcement of active measures to tackle the crisis to be especially important .
The economic crisis , which is the worst crisis our civilisation has experienced since the 1930s , is causing unjustified anxiety throughout Europe - in poorer countries and in richer , in countries of the north and of the south .
I am glad that you have announced an active fight against this crisis , and I am glad that you can see priorities which we also share - more freedom for the market , less regulation , more economic freedom , greater openness to free trade .
These are a recipe for the economic growth of our continent , of our European Union .
Prime Minister , we also share your conviction that dealing with climate change is an important matter .
I know that you have bold views on this subject , and I want to encourage you to be bold in this area .
The issue of climate change shows very clearly that today we live not only in a single Europe , but in a single world , where the threats are shared by all and must be dealt with effectively .
I am very glad that you referred to the fight against crime as a serious problem of our European Union .
I am convinced that , because Sweden is already a powerful force in the area of crime novels , we will also achieve success under your leadership in the area of the fight against crime .
It is extremely important , and I am glad that both you and your Minister for Foreign Affairs have mentioned recently that you want to look carefully at our neighbours and take what I hope will be a sympathetic view of the idea of enlargement of the EU .
We must not forget that across the eastern borders of the EU there are countries which are entitled to be part of the area of democracy and affluence which we are in today .
I regret to say that there is just one point on which my group is not in agreement with you .
This is the question of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
You spoke about democracy in the context of the Treaty of Lisbon - and you were right to do so .
It should be remembered that it was in a democratic referendum that the people of Ireland rejected the Treaty of Lisbon .
Since we have respect for democracy , we should respect the vote of the Irish people .
Prime Minister , I hope that your priorities , which in very large measure are shared by the ECR Group , will prove to be an opportunity which enables you to lead the European Union effectively and to deal effectively with the crisis , which is today our greatest problem .
( Applause )

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister Reinfeldt , ladies and gentlemen , the Swedish Presidency has presented an ambitious work programme which includes a proposal for more transparency .
Transparency is needed in particular when combating the crisis we are currently experiencing .
Many people believe that the crisis has been caused far away in the US and by some bankers who are said to be greedy .
The heads of government in the EU Member States seem not to have had anything to do with the crisis .
They are innocent parties .
Those who bask in innocence do nothing to combat the crisis .
I believe that transparency should also include talking about the failures of policy that contributed to the crisis and also of course about the bankers .
Transparency is in vogue in casino capitalism .
We are keen to see what happens with the Baltic Sea Strategy and I would be behind the President-in-Office of the Council if he were to focus on dialogue with Russia .
We would also like the European Union to support the pledges of President Obama and President Medvedev with regard to the dismantling of nuclear weapons .
The European Union ought to take advantage of this new opportunity for disarmament .
The Swedish Presidency wants to further harmonise asylum law and make the European Union more attractive to migrant workers .
Asylum policy is to be closely linked to development policy .
This is a good thing in our view , but at the rigorously guarded external borders of the European Union , particularly in the Mediterranean , thousands of people die every year when seeking sanctuary from persecution , poverty , natural disasters and wars .
Despite costly border control , monitoring and data acquisition systems to prevent illegal migration , the Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left calls for the humane treatment of refugees and migrants and a change in economic and trade policy to effectively combat the things that cause people to become refugees in the first place .
The Swedish Presidency is focussing on more inclusive labour markets to create full employment and therefore wants to initiate labour market reforms and gender equality measures .
We too are in favour of a strategy for good work practices which will support wage increases and introduce a statutory minimum wage across the board in all 27 countries .
We want to see the EU agree on targets for the minimum wage set at a level of at least 60 % of the national average wage in order to prevent people falling into poverty despite having gainful employment .
I particularly welcome what you said about Cyprus and I wish you every success in implementing your ambitious climate targets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I appreciated the fact that the Swedish Presidency emphasised issues that concern our fellow citizens , our electorate , namely the environment and climate change , the financial crisis , the safeguarding of jobs and the fight against crime , because , in order to do a good job , we need to be in harmony with those who voted for us .
We are no better or worse than our electorate , but I do believe that it is important to act in accordance with what they are asking of us , and these points seem to me to be along the lines that I mentioned .
Moving on , we must , of course , turn the proposals into concrete action , and here we will come up against one another above all in the codecision procedure , since we , Parliament , and you , the Council , will lay down those rules that will govern the lives , affairs and interests of our electorate , and I believe that that is our fundamental task as legislators .
We must overcome the crisis of confidence that undoubtedly exists .
The poor turnout at the elections of this Parliament is a symptom of this , and to overcome it , we must act fully in accordance with the will of our electorate .
We must also perhaps avoid making comparisons : your country borders Norway ; I live near Switzerland .
They are outside the European Union , but they live well all the same ; they have the same problems , but they are no worse off than us , and here it is important to see and to demonstrate that it is worth having the European Union .
I believe that this is a great challenge but I also believe that , with everyone 's help , we can show that Europe should not be suffered , but should be an opportunity for those who live there and are citizens of it .
( NL ) The Dutch Party for Freedom has come into this Parliament in order to stand up for Dutch citizens and in order to wrest back the money that has been overpaid by the Netherlands to this cash-guzzling and bureaucratic Europe .
The Party for Freedom was elected to this Parliament by Dutch voters to make it clear that Dutch citizens believe that the enlargement of the European Union has already gone far too far .
Mr President , this Parliament spends its time regulating matters that should be determined in the Member States themselves .
As far as our party is concerned , the European Union should only be involved in matters relating to economic and monetary cooperation .
It is with Dutch interests to the fore that we will keep our eyes on the Swedish Presidency , as it is doing nothing for Dutch citizens .
You want to just press ahead with the European Constitution , which Dutch voters rejected and which is 99 % identical to the Treaty of Lisbon .
You also fail to do anything about the immensely costly monthly relocation from Brussels to Strasbourg .
What is more , you have not even put the matter on the agenda .
Why not ?
It costs thousands of millions of euros and the only people who like the idea are perhaps those at Ikea , who get the chance to sell moving boxes and extra cupboards .
We also want to see the negotiations with Turkey brought to an immediate end .
Turkey is an Islamic country and the Islamic ideology is completely at odds with our Western culture .
Turkey is , furthermore , absolutely not a European country , but an Asian one , while Turkish membership would cost Dutch citizens sacks full of money yet again .
Turkey can be a good neighbour , but it does not belong within the European family .
The Party for Freedom stands for a Europe of sovereign states , but further building work towards a federal superstate where the Member States get to determine less and less of their own affairs is taking place under the Swedish Presidency .
We therefore hope that the people of Ireland will have the courage to vote ' no ' , once again , to the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Irish population has the opportunity , here , to act as the voice of the people of Europe , and I would like to ask you , on behalf of the Party for Freedom , what conclusions the Swedish Presidency will draw from the result of the Irish referendum .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SV ) Mr President , allow me first to congratulate you all collectively on having been elected as group leaders .
I know that a number of you were elected with very strong support .
I know , for example , that Martin Schulz was re-elected with very strong support in the social democrat group .
It is important to be able to represent your respective groups strongly .
I very much welcomed the dialogue that we have had and the consultations which I was asked to introduce by the European Council during the month of June .
This was done by EU Minister Cecilia Malmström .
I also did it myself , both through telephone contacts and at the meeting that we had on a boat in the archipelago as we moved through the waters of Stockholm , sitting and discussing the situation that had arisen .
I had been asked to investigate the possibility of electing José Manuel Barroso , appointed by the European Council , as president of the Commission for a second period of office .
A number of the matters that you touched upon are the main issues that I want to work on during the Swedish Presidency .
Let me say that we are putting jobs first .
We want to see a Europe in which more people have work .
The discussion must start from how we achieve this .
Just as Joseph Daul pointed out , I believe it is a matter of innovation and training ; in other words , the things that basically drive enterprise and make people employable .
I believe that Martin Schulz is right that we must be wary of ending up a Europe in which we compete on the basis of poor terms .
We are having this discussion in Sweden , and it is also taking place around Europe .
Having low or no pay is not a good starting point from which to try to face the competition ; rather , it is only with good conditions that we can face the competition of the future .
Allow me to mention some other things that I believe are very important for steering Europe through the crisis .
I have seen how the Commission - and I myself think this is important - has managed to defend the principle of the internal market at a time when many are attempting to compromise it and bring in protectionism .
It is very easy to listen to those who are saying ' Why did you not save the jobs in this particular country ? ' without seeing the consequences of this if everyone acted in this way .
If we did , we would basically extinguish free trade and the opportunity for cross-border trade .
That which has basically created wealth and prosperity would very quickly be lost had we not resisted the call for protectionism .
I believe that safeguarding the internal market and free movement is an important starting point for securing jobs .
I also have great faith in other things mentioned by some of you , such as investing in human skills and ensuring mobility in the labour market .
I believe , for example , that one way to manage this is precisely this free movement - including across borders .
Just as Martin Schultz , Rebecca Harms and Joseph Daul mentioned , I believe that this is also an opportunity to combat this with a green trend , to bring about the low emission economies that we are talking about all over the world as another way of getting out of the crisis .
How we manage financing and how we invest are important .
I also want to say - I agree with Guy Verhofstadt on this point - that the Swedish experience of crisis management in the 1990s was that it can only be done by keeping a grip on public finances .
I have learnt that when deficits are large and rationalisation is called for , it is people with small margins and those that are most dependent on welfare institutions who are left behind .
Consequently , a policy that is prudent with public finances is a good policy for people who are poor or living on small margins .
Where the climate issue is concerned - which will be the main issue we work on ahead of the Copenhagen summit - I want to say that it is true that there is still a lot to do .
Time is short .
I want to tell Rebecca Harms that it is unusual for us in Sweden to be criticised for our aid commitments .
The average spent in Europe on such commitments is 0.4 per cent of gross domestic product .
Sweden is fairly unique in that one per cent of our gross domestic product goes to development aid .
For me , these matters are related .
We carried out our own review under the leadership of our aid minister within the framework of the UN 's initiatives .
During this we analysed precisely how we need to bear climate change in mind in our development work .
You cannot carry on development work without at the same time looking at climate change and how it is already affecting poor parts of the earth .
Consequently , we cannot separate these issues and say that this is development policy and that is climate policy - rather they are related and have to work together .
Where the Treaty is concerned , I would like to say to Martin Schulz that my role is to ensure that there is effective European leadership in a difficult period .
We must be able to give answers to the citizens who want to see us take action to combat the financial crisis and on climate issues .
We are all politically active and know that in the political domain , when we are inward-looking and discuss names and leadership our citizens perceive this as us having turned our backs on them .
We are looking inwards .
Therefore I will do what I can in my role .
I have been tasked by the European Council with ensuring that our cooperation and our respect for the integrity of the European Parliament are united by clarity - whether under the Treaty of Nice or the Treaty of Lisbon - in our nomination of a candidate to the post of Commission President .
Where José Manuel Barroso is concerned , it is important to state that he was unanimously supported in the European Council , that he was well known as a candidate and had already been introduced to the electorate prior to the election .
Naturally , that made it easier for me to act - naturally respecting the fact that the European Parliament will be given opportunity , when you feel ready to make a decision , to say yes or no to the candidate nominated by the European Council .
Meanwhile there is time for discussions , which I know José Manuel Barroso has also stated , and to have this type of dialogue concerning how European policy is to develop in the years ahead .
I hope that this can now be agreed in accordance with the agreement that has been made .
It is what the electorate of Europe now expects , and will enable us to act together with strength .
Mr President , some important questions have been asked ; I shall try to answer them very briefly .
Firstly , Mr Schulz 's important question regarding the treaties .
He referred , in particular , to the Commission 's role as guardian of the treaties .
We in the Commission believe that there should be respect for the treaties in force .
The treaty in force is the Treaty of Nice .
All of you who are sitting here were elected under the Treaty of Nice .
Obviously , if the President of the Commission is elected now , he will be elected as you were , under the Treaty of Nice .
That being said , we are going to have - I hope - the Treaty of Lisbon .
The necessary adjustments will have to be made as regards the composition of Parliament , which will no longer be the same with the Treaty of Lisbon , since there will be certain changes , and the same will have to be done for the Commission .
Nonetheless , the European Council adhered to every aspect of your report - the Dehaene report - which was adopted by an overwhelming majority .
On the subject of the European Council , before formalising its decision , it carried out consultations , which also took into account - and this is a real first - the result of the European elections , not to mention the fact that there had been a candidate supported by a political force .
The task now is to gain the approval of the European Parliament .
I should like to repeat today what I have already said in a letter sent to the President of the European Parliament : I am ready to discuss the content of the guidelines for the next Commission with any political group that wishes to discuss them .
In any case , that is my position as regards institutional matters .
On a political level , I should like to stress a very important point . I believe that it is important to link the election of the President of the Commission to the democratic election that has taken place , your election .
You have been elected by virtue of the Treaty of Nice , and it is my view that the President of the Commission should also have this legitimacy , which should in a way result from this democratic election .
Furthermore , in view of the economic and financial crisis - and I believe that those who are in favour of a strong Europe and who want a strong Commission will no doubt agree - the matter of Presidency of the Commission should not be left unresolved now pending the final ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , which we all want - at least the majority of us do - when we do not know when that treaty will come into force .
Leaving the European Commission and its Presidency in a state of suspense when there is an economic crisis , a financial crisis and a social crisis , and when we have very important negotiations ahead of us in Copenhagen , does not seem very wise to me .
Be that as it may , it is up to the European Parliament to decide , and I am ready to enter into a democratic debate as , in fact , I did five years ago .
On the second question about finance and the economy and what Mr Verhofstadt said : we can all have more ambition , and on that matter let me tell you that I share your ambition .
But we cannot say that we did not adopt a European economic recovery plan , and that was the maximum that our Member States accepted .
The European Commission proposed more , but that was what our Member States accepted .
I want to draw your attention to the fact that some Member States - no less influential at the beginning of this crisis - suggested not to have a coordination plan .
Some others suggested a fiscal stimulus of 1 % , and the European Commission came immediately to the proposal of 1.5 % , and in fact the automatic stabilisers were around 5 % .
Apart from that , we took those important decisions in terms of balance-of-payment support to some non-euro-area members and also some initiatives at global level .
So you may count on the Commission to do everything we can do to reinforce the European level and a common approach , let us have no ambiguity about it .
But , also , let us be honest with ourselves : we are not the United States of America - we are not an integrated nation state - so of course we have different situations .
You cannot ask Germany and Latvia to do the same thing .
We have countries in Europe that are under balance-of-payment support , so of course we cannot have a one-size-fits-all approach .
We have to have a common approach but with specific national responses , because that is the reality we are facing in European and will face in the near future .
We have mainly national budgets .
So I share your approach to have a more coordinated European plan , namely to get out of this crisis and to build this kind of smart green growth we want ; but at the same time we have to accept that we have 27 national budgets , we have 27 finance ministers , we have 27 national banks apart from our European Central Bank , and it is very important to reinforce the euro and to have economic policies and financial policies that are sustainable .
If not , we will put the euro , one of the great successes of European integration , at risk .
Finally , on the question of climate change , once again we can always have more ambition .
But for me it was very important that Prime Minister Reinfeldt was with me recently in L 'Aquila , when we heard the Secretary-General of the United Nations say : ' You are the locomotive of the world ' .
We can always have more ambition , but the European Union is leading the fight against climate change in the world .
No one is being more ambitious than we are , so of course I would expect at least a word of recognition in terms of the work done by this Commission , together with our Member States , to put forward ambitious proposals .
Let us now try to convince others , because we need others - because the problem of climate change is not just a European problem , it is a problem for our planet .
With your support I believe we can achieve success at the Copenhagen Conference .
( Applause )
( SV ) Mr President , as a Swede it is with pride that I listen to the Swedish Presidency 's priorities and I am also proud to be able to welcome the Prime Minister of Sweden back here again .
The challenges we face are very substantial .
We have 20 years of fantastic , miraculous change in Europe behind us , and as a result we now have one of the early representatives of the Solidarność movement for freedom as president of the European Parliament .
It is ideals such as democracy , freedom , the rule of law and the market economy that have given us 20 years of fantastic development .
We are now living in a time of change with a new treaty , the climate issue which demands a consistent policy capable of global impact , and the economic crisis .
It is therefore important that we have a presidency , but also a parliament , that is capable of ensuring that we get stability as regards public finances , stability as regards the internal market and stability as regards openness to trade and movement across borders that can help to take us out of the crisis .
I would like to take this perspective one step further .
The decisions for which we are now preparing the way through the Swedish Presidency and in this Parliament will also decide the form that Europe and the European Union will take after the crisis - what dynamics we have in the financial markets and what confidence and credibility they enjoy , and what room we have for innovation and enterprise , for investments and new jobs .
If the elections to the European Parliament showed one thing , it is that the citizens of Europe want less bureaucracy and regulation and greater openness - across the borders and out to the world .
It is this openness that will be crucial to Europe 's ability to be a leading force for the values that 20 years ago began to change Europe , and to which we can also contribute out in the world .
( Applause )
( SV ) Mr President , I would first like to thank the Swedish Prime Minister for his presentation of what he and his government want to do in the coming six months .
We know that we are in a tough starting position ; the crisis is deep .
It is about jobs , it is about dramatically growing chasms , it is about a generation of young people who are going straight into unemployment and of course it is about the environmental and climate crisis .
This has also been described by Prime Minister Reinfeldt , but it is the conclusions that are surprising .
What has been highlighted as the central issue for the Swedish Presidency is not jobs or investments , but rather the Member States ' ability to maintain budgetary discipline .
As we approach 27 million unemployed in the EU , the clearest message from the Swedish Presidency is thus : budgetary discipline .
This is not only wrong , but also worrying .
In this area Mr Reinfeldt 's party - contrary to what has been said here earlier - comes with some hefty historical domestic policy baggage .
The last conservative Swedish Government led Sweden into economic disintegration , and it was a social democratic government that had to devote 10 years to sorting out our public finances .
However , we cannot allow old shortcomings in domestic policy to set the agenda for the whole of the EU at a time of serious crisis .
What is needed is major investments in jobs , training and green change - not putting anorexic economies on a diet by means of budgetary discipline .
John Monks , General Secretary of the European Trade Union Confederation , has also expressed concern that the social dimension of the Swedish Presidency has been given such low priority .
Mostly fine words , says Mr Monks , very little in the way of real plans .
My group shares these concerns , and they also include the trade union rights of workers , as Martin Schulz stated in his speech .
Workers ' terms have deteriorated following the Laval judgment and following the Viking , Rüffert and Luxembourg judgments .
Their rights have been weakened .
What I and my group want from the Swedish Presidency is a definite commitment that the EU 's workers will have their full trade union rights restored .
Trade union rights must take precedence over free movement .
That must be extremely clear .
We do not want to live in a Europe in which the crisis is met with budgetary discipline and with confrontation .
Is this matter even on the agenda , I would like to ask the new president , Prime Minister Reinfeldt .
( FR ) Mr President , we are faced with two issues .
The first issue is the crisis .
As everyone knows , we need a consistent and common response to the economic and social crisis and thus a European recovery plan to increase investments and to support employment .
Europe really must show today that it is more attentive and closer to our fellow citizens when it comes to the difficulties they are facing .
It must do more to help those who are affected by the crisis .
From that perspective , the situation is urgent .
The second issue is finally that of the new development model that must come out of the end of the crisis .
It must be a simpler , fairer and more sustainable model , which ensures that finance serves the real economy , which develops new forms of solidarity among Europeans , which takes account of the social and environmental challenges in international trade , and which radically reforms our relations with the world 's poorest countries , and here I am thinking specifically of Africa .
In addition to these two major issues there is a democratic requirement that concerns the process for which you , the Swedish Presidency , are responsible .
Cecilia Malmström - whom I am pleased to welcome today - knows better than anyone that there are some very important differences between the Treaty of Nice and the Treaty of Lisbon where the appointment procedure is concerned : a simple majority on one hand , and a qualified majority on the other ; an appointment on one hand , and a nomination on the other ; and a different number of commissioners depending on the treaty .
For my part I am really asking you to ensure that the spirit and the letter of the treaties are respected .
This falls under your remit , and it is very important for the credibility of our institutions . Thank you in advance .
( SV ) Mr President , congratulations on your appointment .
I would first like to commend the government for having a genuine commitment to the Baltic Sea and I hope that we will make progress here .
You also have remarkably good rhetoric on climate change .
What I am now looking for , of course , is for this rhetoric to be put into practice .
You often say that Europe and Sweden account for only a small part of the world 's emissions , but if the EU Member States are home to just eight per cent of the world 's population and account for 30 per cent of emissions , then it is also our responsibility to take a large part of the climate work seriously .
It is here that I find the concrete information lacking .
How are you going to deal with the IPPC Directive on industrial emissions ?
How are you going to deal with illegal felling ?
How are you going to deal with energy efficiency standards for buildings and how are you going to deal with the fact that aircraft cannot continue with their emissions while at the same time avoiding paying the EUR 14 billion in energy tax that they should pay ?
Then I would also like to bring up the Stockholm Programme and Acta .
Where Acta is concerned , we must ensure that there is openness here .
The German constitutional court has said that the countries must have more influence , that the parliaments must have more influence .
We need openness in the Acta negotiations .
We cannot move towards supervision unilaterally .
The same applies to my hometown and the Stockholm Programme .
Let it become a name that is associated with the EU 's transition from terror paranoia to human freedoms and rights and with a strengthening of asylum law and the protection of privacy .
Then we will have made progress .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency for prioritising economic challenges .
Whilst we have economic uncertainty , our ability to face any of our other challenges is obviously diminished .
You are right to prioritise the need to restore public finances : the extraordinarily high levels of public debt pose great and long-term threats that , unless we face up to them now , may be with us for many decades .
But restoring health to financial institutions is also key to regaining the confidence of consumers and returning economic growth , let alone taxpayers ' money .
In your priorities you discuss the importance of the supervisory framework .
I would add that regulatory clarity is vital .
These industries are , as we all know , global industries .
The capital , the talent and the individual enterprises are highly fluid .
They need workable and defined legislative timetables , prioritisation of legislation and proper consultation .
I welcome your commitment to work alongside the G20 , because if we get out of step and go unilateral in the EU we risk not only putting borrowers and investors at a competitive disadvantage but also causing industries to relocate outside ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( SV ) Mr President , firstly of course I would like to congratulate you on your appointment as president and at the same time thank you for the interesting exchange of views that we had during the election period .
Prime Minister and fellow Members , thank you for your account of the Presidency 's programme .
I am convinced that in organisational terms the Swedish Presidency will be a great success and that it will be taken care of truly excellently by the competent Swedish state administration .
Politically , I naturally share the Presidency 's opinion of the two major crises - the economic crisis and the climate crisis - and of course these are the priority issues .
However , where is the analysis ?
The economic crisis and the climate crisis were not predestined by fate .
The crises have their origin in political decisions made .
This is a positive thing , because it means that we can also solve the crises through political decisions - but I see no sign of a change to different policies from the Presidency .
It is the same economic policy that takes no account of social or environmental considerations .
What I and many of our citizens are looking for in the programme is workers ' rights , which have come into focus following the court rulings , and social issues , where no answers are forthcoming .
Neither have we heard anything about the famous progressive equality policy .
Where the Stockholm Programme is concerned , it is said that it will create security , but in practice what is emerging is a ' big brother ' state that threatens personal privacy .
We can never accept restrictions on asylum rights or restrictions on our rights as free citizens in this programme .
We need a humane asylum and immigration policy .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Sweden has always respected human rights and democracy .
Some time ago the Swedish people voted against the euro , and you have respected that decision , although you yourself were strongly in favour .
That is why it is rather odd that Ireland should now promptly have to vote once again on exactly the same treaty .
It is the Nordic and the Swedish way to respect the voice of the people .
I wish you luck and success in the challenge that you now face .
I hope that you will respect the values of the best sort of Nordic democracy : not through compulsion but through cooperation .
I am very pleased that you mentioned the Baltic Sea , and I fully support you in this matter .
The Baltic Sea is in difficulties ; it is dying and it needs to be saved .
The Northern Dimension has been missing in all this , however , and I hope that you will do a lot to promote it , although you made no mention of it .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a revolution in democracy .
We need bold democrats and in this new period we urgently need an exciting , democratic and genuinely effective Europe .
Creative artists and , in particular , freelance writers , will have a role in identifying the values of this new Europe .
Their uncensored imagination will be able to put the bureaucratic genie which aims to destroy democracy back in its bottle .
After all , it is exciting ideas that lie behind at the birth of social change .
Those who can offer visions of hope which allow them to get inside people 's minds - the Swedes have been particularly good at this in the past , and in this respect I have every confidence in my former colleague Cecilia Malmström - can also inspire their interest in socio-political matters .
This is how I deliberately worded the final paragraph of my new book at the beginning of this last election campaign , which brought about major changes and which is linked to a great deal of hope that you in particular from Sweden with your great democratic tradition and transparency will now recognise the signs of the times .
We are not only facing the economic crisis - and here the Swedes have shown their cleverness by largely avoiding it - but we also have to deal with a rather ominous swing to the right .
I therefore firmly believe that together we democrats must stand up for genuine transparency and in particular we must stand together in the fight against the extreme right .
( NL ) My heartfelt thanks for the ambitious plans that you have laid out for the coming six months .
I can tell you that we have high expectations of you , as you have had the reputation right from the very beginning of having gone into bat for European integration and for our European values .
It is important that the solutions that we put forward and that you are working on to get us out of this economic crisis reinforce our social market economy .
It is also important that these solutions do not only benefit our citizens today and tomorrow , but also provide for our children 's future .
It is therefore so very important to continue to build towards a sustainable economy and towards preventing climate change .
It is good that you give such a high priority to this in your programme .
I sincerely hope that your efforts in these areas help to bring the Member States closer together and that , in the run-up to the Copenhagen Conference , you also manage to induce the biggest players on the world stage to really play their part in finding a solution to climate change .
Mr President , the social market economy is also important when it comes to sustainable government finances , since government deficits form a burden for future generations .
It is therefore important to respect the Stability and Growth Pact and it is also good that you have said so expressly .
Mr President , it is ironic , but the financial crisis has brought Iceland closer to the European Union .
I hope that the Swedish Presidency is welcoming towards Iceland , but that it is also strict in ensuring that Iceland complies with the requirements for accession and that it meets the obligations relating to European legislation and towards the Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , I hope you will allow me in this connection to speak in particular to Carl Bildt , because I would firstly like to touch on the subject of enlargement , particularly in the Balkans .
You mentioned that this enlargement process will be slower than many people on both sides would have wished .
However , it is very important to give clear signals .
What I expect from the Swedish Presidency is help in particular for the people in south eastern Europe to overcome the problems they are facing there - including the intergovernmental problems - so that they can feel hopeful that the road to Europe will not be blocked off , but that progress can continue to be made , even if it perhaps takes a little longer .
However , the appropriate preparations must naturally be made by these countries .
Secondly , I would like to refer to another subject that you mentioned , namely the issue of restructuring the economy and the linking of economic policy and the environment .
It has already been said that you have our full support in this .
I believe that this is an important task for Europe .
It is true that in this regard we are very much at the forefront , but we still have a lot to do .
At the same time , unemployment is also rising .
The level of unemployment that we are seeing today in Europe has not yet reached its maximum .
It will , unfortunately , get even worse .
It is therefore extremely important to mention the other dimension , the social dimension , as we will only receive broad support for the green restructuring of the economy if people feel that their social needs and requirements are also being taken seriously .
The Nordic countries in particular have a lot of good examples of an active labour market policy .
We are not able , either as the EU or as individual Member States , to create jobs , but we can help people who have lost their jobs to find work again as quickly as possible .
That is what we mean by a social Europe - this active labour market policy that we need in the individual Member States , which the European Union and the Council in particular must give out a clear message about .
The green restructuring of the economy will ultimately result in lower , not higher , unemployment .
This is what we are calling for .
( SV ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , good to see you here !
There are many challenges in these turbulent times : a severe economic recession , the uncertainty as regards the Treaty of Lisbon and the negotiations ahead of the climate conference in Copenhagen .
You have a lot on your plate .
Prime Minister , a few important points .
You also have to convince your colleagues on the Council that protectionism is an abomination .
The strength of the EU lies in its open borders and free trade .
State subsidies to rescue the car industry are not the solution .
The financial crisis cries out for a new global order , but the regulations must be balanced and must not be excessive .
This autumn , as some here have mentioned , the EU must come a bit closer to a respectable asylum policy .
The energy policy , just as some have said , requires both realism and solidarity .
No new gas crises , no unilateral dependence .
The Internet was an important issue in the election campaign .
Here Sweden has a great responsibility to bring what is known as the Telecoms package to a successful conclusion .
The rule of law must also apply in the virtual world .
I had hoped that during this session Parliament would approve the appointment of José Manuel Barroso as President of the Commission for a new five-year period .
Now this will not be the case , and I am sorry for that .
Now is not the time for the EU to spend its time on institutional power struggles .
Now is the time for political leadership and drive .
The euro has proved its strength .
When does the Prime Minister think that we in Sweden will be prepared to become full EU members and have the euro in our pockets too ?
Thank you , and as we say in my party : good luck !
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Sweden now has a huge responsibility for the future of the human race .
Prime Minister Reinfeldt , you spoke quite rightly of the climate crisis .
We know that the technology we need over the decades to come exists , and that it is available at a fair price , but the most problematic issue is that climate protection is an incredible challenge to human cooperation .
Unfortunately , the negotiations that are currently going on are more like a combination of hide-and-seek and a competition in self-congratulation .
The European Union must have the courage to put forward a proposal regarding not just the EU 's own emission reductions , but the principle of burden-sharing , where all industrialised countries accomplish emission reductions according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) Guidelines .
The most important thing is that we achieve the emission reduction targets for 2020 .
Secondly , it needs to be realised that the developing countries will not be able to adjust to a system of adequate emission limits unless we assist them financially at a completely new level , and the EU should be in a position to make proposals on that too .
( PL ) Prime Minister , we listened to your speech with great care and would like to express the hope that the most important points of the programme will be put into effect successfully .
I would like , however , to draw attention to three challenges .
The first of these is European solidarity , which is especially important at a time of financial crisis .
We cannot allow situations to arise in which particular European countries are treated unequally .
We cannot accept a situation in which some are allowed to subsidise their banking sector and others are condemned for attempting to strengthen their shipbuilding sector .
That is not solidarity , that is hypocrisy .
Secondly , we are glad that the Baltic Sea Strategy is one of the priorities of the Swedish Presidency .
This is an important area of macroregional cooperation .
The Baltic ecosystem should be protected from hazards such as the very unsafe , and also financially absurd , Nord Stream project .
The need for diversification of energy sources should also be mentioned .
Thirdly , let us remember that Moscow does not restrict itself to turning off the tap , as Georgia discovered .
I hope that , as Sweden takes the helm of the European Union for the next six months , it will be as resolute as Minister Carl Bildt , who condemned the Russian aggression against Georgia .
I am sure that the Swedish Presidency will be equal to these challenges .
It can count on our support .
( DA ) Mr President , there are two things that struck me when I read the Swedish Presidency 's work programme .
The first thing is all the promises about how the EU will be used to create a better economy for solving climate and other problems , but there is not a single word about the problems that the EU creates - the problems that the EU has created in our labour markets , the problems that the EU has created in our fisheries sector , in our economy , in connection with the fight against crime and I could go on .
This is the first key observation we can make when reading the Swedish Presidency 's work programme - that the EU only represents solutions and that the EU is not a problem .
This says more about the Swedish Presidency than it says about the EU .
The second thing is that there is no mention of the fact that 2 October will be one of the most significant days in the entire history of the EU , and this will be during the term of the Swedish Presidency .
I am , of course , referring to the second referendum .
There is not a word about what the Swedish Presidency will do to ensure that the so-called guarantees that have been given to the Irish people will also be regarded as such .
We have seen before how people have been deceived - deceived over referendums and deceived over democracy .
What will the Swedish Presidency do to ensure that this does not happen again ?
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I would like to welcome the Swedes and also offer my congratulations that they - as the Prime Minister said - have finally found their way to Europe after a long process .
We are very pleased to find that Swedes today are among the best Europeans .
You have presented your programme and it is very ambitious .
However , I would like to ask you to consider whether Sweden would have the courage to take the step , particularly after the experience of the financial market crisis , of joining the euro - especially as you said that the Stability and Growth Pact must be complied with .
You , of course , have no opt-out clause like the United Kingdom and Denmark , for example , and you meet all of the conditions now .
Will you have the courage during your Presidency to stabilise Europe further and become a member of the euro zone ?
Prime Minister , I agree with your prioritising of climate policy and the Baltic Sea Strategy , but with regard to your programme in its written form , I have a request : please pay more attention than proposed to combating the financial market crisis .
None of the other projects will have a chance if the crisis in the financial markets and in the economy is not resolved as quickly as possible .
For this we need clear rules .
It is not enough for the City of London once again to determine the course .
We need clear rules in the social market economy , because a market economy without rules cannot operate and will not receive majority support .
Therefore , you should consider once again - although we fully support your programme - whether you should not give the subject of overcoming the financial market crisis higher priority than you have done so far .
Thank you very much and good luck in a difficult time of upheaval .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , we have all listened to the Swedish Presidency 's programme with great interest and appreciation .
Its clear priorities are the economy and energy , because the European Union 's priority is to help restart the economy and generate employment , curb unemployment and ensure that the Copenhagen meeting in December 2009 is a success .
However , I would like to draw attention to a political , civic and democratic objective , which is to replace the Hague Programme with the programme that will be named after the Swedish capital : Stockholm .
The programme combines the achievements of the area of freedom , security and justice over the last five years , which have been very significant in terms of harmonisation , mutual recognition and the principle of trust in relation to fundamental rights and legal protection , but also in relation to active cooperation .
I invite you to be ambitious in this area : firstly , from a substantive point of view , as in all areas related to managing external borders , immigration , asylum , refugees and combating illegal trafficking , organised crime and terrorism it is easy to drift towards reactionary positions that contradict the acquis of fundamental rights that should set the European Union apart and which Sweden identifies with so much , as a country that respects transparency and democratic principles .
Secondly , I invite you to also be ambitious in terms of the form , because the Swedish Presidency is most probably going to clear the way for Lisbon , which firstly means that there will no longer be that double procedural framework of the third and first pillars , which is often confusing .
However , and most significantly , it will also mean that Parliament will have greater capacity to monitor the legislative initiatives that the Swedish Presidency implements as part of the Stockholm Programme .
This means that what has so far often been seen as a deficiency of Brussels or of the Council will also be the responsibility of Parliament .
( SV ) Mr President , naturally I am very pleased and proud to see my government in the Swedish Presidency and I also think that the programme contains a lot that is good as regards solutions for the climate , jobs , the financial crisis , the Copenhagen Conference , the Baltic Sea Strategy , Community policy , enlargement , Iceland , Croatia , Turkey , etc .
However , I can see another matter that is important for the future : namely open Europe , privacy and freedom of expression .
Today the ministers are meeting in Stockholm to discuss the Stockholm Programme .
What is good is that this is the strategy for the legislation that is now to be drawn up .
Parts of the proposal have been long awaited .
Ratification of the European Convention on Human Rights will finally take place , I hope - the rights of the child and of the victims of crime .
We can make something really good come of this , but there are also downsides ; namely the threat to the open society that the Stockholm Programme contains .
Threats to our open society must be fought off using the methods of the open society .
Some of what is contained in the Stockholm Programme is not liberal , and neither is it humane or far-sighted .
Registering our travel , the mass storage of personal details and the systematic charting of economic transactions is not liberal , nor is it tolerant or far-sighted .
Let Stockholm stand for openness , freedom and tolerance , not registration , supervision and intolerance .
Furthermore , I believe that our work in Strasbourg must be discontinued .
Before giving the floor to Mr Stolojan , I should like to welcome a guest of ours , a child who is sitting in seat 505 .
It gives me particular pleasure to see children taking an interest in European issues and in our institutions because it is important to grow up as Europeans from an early age .
( RO ) I wish the Swedish Presidency every success and I believe that the priorities set out are those we have been expecting .
The next six months are crucial for Europe 's citizens and for the European Union .
They are crucial in terms of whether our countries are going to emerge from the economic crisis next year or whether , on the other hand , a large question mark will continue to hang over the economy for another year .
Many proposals and new programmes are being put forward .
However , I think it is time for us to assess the impact which the economy recovery programme launched by the European Commission at the start of the year is having , if any at all , and for us to take a close look at the European Union 's budget for this year to see which activities have stopped and what resources we can continue to use to come up with new measures .
We also have investment projects planned for the energy sector which have already been approved from that amount of around EUR 3 billion .
We will have to take specific measures to implement these projects .
I would like to thank President Barroso for his particular contribution to getting the Nabucco project off the ground .
Finally , I would like you to remember the European Union 's political commitment to other countries also successfully joining the European Union .
Mr President , we will not overcome the deep financial , economic and jobs crisis - or climate change - as independent , protectionist nation states .
Without Europe and the euro we are sunk as a continent , but neither can we continue as a union as though nothing was wrong except a few greedy bankers : budgeting discipline will not solve the problem .
The system is broken and must be deeply reformed .
Already the financial institutions are resisting the regulations we need to prevent a future meltdown .
We need more integration of our social and economic and climate and energy policies , with the objective of job retention and creation with decent living and working conditions .
We need a breakthrough in the climate change summit in December .
We need , more than ever now , a recommitment to the Millennium Development Goals and , more immediately , Mr President-in-Office , I regret you did not call for an immediate lifting of the siege of Gaza or indicate any wish to re-energise the search for peace alongside President Obama .
As a Member from Ireland , I would like to remind the House that political irony is a trait much appreciated in Ireland .
Jonathan Swift , the author of Gulliver 's Travels , once proposed to the British Government that the way of solving poverty in Ireland was to encourage us to eat our babies .
Well , I do not think the historical irony of the United Kingdom Independence Party proposing to come to Ireland to campaign for the independence of the United Kingdom from the European Union will be lost on the people of Ireland as a subject for a good belly laugh .
It will be something to see Mr Nigel Farage , dressed in his Union Jack and leprechaun hat , arm in arm with Gerry Adams , the former leader of the IRA , and Joe Higgins , my colleague up here in the back , calling for a ' no ' vote on the Lisbon Treaty , each with their own lemming-like contradictory agendas .
I am confident the Irish people will tell this particular circus what they told Libertas : get lost !
( Applause )
( EL ) Mr President , the programme of the Swedish Presidency does indeed include all the important issues which have to do with our times , both present and future .
I shall start with the recession .
I assume that the Swedish Presidency will need to go into this issue in greater depth .
The social market economy needs investments in the real economy and not simply in financial products such as those which put us in the situation we are in today .
The issue of climate and sustainable development , which also includes social development , and the issue of work , are obviously extremely important issues .
However , here too real investment is needed in the economy , together with more control .
A market economy which tries to move towards a laisser faire - laisser passer approach is not what we need in Europe .
The issues of crime , home affairs and justice truly concern us all .
Organised crime certainly is no longer what it once was and it certainly has links with terrorism and every form of illegal activity .
It therefore requires a differentiated approach .
I think what is most important is that we also examine , in relation to the large number of immigrants from third countries , whether the European Union 's development policy really did succeed and on which points ; in other words , we need a real evaluation and to examine what could or should have been changed in order for illegal immigration to be dealt with in the right way , because we are actually dealing with people and not just political or administrative acts .
The programme of the Swedish Presidency is truly very ambitious , especially , among other things , on trans-Atlantic dialogue .
However , on this issue too we must examine whether it is expedient for the European Union to be concerned solely with development and for the United States to be concerned solely with security .


( LV ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Reinfeldt , firstly I would like to congratulate the Swedish Government on the objectives it has set out for its presidency .
This is not an easy time for Europe ; it is full of challenges .
Of the many important priorities that Sweden has set out for its presidency , I would like to draw attention to the European Union strategy for the Baltic Sea region , and particularly that part of it relating to energy market security .
Joint security for Europe 's energy market will not be possible so long as divided and mutually isolated markets exist in Europe , both in electricity and in gas .
For historical reasons , this problem is particularly pronounced in the Baltic Sea region .
In order to resolve this problem and spread the risk relating to energy supply , we need a common European Union energy policy .
The foundation stones of such a policy must be not only energy efficiency and renewable resources , but also the creation of a common electricity and gas market with operational interconnections .
The European Union 's strategy for the Baltic Sea region is a step in the right direction .
Its aim is to gradually connect up the energy markets in the region , overcoming deficiencies in interconnections and creating common market mechanisms .
The legacy of the Soviet Union occupation in the Baltic Sea region is a split and partially isolated market , which increases our energy supply risk .
Our challenge for the future is to change this situation , and by doing so boost our joint energy security .
I wish the Swedish Presidency luck in making an energetic start on this important task . Thank you for your attention .
( SV ) Mr President , Prime Minister , if we are to get a good international climate agreement we must also listen to other countries .
If we do so we will realise that firstly what is required is that the EU and other countries take greater responsibility for reducing our emissions at home , and secondly that the EU and other industrialised countries state in concrete terms how we will contribute economically to the climate work of poorer countries .
The fact that up to now the Swedish Government has worked against this has unfortunately undermined the opportunities to get a good agreement in Copenhagen .
The Council of Ministers must also realise this , and I would therefore ask two questions .
Is the Swedish Presidency prepared to contribute to a good international climate agreement by making a greater part of the EU 's cuts in emissions on home soil ?
When does it intend presenting specific proposals to finance the climate work of poor countries ?
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on its historic opportunity to steer the EU toward implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
I would like to make three points .
First , it is of extreme importance to have the new Commission made operational as soon as possible .
Institutional uncertainty cannot be used as an excuse to delay the formation of the new Commission .
These arguments sound really hypocritical .
To come out of the economic crisis and to create new jobs , we need more than ever a strong , independent and innovative Commission .
Second , I would like to commend the Swedish Presidency on taking the lead in the implementation of the Baltic Sea Strategy , which was initiated by the European Parliament .
However , there is also a special budget line for this strategy which is still empty .
We cannot expect a positive change in the environmental situation in the Baltic Sea by relying only on ad hoc projects .
We certainly need also coordinated support from the EU budget .
Third , for Estonia the Stockholm programme is important .
It should also include a programme for using modern IT .
I am wondering whether the establishment of an agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom , security and justice would be of help in implementing this strategy .
( SV ) Mr President , congratulations on your appointment .
I would also like to thank Fredrik Reinfeldt for an extraordinary review and report .
We all now expect great achievements in Copenhagen , although it must also be emphasised that this is to be an international event .
Expectations have really been raised , but I dare say that if not all the groups are satisfied with the result then it will not be the end of the world .
Naturally the economic crisis has been highlighted here .
The big groups , the big companies always get attention .
I would like to emphasise that the small loyal subcontractors should not be forgotten either when financial matters are under discussion .
I would also like to underline the specific values of the Baltic Sea Strategy .
I believe that the Baltic Sea Strategy could increase the legitimacy of the entire EU .
Europe 's largest inland sea can and must be saved .
The Baltic Sea Strategy can also help to check the crime trend and trafficking .
This is also an important environmental issue that you could say demands its own Copenhagen Conference .
I am pleased that the work on a border solution between Croatia and Slovenia is on the agenda and that the Cyprus question is also being resolved .
We are all anxious to see this .
We will also , I believe , gradually see the Nordic region enlarged here in the EU to include Iceland and , I imagine , also Norway within the not too distant future .
President Barack Obama gave an extraordinary speech about Africa in Africa the other day .
I have reason to stress that Sweden can be proud of its work and I hope that we can continue to hold the flag of solidarity high in the future .
( NL ) I think that we and the European project stand at a real crossroads .
The Treaty of Lisbon , the Copenhagen climate conference and a vigorous approach to tackling the financial and economic crisis are the three great issues that you will have to deal with over the coming six months , and if we can bring them to a successful conclusion , Europe really could take a quantum leap forwards .
You are no doubt aware that a large majority of MEPs are ready to lend their backing to this route and I would like to urge you , with a quip , to leave the critics and the barking dogs to make their racket on the sidelines .
Let them not distract you from your mission , your purpose .
I believe that we must concentrate on the essentials .
Allow me to point out just one issue , Prime Minister Reinfeldt .
It is crucial that we concentrate on one of the top priorities , namely an aggressive plan for the future of the automotive industry in the European Union .
In my opinion , we have not had such a plan up to now , or at least we have had too little of one , and I think that you would agree with us there .
It is definitely not too late .
The rescue plan for Opel is in full swing and the world , and even Europe , is not rid of the demons of protectionism .
They are slumbering beneath the surface , and Swedish society is just as affected as we in Belgium are , just as they are in France , Germany and Slovakia .
We are all in the same boat .
What is needed is for us to approach this in solidarity with one another , with a coordinated , rather than an ' every man for himself ' approach , and that we do not attempt to clip each others ' wings .
Mr President , I think that you have a unique opportunity here to work with the President of the Commission - this also sends a clear signal to the Commission - to draw up a joint plan , a joint plan , Mr Barroso , for the future of our car factories , thereby steering them into the 21st century .
We believe that the energy-efficient and environmentally-friendly car can be realised in Europe 's existing car assembly factories and we are counting on you , Mr Barroso and Mr Reinfeldt , being on our side .

( HU ) In our view , Sweden is synonymous with Europe .
This country is the home of prosperity , security and freedom , where the issues of human rights and freedoms are just as important as economic and climate change concerns .
Then we have the parliament of an EU Member State which adopted a language law on 30 June 2009 stipulating that if anyone , including all of you , does not call that country 's capital city by its name in the country 's official language , Bratislava , but uses its German name , Presburg , or Hungarian name , Pozsony , they may very well end up paying a fine of EUR 5 000 .
The explanatory memorandum to the language law amendment states that protection of the national language in certain cases overrides the freedom of speech and right to privacy .
A European Union which adopts such a law is no longer a Europe of freedom .
I ask the Swedish Presidency to do its utmost to ensure that this law is repealed and that the Slovak head of state does not sign it .
( HU ) I would like to draw your attention to two of the Swedish Presidency 's priorities which I was delighted to see on this list .
The first of these priorities is the unequivocal opposition to discrimination , racism , anti-Semitism , xenophobia and homophobia .
I think that the importance of this issue is particularly underlined by the fact that we saw how evident the level of support was for the far right in several European countries during the European Parliament elections .
This therefore makes it the responsibility of every one of us , including Parliament and the current Presidency , to ensure that the most vulnerable do not end up in a precarious situation .
In particular , we must do everything to ensure that there is no cooperation between those parties professing to be democratic and the extremist parties .
A very good example of this is the Slovak language law , mentioned already today on several occasions , which is severely discriminatory , as was described .
The second priority which I would like to welcome is the series of European measures to be adopted , aimed at the integration of Roma communities .
( PL ) Mr President , continuation of enlargement of the European Union and the future of the Treaty of Lisbon are among the objectives of the Swedish Presidency .
The German Constitutional Tribunal ruled recently that the Treaty of Lisbon can be accepted only on condition that the precedence of the Bundestag and the Bundesrat are safeguarded , which calls into question the idea of European federalism .
The Treaty of Lisbon has , therefore , turned out to be a legal monster , which has been noticed not only by the Germans , but also by the Irish in a referendum and by the Presidents of the Czech Republic and Poland .
In this context the Swedish Presidency should initiate a Europe-wide debate on the subject of the role of the national parliaments of all the 27 Member States , and should develop a new model of cooperation between sovereign European nations .
It is , therefore , to be hoped that the Swedish Presidency , which I wish much success , will listen with greater attention to the voice of the citizens .
( MT ) I would also like to laud Prime Minister Reinfeld for staying with us until the very end of this discussion .
We will be looking to the Presidency to implement three important priorities .
The first is the Stockholm Programme on the area of justice , freedom and security .
We have to ensure that agreement is reached on this programme as soon as possible .
The second priority is the implementation of the Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
We will be looking to you Prime Minister to ensure that you will implement the Pact that was agreed upon last year .
Thirdly , last month , during the European Council , agreement was reached regarding the pilot project on burden sharing in the field of immigration .
You have a great deal of work ahead of you Prime Minister , and we , together with our President , will be monitoring you closely to guarantee that this work is carried out .
( PT ) Since Dag Hammarskjöld , Sweden has distinguished itself as a member of the United Nations ( UN ) .
It therefore knows that , without bodies with universally recognised legitimacy and representativeness , there will be no political force to conclude Kyoto2 , the Doha Round or the Millennium Development Goals , or to regulate the global economy , not to mention defend human rights .
It is regrettable that the Swedish Presidency is resigning itself to the informal and disputed framework of the G20 .
It is tragic that the EU - this locomotive of the world according to Mr Barroso , who was citing the UN Secretary-General - is leaderless and lacking in any strategic vision in this area , at a time when President Obama is proclaiming his commitment to global governance .
Instead , on our side , we have only heard the Pope insisting on the urgent need to reorganise the UN Security Council and the Bretton Woods Institutions .
Mr President , why is the Swedish Presidency refusing to lead Europe into forcing reform of the UN Security Council , by demanding a seat at the table for the European Union with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon ?
( GA ) Mr President , the referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon , which will be held in Ireland on the second day of October this year , will be one of the most important events to occur during the period of the Swedish Presidency .
Ireland has received legal guarantees in a range of policy areas and this is helping greatly to alleviate the concerns that the people of Ireland had in the referendum last year .
Now , it is incumbent on those of us who believe that a vote in favour of the Treaty will be to the benefit of Ireland to work to progress this new arrangement in my country .
If the Treaty of Lisbon succeeds - and I hope that the referendum will be passed - the various countries will be able to nominate a member to the Commission .
Those in favour of the Treaty cannot afford to be complacent in any way .
We must do our utmost to ensure its success .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , I would very much like to thank Prime Minister Reinfeld for including in his priorities the need to develop cooperation with our Eastern neighbours .
I would also like to thank him for Sweden 's engagement in development of the Eastern Partnership .
In this context I would like to point out that in the next six months , we as the European Union and Sweden as the Presidency will have to face up to problems relating to the disregard of human rights in Belarus .

For six months now , three entrepreneurs , Mr Avtukhowich , Mr Leonov and Mr Osipienko , have been held in detention and have not been able to obtain a just verdict .
Of 12 young activists who took part in a demonstration in January 2008 , 11 were given custodial sentences , and several days ago one was sentenced to a year in prison .
Prime Minister , in the next six months please pay attention to the question of breaches of human rights in Belarus .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SV ) Mr President , I hope I can return a little of the time I borrowed earlier .
( The President briefly cut off the speaker )
I know that you are waiting for a vote .
Allow me to thank you for having represented your respective party groups very well .
I note your eagerness and the expectations that there are of the Swedish Presidency , your desire for us to be more of a driving force in climate negotiations and to take action to combat the financial crisis and economic recession .
You have noted our Baltic Sea Strategy , our Stockholm Programme , our continued efforts to drive forward the matter of enlargement , and I would like to thank you all for the support we are experiencing in this .
I also know that the transition to the Treaty of Lisbon will mean that we meet again , and that we have a great deal to do together this autumn .
A number of the ministers in my cabinet are here with me today .
We have noted and carefully followed your questions and views .
I hope that we will cooperate closely and I hope to see you again in the autumn .
We also count on constant discussion and keeping in contact with the Presidency .
It is very important for the European Parliament .
It is the beginning of our term of office and we must do many things , and this is a very good starting point : the Swedish Presidency .
Thank you very much , Prime Minister .
I would also like to thank the President of the European Commission .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the Swedish Presidency 's proposal to focus on questions of policy instead of constitutional questions during its presidency .
However , the Council has decided to ignore the democratically expressed will of the Irish people , and they have made a decision to force the Treaty of Lisbon through .
Unfortunately , the policy framework that they are pursuing is the same failed agenda of deregulation and liberalisation .
This is not the appropriate response to the economic crisis .
The complete opposite is the case , namely that it is a continuation of the same policies that instigated the crisis , and it is these same policies that are being further strengthened in the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are told that we need the Treaty of Lisbon because it has been long years in the making .
But the Treaty of Lisbon was drafted and agreed before the economic crisis , and is based on policies that helped to ignite the crisis .
To force through those outdated policies now would be disastrous , for it would make the crisis worse .
There is a need for new policies for a new era .
There is a need for a new Treaty for a new era .
As far as climate change is concerned , it is important that the Swedish Presidency does its best to achieve a robust deal in Copenhagen .
in writing . - The incoming Swedish Presidency has many challenges but the greatest is the need to ensure that the EU respects the sovereignty of the Member States and does not ride roughshod over the democratic rights of the peoples of Europe .
Far too often the concerns and interests of our peoples are ignored in the headlong rush to advance the federalist agenda exemplified in the Lisbon Treaty .
Looking to changes ahead , the preparations for the reform of the common agricultural policy in 2013 will be an issue during this Presidency .
The voice of areas heavily dependent on farming , like Northern Ireland , must be heard during those discussions and in the debate on reform of fisheries policy .
We have a great duty to help and protect our constituents at this time of great financial turbulence .
The EU must not put further obstacles in the way of economic growth and stability .
in writing . - ( PT ) The anti-social programme of the Swedish Presidency of the Council of the European Union represents a dangerous step forward in the expansion of neoliberal policies .
It reflects the relentless pursuit of these policies , despite all the evidence , by the leaders of capitalism in the European Union , who are forgetting that their policies are the main cause of the economic and social crisis .
Although , in the presentation of its programme , the Swedish Presidency did refer to people and the problems of unemployment , it did not mention a single measure to change the existing policies which have caused these problems .
Quite the contrary .
In particular it highlighted the policy of free competition in the widest range of areas , including in services and foreign trade .
It has gambled everything on the recovery of the financial markets , on the resumption of the paradigms of the Stability Pact and on the defence of neoliberalism , which will certainly result in new attacks on social and labour rights .
It also did not forget to insist on a new referendum in Ireland on the draft Treaty of Lisbon , already planned for 2 October , in a continuation of the blackmail of the Irish people in order to move forward more quickly with the destruction of public services and the reduction of social rights , including in the areas of social security , health , water , social protection and workers ' rights .
It is not difficult to predict that it will submit new proposals for directives , which will try to adopt the same lines as those proposals that were rejected in the previous legislative term .
I welcome the incoming Presidency and would like to express the hope that as the third member of the Council troika , Sweden will continue the work which was started during the Czech and French Presidencies in the area of Roma social integration .
There were many factors which hampered the outgoing Czech Presidency 's work , but the overall picture in terms of Roma issues is nevertheless positive .
In fact , the Roma Platform held its first meeting in April in Prague , while , in June , the European Council strengthened its general objectives in terms of offering Roma equal opportunities by calling on the Commission and Member States to combat the poverty and social exclusion affecting Roma .
In the same document the Council adopted the common basic principles set out in Prague for achieving Roma social integration , with a call to public policy-makers to take these principles into consideration and comply with them .
Based on the results achieved by the troika so far , I hope that the Swedish Presidency will at least focus greater attention than before on Roma issues .
For example , I hope that the forthcoming conference on the inclusive labour market to be held in October and the Equal Opportunities Summit due to take place in November will deal with the issue of Europe 's largest minority as a main priority .
Indeed , in terms of population size , it is considerably larger than the population living in the Baltic region , designated as a priority by this Presidency .
I also hope that the Swedish Presidency will go beyond the theoretical approaches already adopted and the organisational issues decided and start to take specific actions , thereby actually putting these frameworks into practice .
The Stockholm Programme , which is a priority for the Swedish Presidency , must provide support in reinforcing the area of freedom , security and justice , as well as in promoting economic activity during the current crisis , especially in view of the possibility of the Treaty of Lisbon coming into force .
The success of the Stockholm Programme will help make Europe more accessible to its citizens .
This success will be reflected in the enforcement of the right of freedom of movement for all European citizens and the comprehensive implementation of the mutual recognition principle in civil and criminal matters at EU level .
The Swedish Presidency must continue the efforts of the French and Czech Presidencies , whose priorities were to provide all workers in the EU with complete access to the Community 's labour market , a freedom which is most symbolic of European citizenship .
In order to do this , Member States must actively participate through concrete actions in abolishing the virtual borders inside the EU which are detrimental to citizens ' freedom of movement , as they encounter administrative and legal difficulties when they live and work in another Member State .
The freedom of movement must be a reality for all EU citizens , especially during a time of economic crisis , which highlights the need to promote unrestricted mobility among the workforce .
This mobility can be self-regulating and ensure flexibility , as well as reduce the amount of undeclared work and the natural unemployment rate .
The EU is facing huge challenges nowadays : the economic and financial crisis , the alarming rise in unemployment and climate change .
The unemployment rate in the EU is 8.9 % at the moment , while 19 % of young people under the age of 16 and 19 % of elderly people are exposed to the risk of poverty .
People are losing their jobs , many businesses are going bankrupt , while national budgets are in major deficit .
The EU 's Swedish Presidency has a huge responsibility towards its citizens .
It must restore their hope of a decent living and lay the foundations for economic recovery by getting everyone to pull together .
Such measures as increasing energy efficiency , using energy from renewable sources and improving the EU 's energy security feature among the Swedish Presidency 's priorities .
I hope that the EU 's Swedish Presidency will mark the start of an age of prosperity , guaranteeing a period of economic growth for the next 40-50 years .
I believe that , now more than ever , we need to invest in education , research , energy efficiency and , above all , in people .
Sweden is renowned for its social policies and high standard of living .
This is why I would like , along with my fellow Members in the European Parliament and every citizen in Europe , to wish you every success , and we hope that this term will provide the springboard to a new future .
in writing . - ( EL ) The priorities of the Swedish Presidency mark an escalation in the anti-grassroots attack by the EU , the aim of which is to safeguard the ongoing profitability of euro-unifying capital by shifting the burden of the capitalist recession on to the working class and grassroots classes .
The Swedish Presidency is seeking to speed up capitalist restructurings , within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy .
At the epicentre of this anti-labour attack are wage and pension cuts , the complete demolition of labour relations , workers ' rights and social protection and insurance systems and even greater commercialisation of health and education .
The ' green economy ' is being designed so that , on the pretext of combating climate change , new profitable sectors of activity can be opened up for capital .
The Stockholm programme is endeavouring , in the name of combating terrorism and organised crime , to reinforce the bourgeois political system still further , so that they can combat grassroots reactions and step up repressive measures against immigrants .
The strategy on the Baltic has paved the way for a more aggressive approach by the euro-unifying monopolies in the countries on the eastern borders of the ΕU , in a bid to strengthen their position in the imperialist competition .
Using ' guarantees ' as a smoke screen and blatant coercion , they are trying to grab the Irish vote in order to implement the anti-grassroots Treaty of Lisbon .
1 .
Election of Quaestors of Parliament ( first , second and third ballots )
- Before the vote
( DE ) Mr President , I think you need to explain something .
We are at present conducting a test .
In this test we can only vote for two people - for example Pavarotti and Montserrat Caballé .
Later , however , in the vote for the quaestors we will be able to vote for five people .
I just wanted to reiterate this as it has confused many Members .
It is only in this test that we can vote for two people , afterwards in the real vote it will be five .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , apart from expressing my thanks for putting Pavarotti first , I should like to say something .
After we have marked with crosses the two to be voted for , do we have to confirm our vote or leave it as it is ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since not everyone has fully understood the oral explanation before the vote , it would be a good idea to explain again clearly how we vote .
I believe that the outcome of the vote shows how quickly the procedure has been learnt .
After the vote
In accordance with Rule 16 and Rule 15 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the order of precedence of the Quaestors shall be determined by the order in which they were elected .
The composition of the new Bureau shall be notified to the Presidents of the Institutions of the European Communities .
2 .
Numerical strength of committees
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Iran ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Iran .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , it is an honour to be able to stand here for the first time .
I expect to be here numerous times during the coming six months to address different issues .
The issue on our agenda at this time is Iran .
Before going into the substance of that issue , let me just express our heartfelt condolences to Iran on the occasion of the tragic accident earlier today .
We sincerely regret the loss of life and express our sympathy with all of those affected by this tragedy .
The issue of Iran is obviously very high up on the Swedish Presidency 's agenda .
That has to do with the outcome of the election and the question marks - to put it very mildly - that were raised after that election , as well as the political developments that we have seen since then .
I think you are all aware of the fact that the European Union has taken a very strong and a very principled stand when it comes to these events .
We have reiterated that questions over the conduct of elections are issues for the Iranian authorities to truly investigate and clarify .
We have also been very clear in our response to what we have seen happening on the streets of Tehran .
We have condemned the crackdown , the violence and the use of force that we have seen against peaceful demonstrations ; we condemn the crackdown against journalists , media outlets , communications and protestors .
Those are contrary not only to the norms and values that we represent but also , obviously , to the wishes for a more open and more reform-oriented society expressed by so many Iranians .
That being said , we remain in our principled policy of wishing another , a better , a new relationship with the nation of Iran .
It is a rich nation that has much to contribute to the development of the world and the development of its own region , and we would hope that at some point in time - hopefully not too distant - there will be that possibility for a truly new relationship .
Before concluding , let me just note one issue that has been occupying us quite a lot , and that is that the Iranian authorities did detain a number of personalities who are staff members of European missions , as well as some European nationals .
We have been in constant touch with the Iranian authorities over these issues .
We consider possible accusations levelled against them to be baseless , and I can assure you that we will continue to engage with the Iranian authorities in all the ways we can until these issues are resolved in a satisfactory manner - that is , that the persons in question are released .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is my first opportunity to congratulate all the honourable Members on their election to the new European Parliament .
I can say , on behalf of the Commission , that we very much look forward to a constructive cooperation with you , including of course on some of the most pressing international challenges that we face , and the subject of today 's debate is certainly one of those .
My colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner is travelling this week and so I have offered and have been delighted to be able to speak on her behalf in Parliament today .
This Parliament plays an important part in maintaining and developing relations between the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran .
Exchange visits between Parliament 's Iran delegation and members of the Majlis have already played an important role in increasing mutual understanding .
Parliament has also played its part in setting up several instruments that serve as an important basis for EU activities in Iran , and we in the Commission hope to continue to make good use of these in the years ahead .
Today 's debate was prompted by the recent Iranian presidential elections and the subsequent events .
While , as the Presidency has said , the evolution of Iran 's politics and policies are chiefly a matter for the citizens of Iran , there can be no doubt of the broader significance , and it is right that we should follow these developments closely .
The European Union has taken very clear positions on the situation in Iran following the presidential elections and has remained united in these positions .
We have expressed full respect for the sovereignty of Iran , but have stressed our deep concern about the post-election violence , as we would when lives are lost or rights are put at risk in any country .
Allegations of European interference in the Iranian elections or any involvement in the protests which followed are unfounded .
However , suppression of peaceful demonstrations , arbitrary detentions and severe censorship of the media constitute violations of human rights which cannot be considered matters confined to the domestic affairs of any country .
In spite of the current delicate situation in Iran , the Commission believes strongly in maintaining a dialogue .
That was the case before the elections , and it remains the case now .
The European Union and Iran have many common and pressing interests , including the fight against drug trafficking and support to Afghan refugees .
These demand our continued attention and cooperation , and we hope that Iran will share this view .
The Commission continues to search for ways to deploy Community instruments in constructive activities in Iran .
We can increase mutual understanding by continuing , for instance , our cooperation through Erasmus Mundus academic exchanges .
We are convinced that the European Union should keep all available channels of communication open with Iran .
We should strive for engagement with Iran at all levels .
When possible and prudent , we stand ready to continue and expand cooperation in the future .
Our present differences with the Government of Iran are many ; some are very serious .
We call on the Government of Iran to join us in trying to find solutions to our differences through dialogue .
It is only through discussing the challenges that lie between us in a spirit of mutual respect that we can hope to overcome them .
Europe has never closed the door to such discussions , and it remains open today .
Finally , I join with the Presidency in expressing condolences to the families of Iranians and Armenians involved in the tragedy of the plane crash today .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I want to reflect the tone of the debate in the extraordinary meeting of the outgoing Committee on Foreign Affairs , which met last Wednesday because there was no time to convene the new committee .
Everyone knows the facts all too well , so I will not dwell on that .
The Union has a duty to stress the universality of human rights , to follow up human rights violations in Iran very closely and to take Iran to task for the brutality and violence .
Last week we , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Delegation for relations with Iran , met with representatives of the civil society of Iran , and these are aspects that seem to us extremely important .
We fully endorse the statements and positions taken so far by the Presidency , Council and Commission , but we are also asking the Council to ensure that EU Member States and their ambassadors in Tehran are fully complying with EU guidelines on human rights defenders and on the prevention of torture .
We should also convey to the Commission our insistence that all available means should be deployed .
We should support and strengthen civil society organisations in Iran , notably via the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , and deploy all efforts for renewed engagement with Iranian civil society in such uncontroversial areas as the fight against narcotraffic , refugee issues , academic exchanges , and visits to Europe by journalists , to name but a few .
They could help to further people-to-people contacts and lead to improved freedom of expression in the country .
Pressure on human rights , yes , but no isolation !
Dialogue , even if a very difficult dialogue .
We are going through a very difficult and tense period with Iran .
The crucial nuclear question is on hold , and we ask the question : what is the way forward ?
Well , sanctions are one possible measure being explored .
We really believe the Union must find a way to re-engage in dialogue with Iran on all these issues .
The need to find ways of building fresh trust and to create a strong diplomatic process has never been greater than now .
We should offer our full support to the Council and the Commission in their efforts .
In turn , we , the European Parliament , must continue with our efforts to strengthen the parliamentary diplomacy aspect of our relations with Iran through our strengthened links with the Majlis .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , whatever people feel about the outcome of the Iranian elections , there is no doubt that tens - hundreds - of people have been injured , tens of people have been killed in the protests that have taken place since the elections in that country , and thousands of people appear to have been detained as political prisoners .
This entire Chamber should therefore have no hesitation in condemning those abuses of human rights , as it should condemn the obstructions to free journalism that have taken place since the elections .
We should also , as Mr Saryusz-Wolski mentioned concerning the meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs last week , recognise that one of the best ways of determining a free and fair election is to invite election monitors to observe the process , and this European Union has got a fine record of doing that .
We should note in this Chamber today that the Commission on our behalf did not have the confidence that they could do an independent , fair and objective job and therefore we have proper reason to say that we have no confidence in the election results .
Our hearts go out to the Iranians who have been injured , detained or had their human rights abused .
Our thoughts are foremost with them , but I also ask this Chamber not to forget the Iranian who was an employee of the British Embassy .
He has been detained and is charged in a completely unjustified way with fomenting the protests .
Our hearts go out too to the French student who was detained by the Iranian authorities .
We should praise our colleagues in the Swedish Presidency who have stood by those countries and who have ensured concerted action by the European Union in response and ask them to continue it .
Finally , I am ashamed that in this debate the British National Party will speak for the first time , with an MEP who last Friday described Islam as ' a cancer that should be removed from Europe by chemotherapy ' .
That does not represent British people 's views ; that is not Europe 's attitude towards Islam .
We should stand up against that as we stand up against unfairness internationally .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Iran is a large country with a large and predominantly young population , a long and eventful history and an impressive culture .
What is more , Iran is located in one of the most sensitive areas on the planet .
For all these reasons , but also out of compassion for our fellow human beings , let us not be indifferent to the goings-on in Iran .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is not in favour of regime change by force .
We do believe , however , that all the peoples of the world , including the Iranian people , must be entitled to choose their own leaders and to replace them when they cease to make the grade .
Elections under Iran 's current regime do not meet international standards for free and fair elections , a situation that was no different in the most recent presidential elections .
Yet even within the tight restrictions in place in Iran , large swathes of the population refused to accept the official results and took to the streets in protest .
The Iranian people were not convinced by the extremely limited review of the results and the protests therefore continued .
The protests were put down in a particularly violent way and the prosecutions are still going on .
We firmly denounce these prosecutions and we call on the Iranian authorities to bring them to an immediate end and to release all those taken into custody .
An immediate end must also be brought to the prosecutions of foreign journalists , NGO workers and the Iranian staff of foreign embassies in Tehran .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commission , a regime that turns on its own people and its own youth in this way loses all legitimacy , not just at home , but internationally as well .
It is therefore particularly tragic that these dramatic developments should take place at a time when the president of the United States has expressed his willingness to enter into dialogue with Iran .
Iran is on the verge of missing a historic opportunity to take the place on the world stage that its history and culture deserve .
Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , when a people wants to free itself , it inspires our admiration and our solidarity .
Such is the case for the Iranian people .
It is true that those elections effectively ended before they began , but , even in those elections , we saw that the people of Iran were able to find the Achilles heel so as to express their desire for freedom and democracy .
It is true that it is in our interest for the dialogue to be maintained with the Iranian - terrorist - power ; no one disputes that .
At the same time , however , we cannot simply move on to the business of the day .
What took place in Tehran is absolutely horrible .
Torture is a daily occurrence in Iranian prisons , but not only for UK nationals .
Iranian men and women are tortured daily in these prisons , too .
Therefore , Europe must raise its voice .
I know that it is difficult to strike a balance between the interests and the protection of the Iranian people and our own interests , which are not always identical .
However , even if it is complicated , it is important to stress that we show solidarity towards the Iranian people every day .
I call on the Commission and the Council to analyse the part played by Nokia and Siemens and the responsibility of European weapons in the repression of the Iranian people .
It is , after all , unthinkable that it should be large European companies that have enabled the Iranian Government to suppress the freedom and the desire for freedom of the Iranian people .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , while we sit here debating the recent uprising in Iran , do we realise that over 50 of the student leaders , the protestors who were arrested , have been taken out and hanged by the Iranian authorities , that over 200 people were killed on the streets , including Neda , who has become an international and very potent symbol of the brutality of that fascist regime against the people of Iran ?
And , while we continue to enjoy our place as the biggest trading partner with the Iranian Government , do we seriously think that money is more important than lives ?
Why are we not prepared to put tougher sanctions in place ?
Why do we not , as a Parliament , scrap our Delegation for relations with Iran , which in any case in the last five years became nothing more than a compliant mouthpiece of the Iranian Embassy in Brussels and brought shame on the EU institutions ?
Scrap it and let us start talking tough with the Iranian authorities .
It is the only language they understand .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left is deeply concerned about the ongoing violence in Iran .
We , too , condemn in the strongest possible terms the brutal mistreatment of demonstrators .
We are extremely concerned about the fate of numerous people who were detained and call for their immediate release and we also believe that the European Parliament as a whole should do this .
We are also critical of comments in media and governmental circles in other states which exploit the legitimate protests of the Iranian citizens .
Not even the most recent developments in Iran justify plans for military action against Iranian nuclear installations .
My group rejects such strategies .
We therefore welcome the clear statement by President Obama , who has refused to give Israel the green light for an attack on Iran .
The US President also believes in diplomacy .
Iran is a sovereign state .
Its people alone have the right to decide on changes to its society .
The government of a sovereign state must openly accept the desire for change and drive through a political solution .
Mr President , congratulations on your election .
The repression of citizens who contest the election results , the censorship of the media and the persecution of the opposition confirm the absence of democracy in Iran .
We find similar situations in other countries too , such as China , but there is further cause for concern in Iran 's case .
Firstly , because of its hegemonic ambitions , which manifest themselves in its interference in neighbouring countries , such as in the Basra region of Iraq , and in its support for Hezbollah in Lebanon .
Secondly , because of the strong influence that religious extremism exerts on the political power of the Islamic Republic .
A few hours ago a singer - an Iranian singer - was sentenced to five years ' imprisonment for defamation of religion , and 12 Sunnis were sentenced to death .
President Ahmadinejad has declared on many occasions that the destruction of the State of Israel is his main policy objective .
Moreover , Iran 's desire to develop a nuclear programme outside international controls is alarming .
In view of the fact that Iran is one of the largest producers of gas and oil , its real objective appears to be to develop nuclear weapons for the obvious purpose of being able to blackmail countries in the region and the entire international community .
An intense effort is therefore required from the entire European political community to strike the right balance between opposing the Ayatollahs ' regime and supporting the moderate and reformist Iranian element that exists and is active .
In this regard the financial resources from the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights could be used to support all of the victims of the current oppression .
No political intervention can be effective , however , without all of the countries of Europe uniting and acting as one .
Mr President , as a human rights lawyer with 20 years ' experience internationally , let me ask this Parliament , in order to have legitimacy and credibility , to scrutinise the human rights situation in the Third World and other non-EU countries , but also , please , to take a much closer look at the situation of democracy , the rule of law and human rights within the EU , in particular in my own country , Hungary .
Let me share with you a couple of facts .
On 23 October 2006 , there was a major demonstration with about 100 000 people in commemoration of the 1956 revolution .
This was organised by the largest opposition party , Fidesz , which is well represented here in the EPP , and basically they won the elections this year in Hungary .
It was a middle-class crowd of families , elderly people , children , and the brutal Hungarian police brutally attacked this crowd with tear gas , with rubber bullets , with policemen on horseback , causing severe injuries to several hundred people .
On the same occasion several hundred people were illegally detained and tortured in prison .
Ever since that date , throughout the last three years right up to the most recent days , when 216 peaceful demonstrators were illegally detained and brutalised by the police , on every single occasion when there was an anti-government protest , not in Iran , not in China , not in Honduras , but in an EU country , Hungary , the same things happened : mass police brutalities , illegal detentions .
May I ask you to please join forces with me and , regardless of political affiliations , help to find out what happened , to find who was responsible , to try to do justice to the victims and please , as the European Union , to try to put an end to these mass violations of human rights within the EU , in order to have the credibility and legitimacy to scrutinise the human rights situation in Iran or whichever country outside the Union .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I am here to talk about Iran , and I would first like to join in expressing my condolences for the victims of this morning 's plane crash .
Ladies and gentlemen , I agree with many of the ideas that have already been expressed regarding the situation in Iran following the electoral process .
This process was neither free nor fair , and has allowed President Ahmadinejad and the most radical sectors of the regime to remain in power , violently repressing demonstrators , preventing journalists from doing their job and seeking to hold a supposed external conspiracy responsible for internal disorder , while using misinformation to conceal the truth .
What is certain is that the Iranian regime has been seriously damaged , both internally and in terms of its external image .
Moreover , the oligarchy that has enjoyed power in recent decades is now divided , which will affect the stability of the regime .
At the same time , discontent among the people will continue to grow , especially if oil prices do not rise again and consequently the economic situation does not improve .
The European Union needs to maintain a united front and continue to condemn the abuses committed in Iran .
It should demand greater respect for human rights , and we also need to look at how we can help civil society , in particular those sectors that want democratic pluralism and respect for human rights for their country .
We should not disappoint those sectors that are looking to the West , including the European Union .
However , with regard to Iran we must also not forget the threat that its nuclear programme represents , as it is having a destabilising effect on the region and on non-proliferation in general .
It is essential that the European Union and the United States continue to cooperate on this matter , and I am sure that this will be a priority for the Swedish Presidency .
We need to fully involve Russia and China , which are permanent members of the Security Council .
Their support is essential in order for a negotiated solution to be found to this grave threat , which requires unity and firmness from the international community .
I therefore welcome the resolution adopted in this respect last week at the G8 .
Ladies and gentlemen , the events of the last few weeks have openly demonstrated the extremism and radical nature of the current Iranian leaders ; it is clear that the international community cannot afford for them to obtain nuclear weapons .
( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I was going to start my first speech to this plenary by welcoming the fact that the debate on the situation in Iran was not brought on by Iran 's prominence in the media , which has been superseded in turn by China , Honduras , the G20 , etc .

Unfortunately , the recent executions of Sunni militants in Iran have brought the country and its human rights violations back to the front page of the newspapers .
However , I do not think that it should be what is in the news that inspires what is on Parliament 's agenda in terms of external policy , but rather Parliament 's own sense of responsibility and its considered and coherent response , in line with its growing role in the European Union 's external policy , especially in the field of human rights .
This role , Mr President , involves monitoring the consistent use of all the instruments that the European Union has in this field and , in the case of Iran , we should not keep the dialogue on nuclear weapons entirely separate from the complete absence of political dialogue on human rights .
Structured dialogue on human rights has been suspended since 2004 .
We do not have a cooperation and trade agreement on which to hang a democratic clause , we have not managed to send an electoral observation mission , and the funds of the Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights are minute .
In Parliament and in the whole of the European Union we need to be more effective in using the instruments that we have available to us and that we have equipped ourselves with .
Some in this very House and in the Iranian opposition have called for relations with the Iranian regime to be completely broken off and for the new government not to be recognised .
We strongly condemn the political repression and the stifling of freedom of expression in Iran , but we do not think that we should relinquish being a force in the defence and protection of human rights , democracy and the fight against poverty in the world .
In order to do this , Mr President , we need dialogue , negotiation and diplomacy , and we need to seek out common interests and build an alliance of civilisations .
I call on the Presidency of the Council to do this .
( DA ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has discussed the violations of human rights by Iran on many occasions and we are , in fact , doing so again today .
We will not change the appalling behaviour of the dictators by words alone .
It is time for tangible action .
The brutal slaughter of a people who hunger after freedom and who have courageously taken to the streets must cause us to take on some of the responsibility for bringing down this criminal regime .
This regime has no place in the 21st century .
European governments must report the Iranian regime to the UN Security Council and demand that the perpetrators , primarily Ali Khamenei and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , be brought before an international court .
The Iranian people want freedom and we must support the call for free elections under UN supervision .
Parliament cannot maintain its delegation with Iran , which , at its last meeting , was turned into a tool by the dictatorial regime to influence our parliament .
We must demonstrate that we do not cooperate with dictatorships .
Mr President , last year I served as a monitor at commemorations for the 1956 revolution in Budapest .
I can confirm that Dr Morvai is right to criticise those who fret about Iran while ignoring human rights abuses here in Europe .
I trust that no ECR Group members here will be hypocritical enough to condemn Iran for the use of violence in elections when David Cameron is among the sponsors of Unite Against Fascism , an organisation of far-left criminals which routinely deploys intimidation and violence against nationalist dissidents in Britain .
The same is true of five current Labour , Lib Dem and Tory MEPs , marked with the shame of supporting the use of British taxpayers ' money to support their own militia , which breaks up opposition meetings and attacks their opponents with bricks , darts and claw hammers .
But my main point is this : however well meaning , and even justified , criticisms of Iran made here may be , they will be exploited as war propaganda by the powerful vested interests that stand to gain from a military attack on that country .
Neocons , oil companies , construction corporations and the Wahabi mullahs of Saudi Arabia all want to see the sovereign state of Iran destroyed by an aggressive war .
Not even European liberals are naive enough to fall for lies about weapons of mass destruction again , so human rights are being drafted in as a new casus belli .
Do not add the voice of this place to the warmongers ' chorus for a third illegal and counterproductive attack by the West on the Muslim world .
Or , if you must , do not leave the war - which hypocritical rhetoric will help to justify and unleash - to the usual brave British cannon fodder : 18-year-old boys from the Mersey and the Thames and the Tyne .
Instead , send your own sons to come home in boxes or without their legs , their arms and their sanity - or mind your own business .
( PL ) Mr President , the death of innocent people is always a tragedy .
If , however , they die in defence of values such as freedom or truth , we can say that their suffering is not in vain - as is the case with the recent victims in Iran .
Things have become very bad , when a regime shoots at demonstrators , puts opponents in prison , and tortures and kills them .
The only source of hope and optimism is that these events may make politicians and public opinion across the world aware of the true nature of the Iranian regime , which is capable of actions which are very far removed from the minimum standards of the modern world .
This regime has blood on its hands .
We should remember this , and we should work towards changing a state of affairs which we cannot accept .
In situations like this the same question always comes up : what can we do ?
Well , we can support the demands and proposals which have already been expressed .
Firstly , the Iranian authorities must stop using violence towards those who have a different opinion than the regime .
In the case of countries like Iran the observance of basic human rights should be monitored and guaranteed by the international community .
Secondly , a free and fair election should be held in Iran , in which all candidates should be allowed to stand , and not just those who have obtained permission to stand .
Incidentally , those who are making these decisions about the right to stand in elections do not themselves have a democratic mandate .
The fairness of the election should be verified by independent external observers - otherwise the election will be pointless .
Thirdly , we should do everything to ensure that the solutions for Iran are peaceful and political , and that means that we should support those Iranians who want fundamental changes in their country , changes which will mean that Iran will be governed by those who win fair elections , and Iran itself will cease to be a threat to world security .
The leader of the Iranian opposition in exile , Mrs Rajavi , has said that what has happened in Iran is the beginning of the end of the regime .
I sincerely hope that Mrs Rajavi is right .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Swedish Presidency for its observations before our debate , which I feel were balanced and also able to make us understand the responsibility that we are being asked to fulfil .
I should like , in this sense , to make an observation that stems from my having seen , as so many others have , on television screens everywhere , the crowds that in some way stirred up the protest of the last few days .
However , while it is true that Iran is a theocracy in which fundamentalism has shaped its plan to wield power by pretending that it is in the name of God , in recent days we have also seen people take to the streets and actually cry out ' God is great ' .
What a difference !
This difference in looks , in the will that these people have expressed , and in the determination not to be violent , makes us realise that , in Iran , the love of freedom and of truth , the love for one 's own people , and the love and regard for everyone is not dead .
Thirty years of theocracy , thirty years of systematic human destruction have not been enough to wipe out this memory that is in the hearts of each of us .
It is to this that we owe loyalty .
It is to this fact , to this love of truth and to this love of freedom that we owe our unconditional devotion , and it is this that should heighten the responsibility of everyone , because asking the European institutions to be strong , to be determined and to make their voices heard is , first and foremost , not a demand by Parliament for geopolitical prominence , it is pointing out that , insofar as it represents this political project that we call united Europe , the love of freedom and of truth that exists in all of those who demonstrated in recent days must not be forsaken by Europe 's institutions .
Mr President , a crucial change has taken place in Iran .
Our first conclusions , therefore , should be that Iran is not and will not be the same again .
It is because millions of Iranians have refused to be hostages of their clerical rulers .
They have demonstrated an amazing courage in challenging the dictatorship .
The issue , therefore , is not about rigging so-called elections more than usual .
This time , blatantly rigged votes provided an outlet for a popular protest the experts outside Iran could not or were not willing to expect .

This reminds me of the situation 20 years ago in Eastern Europe : while the Western governments were prepared for a long-term accommodation and pragmatic coexistence with the Soviet totalitarian system , suddenly millions of hostages of the Communist regime became active : they challenged the system , which was brought to a sudden end .
Therefore , it is important to realise that the European approach to Iran cannot remain the same - just turning a blind eye to routinely rigged elections and systematic repression .
It is estimated that during 30 years of dictatorship more than five million people have been imprisoned , more than 200 000 tortured to death and recently more than 200 killed .
The EU governments have been too hesitant in condemning these atrocious crimes and to make the regime bear responsibility for its behaviour .
If we are serious about protecting the rights of Iranian citizens , we need to be prepared to cause the dictators real pain .
What does this mean ?
We should , for example , ban any of the leaders of the regime from travelling to the EU ; we should recall our ambassadors from Iran as a gesture of our indignation ; and free elections can take place in Iran only under UN supervision .
Mr President , as the situation in Iran escalates and the violation of democracy also presents a danger to the stability of the whole region , we have to express our concern and condemnation - but declarations must not only be symbolic and empty .
Some European leaders are talking about new sanctions to be imposed on Iran , but a discussion is needed right now on the promotion of democracy at grass-root level in this country .
I am Polish , and we in Eastern Europe know how important these types of actions are for the establishment of democracy .
A promotion should be adapted to the political and economic situation in a given country , but previous EU experience in the promotion of democracy in North Africa , the Middle East and Eastern Europe has to be reviewed and evaluated in order to see what should be done in Iran , what can be done in Iran and what is effective under given circumstances in this country .
I also want to remind you that , if the EU wants to be credible , it also has to undertake some measures in Moldova .
Soon we will face a new test - on 29 July - with the elections in Moldova .
The EU has to do everything it can to ensure free and fair democratic elections in this country .
It is not enough to talk about support for democracy : we in the European Parliament and European institutions have to be more active in that respect .
( PL ) Mr President , it certainly is necessary to monitor the progress of the electoral process in Iran , although the beginning of a solution to the conflict should be a declaration by the authorities in Iran that they will stop using force , and that they will free the imprisoned opposition activists , defenders of human rights , journalists , demonstrators and citizens of other countries who are currently being blamed for the situation which exists in Iran .
We should , of course , uphold absolute respect for the sovereignty of Iran , but we should also remind Tehran that it is obliged to observe the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
I would also like to express concern at Iran 's nuclear programme .
Tehran is entitled to a nuclear programme used for peaceful purposes , but it is also obliged to restore the confidence of the international community that Iranian nuclear activity is exclusively peaceful in nature .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to express my deep regret about the tragic aircraft accident which occurred today in the province of Qazvin in Iran .
The debate here today is a necessity following the events which ensued after the elections on 12 June .
However , I think that we must hold it within the right framework .
We must not send out the wrong message .
Any direct or indirect link between these events and the question of the nuclear programme is misleading .
We must be clear that our subject today is the situation of democracy and human rights in Iran .
Talk about new sanctions will not under any circumstances help to resolve the serious problems of the Iranian people .
Democracy cannot be imposed by such means .
In the European Union we need to step up efforts for democratisation and respect for fundamental freedoms , but by setting this issue within the framework of a substantial political dialogue and by strengthening our contacts with civil society .
We also need to call for further investigation into complaints of fraud in the election process and to emphasise once again that the right of peaceful protest is an inalienable right of the people of every country .
We must therefore roundly condemn the violence from this tribune here today and call for respect for freedom of speech and expression to be applied in practice in Iran , as in every other country in the world .
( DE ) Mr President , I think it is good that we are having this debate in the first week of the new Parliament .
Unfortunately , our group chairmen have rejected a motion for a resolution .
I ask myself who we are actually paying attention to here .
A resolution would have been helpful to the dissidents in Iran if we had confirmed to them in a tangible statement that what was officially described as a presidential election did not in any way meet international standards of democracy because most of the candidates were rejected by the Guardian Council and because even those who were permitted to stand cannot be considered to have been given equal conditions .
From a political perspective we can therefore conclude without reservation that the results of the election as announced did not represent the will of the Iranian people .
Let us , as the EU , actively use our instruments for democracy and human rights , support the living civil society or even lawyers like Shirin Ebadi , for example , who is standing up for the Bahai detainees there .
I believe this is the policy that can be successful at the moment , even in the short term .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , last week - to my great pleasure as a new Member - in a meeting of the Foreign Policy Committee we heard a talk by Mr Makhmalbaf , an Iranian film director , who told us very plainly that before this election Iran had 20 % democracy , but after the election , which in his opinion was a sham , there was absolutely no democracy left .
I also agree with this description - it most certainly was a sham election , which , with large-scale electoral fraud , robbed the majority of Iranian people , who had called for change , of this right .
President-in-Office of the Council there is one thing in particular that interests me : in the middle of August the inauguration of the ' re-elected ' Mr Ahmadinejad will take place .
What is currently being discussed in the Council and also in the Member States ?
Will the European Union and the Member States be officially represented at this inauguration ?
I certainly hope not , as I do not think that there should be any official representation of the European Union or the Member States after this election sham , and as much as I would advocate further dialogue , no one should officially represent the European Union at this inauguration .
What is your position on this ?
How is it currently being dealt with ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when debating foreign policy issues , such as today 's issue involving Iran , there is always the risk , as we know , of lagging slightly behind the events taking place .
However , there is no doubt that the European Parliament , if it wants to , can play an important role in urging Europe and the international community to take the current events seriously and to implement all of the initiatives needed to ensure that the process of introducing a democratic system in Iran can actually take place .
Following the close attention paid by the international public to the post-election period in Iran and the street demonstrations that the Iranian regime sought to repress with the use of violence , it is important to ensure that silence does not descend on the situation in the country .
Being realistic about things does not mean taking the Iran issue off the agenda .
It is also up to us to keep this level of attention high , and it is also up to the Swedish Presidency - which I thank for the points it has made today - to promote a strong initiative , together with the United States , Russia and other countries , in order to change the way in which issues in Iran , from democratic rights to the nuclear issue itself , develop .
( ES ) Mr President , in the last few weeks we have been moved by the repeated demonstrations of heroism and the bravery of the people of Iran , who have confronted the machine guns and truncheons of their tyrants with their bare hands .
The large numbers of women leading the demonstrations is an unmistakeable expression of the Iranians ' determination to live in a true democracy .
President-in-Office of the Council , the European Union 's response has been too weak and too fainthearted .
We need to send out a very strong political signal to express our absolute rejection of this intolerable theocratic dictatorship .
The solution has been voiced very well by the leader of the resistance in exile , Massoud Rajavi : the Supreme Leader needs to be deposed , and a temporary assembly of experts needs to call free elections under international supervision .
Anything else will be a waste of time and will prolong this disgrace .
( NL ) May I start by warmly welcoming the new President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Bildt .
I am aware , of course , that he is about to face a number of very busy months , as the problems of the world are going to be resting , more than anywhere , on his big , broad shoulders .
Mr President , when it comes to Iran I have the following points to make .
First of all , the Iranian regime is unpredictable .
Secondly , I note that there are , in fact , hairline cracks beginning to appear in the regime , specifically in religious circles .
Thirdly , it is my observation that the regime supports everything that is bad or involves corruption in this world - be it in the Middle East or in Pakistan .
Fourthly , I would point out that dialogue really does not provide any help and , finally , I note the citizens rightly want more freedom and that they must have our - Europeans ' - support in this regard .
I would then like to ask you , Mr Bildt , why has the Council been unable to produce a tougher statement and why have we only listened to a couple of countries that always want to act in defiance of the human rights situation ?
( ES ) Mr President , I would of course like to start by condemning the events in Iran and the repression by the Iranian Government , but I want to join with those who have advocated that we should combine pressure from the European institutions with maintaining dialogue and the negotiation process .
History and experience have shown us that breaking off all relations with authoritarian regimes does nothing to improve living conditions for the people who are suffering under such regimes and , at the same time , it weakens the position of those of us who are defending respect for democracy and human rights in such countries .
I therefore think that we should use all the tools that the European Union has to put pressure on the Iranian regime , starting with this Parliament , but at the same time that we should also maintain negotiations and dialogue - dialogue that puts pressure on the regime - especially through the High Representative , Mr Solana .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Iran today represents the principal threat to international security and stability : on the one hand , by violating the United Nations resolutions it is pursuing its objective of equipping itself with atomic weapons and , on the other , it is repeating its desire to physically destroy the State of Israel .
I hope that Europe , with the Swedish Presidency , can send out a clear message to Iran in general , indicating that the non-negotiable values of the right to life , human dignity and the freedom of choice cannot be separated from the development of bilateral relations and that , in particular , it can make it clear that the State of Israel 's right to exist is non-negotiable and that Europe , which has lived through the Holocaust on its own territory , will not allow a second holocaust of the State and the people of Israel .
( FR ) Mr President , I wish to take the floor to call on our Parliament to declare itself clearly in favour of financial and technical sanctions against Iran .
Of course , there are a great many arguments against sanctions , since they will have consequences for the lives of Iranian citizens .
However , the worst thing for Iranian citizens , Mr President , would not be the shortages caused by these sanctions ; the worst thing would be our silence , our failure to act .
Sanctions , Mr President , would show that we are not indifferent , and I believe that that is crucial .
That is why , Mr President , our Parliament must demand financial sanctions against Iran .

Mr President , the appalling Iranian theocratic dictatorship is already guilty of many crimes against its own people : from hanging Baha 'is to hanging homosexuals and now apparently hanging 50 innocent protestors .
So we should hardly be surprised by the mere stealing of an election through wholesale electoral fraud .
I believe this crack in the regime and the courage of its protesting youth - whom I salute - will eventually bring the whole rotten government down .
Mr Howitt recently , in another meeting , suggested that we should have sent EU electoral observers from this House to confirm whether fraud had actually taken place .
No , we must never legitimise any sham election which restricts candidates on the basis of their religious purity and conducts its count behind closed doors .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I have listened very attentively to the different assessments and views expressed .
This is , as has been pointed out , a most important debate on a most important subject .
I think it can fairly be said that we stand united in our assessment of what has been happening , what we have seen on the television screens and , more importantly , what we have heard from the people who know even more than what can be seen on the television screens .
I would like to take issue with someone who said we have not been clear enough .
If you make a comparison with what the European Union has said , and what every other significant world body of actors has said , there is no question that we are the ones that have been the most clear , the most consistent , the strongest in the words that we have used .
We would have wished those words to have more of an effect than they already have , but that is often the case .
But , while words are , nevertheless , important - no question about that - we are discussing primarily what has been happening in Iran since the election on 12 June .
I think it is important also to focus on what we saw on the television screens before 12 June , because that was suddenly a somewhat different Iran from the one we were used to .
There was an element within the boundaries of the regime , certainly , of vitality , an element of plurality , an obvious desire for change , for openness , for reform .
Whether that represented the majority of Iranians or not is very difficult to judge from the outside , but that it was significant is testified not least by the force of the crackdown that we saw after 12 June .
So in condemning what we have seen after , we should not forget what we saw before and the long-term significance of that .
I think we are united in what we say and what we think .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Mauro : virtually the same , if we look at what we are assessing .
But the most difficult thing is not what we say ; the most difficult thing is what we do faced with this situation .
I think we must then operate along two lines .
The first one is fairly obvious .
The European Union must be the clear voice for human rights and democracy wherever and under whatever circumstances .
There might be other factors coming into consideration of policy as well , but it should not dilute in any way from the consistency of our defence for human rights .
So we must condemn the killings , the use of the death sentence .
We must call for the release of those detained .
We must be clear in our call for full respect for the freedom and the rights that are there for every human being in our world .
Secondly - and I think here there might be some dissent - we must also be prepared to engage .
I say that , recognising that that is a far more difficult policy than just to stand back , do nothing or try to isolate : that is easy ; to engage is difficult .
Mr Kelam alluded to some of the historical experience we have , with the balancing act that that entails .
But the fact that we have a certain amount of historical experience in Europe - reflected not the least here - perhaps makes it possible for us to venture along that particular road .
We should never believe that just a diplomatic dialogue can sort out every issue that has been addressed here : it cannot .
Other factors will come in to that particular equation .
But neither should we forget that there are some issues that we have a duty to seek to resolve through diplomatic dialogue .
I am thinking of the individuals employed at the British Embassy , or the French student and others , that we must deal with now in a dialogue .
I come from a country where 1 % of our citizens have a background in Iran .
They move back and forth .
We have consular issues that are of a multitude that is difficult to fathom .
We need to be prepared to engage , to help individuals in different cases , without believing that that is going to sort out everything at once .
We have the nuclear dossier that has been alluded to .
There might be others who believe there are far more simple solutions to that .
I do not think there is any solution if we do not engage in a true diplomatic dialogue on that .
Those are other issues that we need to engage on .
This is obviously going to be more demanding and more difficult in the circumstances that we now have , there is no question about that , and I think the discussion in the Committee on Foreign Affairs last week highlighted some of the difficult choices and some of the difficult judgements that we have to make in not only the coming weeks , but months - but not very much longer than that .
Here we must engage - you , us in the Council and us as Europeans - with other significant international actors , not only with Americans with a new and good approach by the Obama Administration , but also engage with others - the UN Security Council , Russia , China , and with the wider world community .
It is only then that we can hope to be able to start resolving not only the immediate issues , but also the other issues that need to be addressed .
I am grateful for this debate .
I think it has highlighted the clear unanimity that we have when it comes to defending our values , but it has also highlighted some of the difficult choices and balancing acts that we have to engage in in the months and years ahead .
We know what we want to achieve ; we must also seek to achieve it .
But do not think it is going to be easy .
I can assure you that the Council will continue to be very much engaged with all aspects of this particular dossier .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , please excuse me , but I have just been given a piece of information , and I should like to share it with the Council and with all my fellow Members .
Natalia Estemirova , who was a candidate for the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , was kidnapped this morning in Grozny and is being held by unknown kidnappers .
I call on the Council , the Commission and the MEPs to protest so that Moscow is aware that we are thinking of Natalia Estemirova .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , this is just to put the record straight , as my name was cited by my colleague , Mr Tannock .

I did not call for EU observers last week and , indeed , earlier in the debate I was very clear in saying that , should the circumstances have justified it , the European Union would have been able to send an observer mission to the Iranian elections .
However , it was precisely because the Commission did not have the confidence to do this that causes us proper , justified and objective concerns about the conduct of those elections .
I am sorry that Mr Tannock was not in the Chamber to hear that earlier in the debate , and I hope that I have been able to put the record straight .
The debate is closed .
China ( debate )
Τhe next item is the Council and Commission statements on China .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , another debate of , needless to say , some importance .
And , although the subject is China , it of course takes place against the background of some significant developments in Xinjiang in the western part of China .
I know that these events have been followed by many Members of this Parliament as well as our respective national parliaments throughout Europe .
We have also , as a Council , expressed our concern over the reports on the unrest there and called for restraint on all sides and for the situation to be resolved peacefully .
I think it is time for us to say that we attach great importance to human rights .
We also profoundly regret not only the loss of life but the destruction of property and everything else that we have seen happening and we can only condemn those that are responsible for it , whoever they are .
But let me also take this opportunity to take stock somewhat more widely of our relationship with China , a country with which we have an extraordinary range of complex relationships .
In fact , when we decided in 2003 to set up those relationships within the framework of a comprehensive strategic partnership , we were committing ourselves to an extremely ambitious enterprise , and this is very much reflected in the broad and wide-ranging relationship which we have with China today .
Complexity of course brings opportunities .
It also brings challenges of different sorts .
What we have tried to do with this relationship is to open it up to the point where we can discuss frankly and openly any concern that we might have on either side .
The basis for such an open dialogue is the shared interest that we have in developing our relationship , our shared interest in global peace and stability .
We pursue this through dialogue and through multilateralism .
We have the annual summit meetings and we have fairly frequent meetings at the level of foreign ministers .
We also have an intense biannual human rights dialogue and then of course sectoral dialogues on different issues , trade obviously being one of particular importance .
We also have the annual high-level dialogue on trade and economic issues .
As you are aware , in 2007 we also launched negotiations for a partnership and cooperation agreement .
Negotiations are progressing but still there is a potential to increase efforts on both sides in these negotiations .
We have a very clear interest in developing the relationship with China in all fields , and that entails , as I said , the possibility for an open and frank dialogue , also on issues where our values might be different , and we know that such issues exist , including human rights , including issues like the use of the death sentence ; but also to pursue the common interest that , needless to say , we have these days : issues of global financial stability , issues of how to deal with the climate change challenge are important .
Also important are foreign policy issues , be that the situation we face over the Korean peninsula with the provocation by the DPIK , or the situation in Burma , where we are concerned , obviously , at what we see happening , but our concern also stretches to the situation in Africa and the need to protect the vital sea routes around the Horn of Africa .
I will not go further into this question now , but wish only to underline the concern that we have over developments , without being able to assess those in every single detail because they are exceedingly complex , our hope that they could be resolved peacefully and our readiness to engage with the Chinese authorities in a frank dialogue on these issues , as well as on the broad range of other interests that we share together and that we need to have a dialogue on .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is a sign of the importance that this House attaches to our strategic relationship with China that this debate has been scheduled during your inaugural session .
I yet again welcome the opportunity to contribute with a brief outline of the perspective of the Commission on behalf of my colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner , who , I have indicated , is unfortunately travelling this week and cannot be here .
I do not need to remind this House of the huge progress we have made in relations with China since our first summit , now 10 years ago .
Economic and trade relations have been transformed , people-to-people contacts are multiplying and we are engaged in dialogue on an ever-increasing range of issues .
Following the last EU-China Summit in May , negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement are proceeding well and we are able to take advantage of a growing number of high-level contacts , including Prime Minister Wen 's highly successful visit to President Barroso earlier this year and the meeting of the high-level economic and trade dialogue which I co-chaired with Vice-Premier Wang Qishan .
Today we are naturally focused on global challenges , including the economic and financial crisis and climate change , as well as regional issues .
At the same time , we have strong interests in the situation inside China , where we witness many spectacular achievements but also developments that cause concern .
China 's policy of opening up its economy has lifted hundreds of millions out of poverty and helped the world progress towards the important Millennium Development Goals .
Yet China is a huge country with considerable internal challenges and differences between its regions .
The strength of our strategic partnership also allows for constructive and open exchange of views on issues where Europe and China diverge .
This can be on aspects of our trade relationship or human rights - for example over Tibet , which I know is of particular interest in this House .
Recently we expressed strong concern over the unrest in Xinjiang , deplored the loss of life , and expressed our condolences and sympathy to the families of the victims .
We have called on all parties to show restraint and bring an immediate end to all acts of violence .
We hope the situation can be resolved peacefully through dialogue without further bloodshed .
The EU has tried , over the years , to convey to the Chinese authorities its worries over the situation of ethnic minorities in China and to share its own experience , many times painful , on how to address the causes of marginalisation , exclusion and discrimination that those minorities often face .
We all share the goal of a more open , transparent China adhering to international standards on human rights and working together to address global challenges .
To achieve this , we must continue to integrate China deeper into the international community and work on the development of our strategic partnership in the spirit of constructive engagement .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the basic substance of what was said by the previous speakers from the Council and Commission .
I too am of the opinion that we should continue the One China policy to achieve the cohesion of China as a unified state , and that we do not want to jeopardise any of this .
Of course , we do not permit violence - be it violence by demonstrators under particular circumstances or violence by the state against demonstrators , as was actually the case .
I wanted to mention this first .
However , we also need to understand that , in China , the violence of the central government which , in this multi-ethnic state with many cultural differences , does not show a sufficient degree of understanding , will always be a recurring problem .
This is why greater cultural autonomy , greater opportunities for mobility and opportunities relating to the preservation of identity and language are all prerequisites for all the citizens of a multi-ethnic state to be able to live together under one roof .
China 's history has consisted of a series of break-aways and reunifications with massive campaigns of violence .
This can be seen again and again throughout China 's history .
China needs to realise that this cannot go on and that it needs to introduce this autonomy .
The Uighurs are a moderate Sunni minority .
They pose no direct terrorist threat .
There is therefore the same danger as we see in Tibet and that is that if China does not enter into agreements with the moderates , there are always young radicals who cannot and do not want to wait any longer .
Therefore , delaying a solution with regard to identity delays a solution in the long term .
The Chinese Government is extremely ill advised to talk only of terrorists , to claim that these people want to destroy the unity of the state and to say that outside forces like Al-Qaeda and others are behind this .
I do not believe that this is a solution for this country and therefore we should make it clear that we do not accept such a policy .
All this should be understood under the premise that I mentioned at the beginning of my speech .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the Chinese people are completely right to ask us why the European Parliament has put the situation in China on the agenda of the first part-session of its new mandate .
Our answer must be clear : this is because China is very important to us and not because we think that our role is to teach China or to impose our views on how sensitive internal problems of this country should be solved .
It is precisely because China is so important to us that we should pay close attention to any event affecting its internal stability and any event that could become a threat to its security .
This time the context was given by the multi-ethnic realities in the Xinjiang region and the aspirations of the Uighur predominant ethnic group to autonomy .
Such contexts are always sensitive and , therefore , respect for human and minority rights leading towards the sense of dignity and security for both minority and majority is important .
Minority rights , however , should not be an excuse for , and they could not excuse , the separatist policies , the extremist means to promote those policies and certainly not the killing of peaceful civilians belonging to a minority or to an ethnic community .
While asking for full respect for human rights and minority rights , while expressing compassion for all victims of these rights , while asking for clarification concerning terrorist , religious , extremist and separatist dimensions of these events , the European Parliament should offer its assistance to the Chinese Government and society in order to cope with these difficult realities , which are also a problem in some of our countries .
While asking the Chinese Government to refrain from the excessive use of power , we have also to ask everybody in the world to refrain from using minority rights as a means for promoting geopolitical goals .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this House has long been critical of the People 's Republic of China for its treatment of ethnic minorities .
The Uighurs of Xinjiang Province have suffered more than most , particularly since the occupation of East Turkestan by the People 's Republic of China in 1949 .
The People 's Republic claims that it does not seek territorial expansion .
History shows that in East Turkestan , Tibet and Taiwan , under Communist rule it has sought to rule and to subjugate .
That is the reason why the European Union must not lift the arms embargo on China .
For a European Prime Minister to refer to the reaction to the latest unrest as ' genocide ' is perhaps an exaggeration , but for the People 's Republic to complain of interference in internal affairs betrays a world view which is touchingly antiquated .
If the contours of the world economy are drawn in the computer campuses of West Coast America , in the call centres of India , in the factories of China , if major decisions can be communicated from Beijing to Brussels in a nanosecond , we have become truly one global community , and there is no room in this community for repression or subjugation on the basis of race or religion or ethnicity ; no room for Islamophobia or for anti-Semitism or any other kind of hatred .
China 's problems stem in this instance from the greying of the middle kingdom .
They need more young people to work elsewhere , similar to the problems we face here in the European Union .
I saw this when I visited Urumqi four years ago .
But the People 's Republic will find that it needs policies to protect economic migrants , policies to recognise the legitimate demands of ethnic minorities , just as we do .
Here , Mr Bildt , is a role for the European Union .
We know that as democracies mature , so they become more willing to allow people self-government and self-determination .
Indeed , the biggest problems in Europe are found in the younger democracies , like Spain and Hungary .
We need to help the Chinese people , who are quite capable of living in democracy - as Taiwan and Hong Kong show - to match their growing economic strength with a growing political maturity in developing democracy and help them develop the policies to match , policies like Erasmus Mundus , policies of which the Commissioner has spoken to increase people-to-people exchange .
I am convinced that the European Union can play an important role in working with China to these ends .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I condemn the violence on both sides , both on the part of the Han Chinese and on the part of the Uighurs , and I mourn for all the innocent victims .
However , this is not a conflict where the two sides are equal .
The Uighurs are a suppressed people numbering only nine million .
I believe that the minorities policy in the People 's Republic of China has failed .
The society is also not harmonious as the Communist Party of China claims .
In Xinjiang , the region of the Uighurs , there is just as little cultural autonomy as in Tibet .
There is no real self-government , even if these regions are referred to as being autonomous and above all - and this is crucial for the younger generation in particular - the Uighurs do not have the same social and economic rights as the rest of the population .
However , the Communist Party of China recognises only one charge , only one monotonously repeated charge , and that is of criminal separatism .
Anyone who promotes human rights and democracy in China runs the risk of being declared a criminal and a separatist .
However , the People 's Republic of China needs to understand that it is only with the guarantee of minority rights that there will be any real chance of internal peace .
Only by granting equal rights will China have peaceful internal development and acceptance of this country .
I have one last very important comment to make to the Swedish Presidency .
Yes , it is true that we have an interest in a strategic partnership with China on account of climate policy and general foreign policy matters .
However , we cannot sacrifice human rights and our criticism of the situation regarding human rights in China for the sake of a strategic interest .
Our strategic policy with regard to China must instead include a clear statement regarding the minorities policy and the violation of human rights in China .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , for centuries the Uighurs have eked out a perilous living in an inhospitable part of a vast country .
Most of them are peaceful followers of Islam .
However , sadly some of the local population in recent years have become increasingly radicalised by terrorists in league with Al-Qaida .
China has never been tolerant of dissent or its own minorities , but I do share its concern about the threat of Uighur Islamist terrorism .
I actually helped convince the Council to ban the Uighur East Turkestan Liberation Front three years ago .
China 's authoritarianism and Han dominance must not be used as an excuse by Uighur terrorists , some of whom are found as far afield as Guantánamo Bay , to spread fear and violence , as most victims of the recent violence were in fact Han Chinese .
Many of us are naturally concerned about human rights in China and I am also committed as a friend of Taiwan .
However , the EU remains wedded to a one-China policy and , given that the EU officially considers Taiwan and Tibet part of the People 's Republic of China , we should certainly not support in any way the secession of Xinjiang province .
One interesting aspect of this issue is whether this controversy will cause China 's Muslim partners in Africa like Sudan to reassess their links to the country .
Finally , I note that Turkey 's Prime Minister Erdogan has labelled this violence as a genocide : a bit rich coming from him when his own country fails to recognise the Armenian genocide .
His efforts to appeal to pan-Turkic nationalism are also hypocritical , given Turkey 's treatment of its own minorities and in particular the Kurds in eastern Turkey .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( NL ) The call to jihad has already gone out both inside and outside Xinjiang , and now the bloody clashes between Han Chinese and Uighurs on Chinese territory threaten to escalate dramatically , both in China and beyond .
The local Christian community is straining absolutely every sinew against the dangerous religious dimension of the ethnic divisions in Xinjiang .
The community prays specifically for peace , stability and justice for all the citizens of Xinjiang .
Irrationally enough , the Chinese Government does not take hold of this helping hand , but strikes it down repressively .
This can be seen from a blatant campaign by government agencies against peaceful protestant house churches of late .
Thus , on 3 July , eight Christians were arrested in Xinjiang during a service .
Four of them are still being held in a secret location , while two Chinese-American missionaries have simply gone missing .
I ask the Council and the Commission to intervene with the Chinese authorities as a matter of urgency in order to ensure freedom of religious practice for all in this critical situation in Xinjiang .
This would be the only effective antidote to the call to jihad and would also provide proof to Chinese house churches that they are part of Beijing 's plans to create a harmonious society .
Mr President , ' violence ' , ' a high number of casualties ' , ' hundreds dead and wounded in China in the uprising in Xinjiang province ' : those were the alarming reports we received 10 days ago .
In Xinjiang , the internet was blocked completely , limiting communications into and out of the desert region .
Taking into account what happened in Tibet last year , recent developments in Eastern Turkestan , also known as Xinjiang , should be a wake-up call to the Chinese Government on its overall policies towards ethnic minorities in China .
The message sent by the Uighur people is that those policies have failed and that the Chinese Government has to understand this and look for the solution .
The eight-million-strong Uighur population in the region has long complained about the treatment they receive from the Chinese Central Government and recently during the racist mob attacks the Chinese Government failed to protect the Uighurs from perpetrators of violence .
It has nothing to do with the war on terror , the controversial concept used by the Chinese Government as a justification for their repressive treatment of the Uighurs in East Turkestan .
The fact that President Hu Jintao had to shorten his participation in the G8 Summit in Italy to return to China indicates that the Chinese Government realises that events in the province are not just an isolated incident .
Rather than seeking solutions through repression and crackdown , the Chinese leadership needs positive action addressing the basic grievances of the Uighur people , especially if China wants to show maturity and create a sincerely harmonious society .
I fully support the EU position expressed by the President-in-Office to urge restraint on all sides and call on the Government of China to respect freedom of speech and information , as well as the right to peaceful protest .
( FR ) Mr President , the outbreak of violence in the autonomous region of Xinjiang is being severely repressed by the Chinese Government .
The clashes between Uighurs and Hans have taken the official death toll to 186 , but the bloodshed continues .
This violence is being presented by China as a mere interethnic conflict between Hans and Uighurs , when it is in fact the almost inevitable result of its repressive policy in the Xinjiang region .
The region is strategic but difficult to control .
As a key transit route and with its wealth of natural resources - gold , oil and gas - it is crucial to the future of China 's energy supply .
However , its population includes many non-Chinese ethnic groups , the largest of which is the Uighurs .
The latter , which make up almost half of the population , are for the most part Sunni Muslims of Turkish-speaking origin .
For a decade , they have been systematically discriminated against and threatened with assimilation and death , and their identity is in danger .
In fact , China 's policy towards these ethnic minorities was liberal in the 1980s but it has gradually become tougher , and the Chinese authorities seized upon 11 September 2001 in order to publicise their fight against - and note how they are all merged - terrorism , separatism and religious extremism .
In April 2009 Amnesty International issued a stark warning : after Tibet , there will be Xinjiang .
The policy of non-violence having failed , the Uighur separatists would seek other ways of having their demands for recognition of their identity met , and this has indeed happened .
However , China cannot continue to maintain its cohesion through repeated acts of bloodshed .
As a signatory to international agreements , it is bound to protect its ethnic minorities .
Moreover , its constitution , together with its 1984 law on regional autonomy , also oblige it to protect these minorities .
Is Europe going to continue to shut its eyes and merely condemn the repression and unsuccessfully beg for the release of the political prisoners ?
No .
Human rights in China are a political problem , and we must dare to remind that country of its commitments to its people and of the risk that it would run with regard to the international community should it fail to fulfil them .
We shall expect strong action from the Swedish Presidency in this regard .
( PL ) Mr President , the way in which protests have been dealt with in Xinjiang province has provided further confirmation of the authoritarian nature of the Communist authorities in Beijing .
At least 180 people are now dead and 1600 injured as a result of the most significant ethnic conflict to take place in China in recent decades .
The European Parliament is duty bound to condemn violence arising from discrimination on ethnic or religious grounds .
Such should also be our response in this case , when the might of an authoritarian state has been unleashed against the Uighur minority .
The latter is not the only victim of totalitarian governments , however .
The citizens of a Europe based on Christian values have a special duty towards Christian minorities that are persecuted in other parts of the world .
Unofficial sources indicate that where China is concerned , this minority consists of over 30 million people .
This means that the representatives of a population the same size as that of a large European country are being harassed , persecuted , prevented from seeking employment , tortured and murdered by the Chinese Communist authorities .
The Chinese regime is aware that a longing for freedom and the rule of law are concomitant with Christianity , and that is why it is trying to halt the spread of that religion .
Its attempts to overcome the Church are proving unsuccessful , however , as the number of believers is steadily increasing year on year .
The Chinese authorities have to understand that the so-called Central State cannot become a truly modern state unless and until it begins to respect the fundamental principles of democracy and freedom of religion .
( DE ) Mr President , today 's debate proves once again that the Council is the weak point of the EU .
This House has adopted a very clear position on human rights and Lady Ashton has given an impressively clear speech on behalf of the Commission .
However , from the Council I have heard only that they condemn both sides for the violence .
Of course violence by the Uighurs should be condemned too .
But can we really compare it to what a communist dictatorship that has learnt nothing from the massacre in Tiananmen Square is doing in suppressing an entire people in a brutal and bloody fashion and threatening this people with ethnocide by means of a targeted settlement policy ?
Can we compare this to incidents which are quite simply an expression of Chinese propaganda and which are not being investigated by anyone at an international level ?
I do not think so .
The Uighurs are currently being accused of separatism .
However , is it separatism if a house is on fire and I try to escape from this house ?
Is it separatism if I am wrongfully imprisoned and I try to escape ?
That is not separatism , that is an expression of the will to live .
If the Uighurs in China were given space to live in their homeland in freedom and with dignity and independence there would be no more separatism .
That is the only way to prevent separatism .
The Uighurs are not a minority , they are a people just like the Swedes , who happen to be smaller in number than the Han Chinese .
However , is a people in the wrong simply because it is smaller in number ?
Do we have to bow to a power simply because it is larger ?
I do not think so .
We , as the European Union , therefore have an important obligation .
I represent Munich , and the headquarters of the World Uighur Congress is in Munich .
Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe were also previously based in Munich .
We are still proud to have been the voice of freedom at that time .
I am sure that one day we will be just as proud to have been the centre for the free Uighurs and I hope that one day all Uighurs will enjoy this freedom .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one thing needs to be stated very clearly : there is a unified system in China and we do not want to allow this system to break up .
We respect the Chinese system .
However , that does not mean ...
( Interruption by Mr Posselt )
We respect China 's unified system .
However , that does not mean that the diversity of peoples in China must not also be respected .
That is what we Social Democrats are calling for .
We want citizens ' rights , human rights and people 's freedom to be respected in China .
We want freedom of expression to be respected .
We want journalists to be able to move around freely so that the situation as it really is can indeed be reported .
That is what we want and there is one thing that we would say very clearly to our colleagues in China : what for us is a basic principle we would also expect to be a basic principle for you in China , namely that human rights are universal .
What the politicians always say to us - let us first solve the social problems and then we can talk about human rights - is the wrong way to go about things .
It must be the other way round .
Human rights come first and then social rights , which are quite simply part and parcel of human rights and cannot be separated from them .
I was therefore very disappointed by what you said , Mr Bildt .
You seemed to be saying : let us work together on an economic level , that is our main concern and all of the other things are of no particular interest to us .
That is not the approach that we need .
We need to take the approach presented to us by the European Commission , namely to say that we first want a common basis for our work on which we can then build our cooperation , because we do want cooperation , that much is clear , but not on any basis , only on a correct basis that respects human dignity .
Mr President , may I congratulate Mr Bildt on a very balanced speech just now .
I believe in the borders of the nation state as recognised by the United Nations and so oppose separatist-related violence everywhere in the world , be it in Kashmir , Indonesia , Sri Lanka , where I was born , Northern Ireland , where I got bombed , Spain or even in China .
I regret that in China , a country very important for the EU , some 1 680 people have been injured and 184 killed .
The problem started in a toy factory in Guangdong and spread .
Among those killed in the riots in Urumqi were 137 Han Chinese and 46 Uighur Chinese .
This is deplorable .
We must condemn it .
If these acts were encouraged and perpetrated by outside forces , particularly separatist fundamentalist forces , then they should be indicted in the International Criminal Court .
If they were home-grown , then it is a matter for the police in China and we must support them .
We live in a small world .
We must live together .
The EU is a clear example of this .
Supporting separatism anywhere in the world is against the spirit of the EU .
We cannot work to unite Europe at home and encourage the break-up of China abroad .
That is the road to chaos and conflict .
( HU ) The question is where do we stand on this issue ?
Are we on the side of China or Tiananmen Square ?
Are we on the side of China or Tibet ?
Are we on the side of China or the Uighur region ?
Are we on the side of 1.2 billion Chinese or 8 million Uighurs ?
Are we on the side of repression , the introduction of an alien way of life , a comfortable life , good health and money , or of a peasant , nomad past , which admittedly entails poverty and widespread disease , but preserves one 's own culture , and of freedom ?
The speeches made by one or two of my fellow Members echo the language of the dictatorship of the former Eastern European regimes .
Can a mother of 11 really be a terrorist ?
A woman who served time in prison , and two of whose children are still in prison ?
Where do we stand then ?
That is the question .
Are we on the side of token autonomy or real autonomy ?
Are we on the side of repression , an alien way of life , the exploitation of the Uighur region 's natural assets , or of the preservation of cultures , freedom and peoples ' right of self-determination ?
It is obvious to me whose side I am on .
I hope that it is clear to my fellow Members too .
We must make friends with China so that it can learn from us .
However , we must do this by showing an example in the areas of human rights , freedoms , self-determination and autonomy .
We still have a huge amount of work to do .
On this point , I am thinking about the countries which have recently joined .
( NL ) I have listened to the introductions from both the Council and the Commission and maybe it is to do with the interpreting , but I have not heard the word Uighurs once , and it is , of course , the Uighurs that we are discussing today .
There are hundreds of dead whose passing we regret , and many more wounded besides .
The European Union stands firmly for fundamental rights , human rights , civil rights and peaceful demonstration .
We are seeing all of these seriously repressed .
Needless to say , I heard in the introductions about the need for dialogue .
That need is something that I , too , very much want to stress .
That dialogue is tremendously important .
I would really like to find out from the Council and the Commission , however , what tangible measures they are going to put in place in the short term .
( DE ) Mr President , we are having this debate on the basis of the universal nature of human rights , but also on the basis of the need for a global partnership .
A harmonious society has been mentioned .
That is one of the slogans of the Communist Party of China , but it is also something more : it reflects a deep hope of the Chinese people .
A harmonious society is not simply the same as masking authoritarian relations .
I believe it could be our job to support the Chinese people in their realisation of a harmonious society .
A partnership involves speaking out clearly .
When we talk about Xinjiang the word ' Uighurs ' should also be mentioned .
However , clear speaking is not the same as being confrontational - we should avoid that .
I would like to say one last thing to Mr Posselt .
He spoke of separatism .
Now , I know Mr Posselt that your Bavarian party knows something about this , but I think that we should instead follow Mr Brok and talk about continuing with the One China policy .
Mr President , it would be a great mistake to place China in the same category in this debate today as we discussed Iran .
The EU enjoys a very good relationship with China and I think we have to take care that our discussions on the recent events in Urumqi are accurate and based on fact .
The incident that took place on 5 July involved a premeditated attack on the Han Chinese population of that city by the Uighurs .
As we know , certain militants among the Uighur population of Xinjiang are Islamic fundamentalists who demand a separate state .
They mounted a violent attack that led to the deaths of 137 Han Chinese .
So the vast majority of those killed were Han Chinese .
The Chinese Government quite properly deployed police and military personnel to quell the violence and stop the retaliatory attacks by the Han population on the Uighurs .
What else would anyone expect them to do ?
So let us base our criticism on facts and not take unfair records against the Chinese .
( DE ) Mr President , I think that this conflict is very often presented in a very one-sided manner .
I agree with the previous speaker that in the present case it is frequently a matter of attacks on Han Chinese by Uighurs and indeed that some of these attacks are racially motivated .
( Heckling )
I read an interview with a Uighur woman , for example , who said : Would you like to be governed by yellow communists ?
The Uighurs enjoy many privileges in their region , for example they are allowed to have more children , they are allowed to practice their religion even during working hours and there are many other examples .
Many of the local Han Chinese are also envious of them .
We ought therefore to be very discriminating in our observation of this situation and investigate the causes and effects .
Sometimes problems do not lie where they seem to at first glance .
We should be careful not to take a one-sided position .
We ought to support the Chinese in solving their problems .
The one-sided view that is so often presented in this House is , in my opinion , dangerous .
The Chinese Government certainly has shortcomings in its policy towards minority groups and it has its failures too .
However , it is also showing the will to improve in many areas .
We should therefore help it in this regard through cooperation - and indeed also critical cooperation - based on trust .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I think this debate has really reflected the complexities of the issues that we face .
What has been addressed here are issues ranging from the different system that China has and the evolution of that particular system , the importance that we attach to human rights and the need to help China develop in the direction of a more open society , better respecting those human rights , as well as the problems attached to minority rights , problems that are there in China .
But China is unfortunately not unique in the world in facing these issues and the violence , the ethnic violence , that has been seen in the last few days on the streets of Urumqi .
Ethnic violence is always evil .
It should be condemned and we can only support those who try to bring reconciliation in this particular situation based on respect for human rights , knowing from our own history the complexity of those issues .
Mr Bütikofer referred to the concept of a harmonious society .
We all want to develop and live in harmonious societies and clearly we need to see what we can do in order to help China develop in the direction of a society that is seen as harmonious by each and every one of the citizens of China .
They are not there yet .
Few societies as a matter of fact are , but it has been fairly obvious .
Otherwise let me note that in the initial statements from Mr Brok , Mr Severin and Mr Watson , I found lots of wisdom that could guide our further deliberations as we move on with the important relationship that we seek with China , understanding the complexity of that relationship in all its dimensions .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( DE ) Conflict resolution for millions of Uighurs in China - dialogue not condemnation .
We lament the bloody clashes , the dead and wounded in Xinjiang-Uighur .
The actions of the police and security forces were excessive and harm the Chinese Government 's goals of growth and stability .
At the same time it is wrong to accuse China of cultural genocide .
The Government is striving to obtain a balance between the autonomy of minority groups and modernisation in a multi-ethnic state .
It is also up to us as a partner to support China 's development in terms of democracy and the rule of law , without neglecting the special historical , geographic and cultural aspects of this state .
Biased information will prevent dialogue , and it will not compensate for a policy with an inadequate guarantee of human rights .
China is an important partner for Europe , alongside the US and Russia .
Combating the financial crisis , fighting poverty , stopping climate change , providing energy security and guaranteeing the water supply - none of these things can be achieved without the efforts of the People 's Republic of China .
The majority of Uighurs are dismayed over the events of the past week and above all want to live in peace once again .
The Chinese Government knows that this conflict cannot be solved with violence .
We can support the dialogue between the Han Chinese and the Uighurs and other minority groups instead of continuing our decade-long interference from the outside with our inapt methods .
Establishing a structured dialogue aimed at developing the rule of law in China is a more important task for the European Parliament .
Honduras ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Honduras .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the world is a big place .
I am grateful for this opportunity to focus somewhat on the situation in Honduras and the seriousness of the developments that we see there , not only for Honduras but for the entire region .
I will try to be reasonably brief .
Since the beginning of this particular crisis last month , the Presidency has condemned the military action that was directed against President Zelaya , who was democratically elected , in spite of everything else that can be said .
That action was in violation of the constitutional order of Honduras .
We have called for the restoration of this constitutional order , in full , and urged all parties and institutions to refrain from violence or talks about violence and to strive to find a swift and peaceful solution .
I think in much the same way as we expect , when we have problems in different parts of Europe , that it is the European Union that should take the lead and we would hope that the rest of the world would support our efforts , our policy has now been guided by giving support to the Organisation of American States in their efforts to find a solution through dialogue and compromise to the problems that they are facing .
We have a situation where none of our ambassadors at the moment are present in Honduras .
We do not have any diplomatic contacts at the moment either .
We very much welcome the recent effort by Costa Rican President Oscar Arias , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , to try to reconcile the differences that exist .
So far that has proved to be - hardly surprising , one might say - a somewhat difficult enterprise .
But I am encouraged by the news that there will be new meetings under the chairmanship of President Arias this Saturday .
We can only encourage him to move forward with those efforts and we can only continue to urge both sides to be ready to compromise , fully respecting every part of the constitution of Honduras .
Let me conclude by underlining the importance that we attach , beyond the immediate crisis , to the holding of fair , timely and transparent presidential elections in Honduras later this year .
The rule of law and respect for human rights must remain the cornerstone of democratic government throughout the world ; Central America , Latin America , all of America are certainly not excluded .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , again I am pleased to contribute briefly to this debate on behalf of my colleague , Benita Ferrero-Waldner , as we look at the political crisis in Honduras .
After many years , Latin America is again experiencing an institutional rupture .
The crisis in Honduras shows us how fragile is the rule of law and the institutional framework for the resolution of conflicts in some Latin American countries and , indeed , how these countries can plunge into crisis , especially now that they are going through a period of strong political polarisation .
The Commission reacted promptly .
We expressed our deep concern about the events in Honduras and we stressed the great importance we attach to the respect for the rule of law , democracy and democratically elected institutions .
We have urged all parties involved to resolve their differences peacefully in full respect of the country 's legal framework and to promptly engage in a dialogue in the interests of peace and stability in the country .
We deplored the violent confrontations , even more so as they have resulted in the loss of human lives , and we called upon all parties involved to show the utmost moderation and restraint .
The Commission declared it would be ready to support all initiatives aimed at a peaceful solution of the crisis and at restoring the constitutional order .
As the Presidency has said , we supported the initiative by the Organisation of American States and its Secretary-General , Mr Insulza , which unfortunately did not bear fruit .
We strongly welcomed the mediation efforts of the Costa Rican President and trust that they will result in a peaceful settlement of the crisis .
Following the events in Honduras and after consulting the Central American governments and EU Member States , it was decided to postpone the next round of negotiations with a view to an association agreement with Central America , negotiations that were due between 6 and 10 July in Brussels .
But we trust that these negotiations can resume as soon as possible .
Again , as the Presidency has said , in response to the gravity of the situation the local ambassador of the EU Presidency has been recalled for consultations and all other EU ambassadors have also left the country .
In close cooperation with the Presidency and the Member States , we continue to explore the ways in which we can best contribute to the solution of this crisis .
For the time being , suspending our cooperation has not been decided , but disbursement of our financial commitments related to budgetary support has been put on hold .
We are very much aware that the events in Honduras could create a dangerous precedent , a step back in terms of democracy , and could destabilise the region .
Therefore , we continue to follow the situation closely and we support all efforts to find a peaceful solution .
We will continue to keep Parliament informed about any further development .
Mr President , the fact that an elected President has been removed from his home manu militari , put on a plane and dropped in a foreign country is something that should , from a democratic point of view , be categorically and unreservedly condemned .
Mr President , on this basis I have to say that the observation made by a number of esteemed analysts , such as Mario Vargas Llosa , is in any case highly significant : the most conspicuous defenders of the deposed President Zelaya - who , by the way , has won support from all the various political parties , including his own , and the Supreme Court of Justice against the National Congress of the Republic - have in fact been representatives of regimes characterised by a systematic violation of human rights and by a progressive decline in individual freedoms , as this Parliament recognised in the last report on the human rights situation in the world .
We now have to find a way out of this situation .
The President-in-Office of the Council has said so : the European Union must facilitate a return to democratic normality by supporting the efforts of a man who has been working to stabilise the situation in the region , namely the President of Costa Rica , Óscar Arias .
Secondly , with regard to the upcoming presidential elections , the European Union needs to make all its election observation experience available to Honduras and should prepare to send an EU election observation mission .
Lastly , President-in-Office of the Council , it is important that the European Union acts consistently , without double standards .
It is unacceptable that , on the one hand , the European Union facilitates and intensifies its political dialogue with the only undemocratic country in the region and , on the other hand , makes the citizens of one of the poorest countries in Latin America pay for their leaders ' mistakes , to which Mr Zelaya is not exactly oblivious .
President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I also believe that the European Union needs to be actively present in the region , as Mr Bildt has said .
That active presence is currently manifesting itself in the negotiations over the association agreement , which are about to come to a head .
Mr President , we cannot make the innocent suffer for the guilty and , therefore , I believe we need to reconsider a swift return to the negotiating table once the conflict is resolved .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we join in the international community 's unanimous condemnation , not only because of the seriousness of the situation itself and of the breakdown in constitutional order - as the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner have highlighted - but also on account of the extremely serious precedent this sets in a region which , with a great deal of work and effort , has managed to restore democracy throughout the continent , with rare exceptions .
Therefore , we cannot accept this situation .
The European Union and the Member States have done the right thing in recalling their ambassadors , cancelling all forms of cooperation and suspending negotiations with the region .
I agree with the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission that we must now support a negotiated settlement led by the Social Democrat President of Costa Rica , Óscar Arias , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , and not provoke any repressive or insurrectional violence .
This is not the time to analyse the real or presumed mistakes that might have been made by President Zelaya , who has six months left in office ; for that is not the matter at hand .
This is a time to analyse the very serious breakdown in constitutional order in Honduras brought on by the armed forces ( with the support of Congress and the judiciary , certainly , but in an entirely illegitimate and illegal manner ) .
There will be time enough to consider his future , but today we must demand President Zelaya 's restoration without the slightest hesitation ; he is the country 's constitutional President until January 2010 .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) ( Speaks briefly in Basque . )
Mr President , I am speaking in Basque , a minority language which is not yet official in this House : Basque .
I hope that it will be so in the future , as other languages are , and that we will , therefore , be able to speak in my mother tongue and in the language of the Basque Country .
That said , I agree , and my group agrees , with the need for an outright rejection of the coup - for we should call it by its real name - that has taken place in Honduras .
Some may consider it a mistake to have tried to consult the will of the people , perhaps above all else ; but we are not here to analyse that .
I also agree that both the Commission and the Council have to work to facilitate the restoration of the constitutional and institutional order that has been overturned and to ensure the return of the Honduran President , who was legitimately elected by all the people .
I , too , am concerned about the attacks endured by some members of the government , even in official diplomatic missions in Honduras , which , as we have heard , have been recalled .
Naturally , as the representative of the Commission has done , my group also supports all the action that the Organization of American States has taken to address and resolve this conflict .
My group believes that we in Europe need to help to strengthen democracy in Honduras , to ensure fundamental rights are developed and , therefore , to ensure that political dialogue is the only tool used to bring us closer to a solution to the problem we are now experiencing .
It goes without saying that we also support all the work being done by the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , Mr Óscar Arias , and accordingly we also hope that , once the aforementioned measures are in place , elections can be held in November 2009 with full transparency and with total respect for the democratic system and for human rights .
I hope , too , that the current situation will also allow us to continue the negotiations in order to conclude the association agreement with the European Union .
Mr President , I , too , wish to use this opportunity to strongly condemn and to express our dismay at the recent events in Honduras .
I have been following the situation in the country and the region in the last few years in my role as Vice-Chairman of the Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America ; it is particularly significant for me and of the utmost importance that we are discussing this matter on the first day of political debate in this House .
That fact shows that this is a fundamental issue : the event has the sad and regrettable honour of being considered the first coup d 'état in a Central American country in the 21st century , and that is something we should not forget .
Therefore , I not only strongly condemn the coup d 'état against President Zelaya , but I also urge the European Union not to recognise the coup leader , Roberto Micheletti .
Furthermore , I believe it is vital that the European Union insists , as it is in fact already doing , that constitutional order be restored .
It is crucial that the November 2009 elections should be prepared in a serious , responsible and credible manner and , with that in mind , I am also pleased that talks aimed at forming an association agreement with the region have been suspended , at least for the time being .
I also ask that we suspend aid in the form of trade support , as others such as the World Bank or the United States have done , with the exception of humanitarian aid .
Beyond these measures , I think it is important to remember the need to carry out a clear and concise investigation into who should be held accountable in this coup d 'état .
It is clear that many people are responsible , that there are many other interests behind this coup and , in some cases , we do not even know their names .
I believe the European Union should press for such an investigation and , for that to happen , we need to send permanent , on-site international delegations who can support the movements that are emerging in the country , in order to demand , reclaim and call for the democracy that has been taken from them .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , four days after the coup , my parliamentary group decided to send me to Tegucigalpa to observe in situ the consequences of this military coup , this coup d 'état .
In Tegucigalpa , I was able to witness the consequences of any military coup , namely : repression ; a lack of freedom ; arrest warrants issued against members of parliament who did not support the coup ; leaders of social groups imprisoned ; and hospitals , with many injured people , taking advantage of the curfew .
That was the detailed picture I gained there .
I welcome the response issued by the Council and the European Commission , for that is the only possible response .
Firstly , all the requirements issued by the Organization of American States must be met .
May I state here that , in the meeting I had with the Secretary General of the Organization of American States , I found that they are very clear on this matter : any action carried out by the illegitimate government of the coup leader , Roberto Micheletti , will be declared null and void and , therefore , the Organization of American States has already decided that it is not going to observe any kind of election held by that government .
I hope that the European Union will also follow the same code of conduct - the same road map - so that any action carried out by that government will not be considered legitimate .
As a result , under those circumstances we would not be able to observe elections rigged by a government that had seized power in a coup .
It seems to me that this is going to be a decisive week .
President Zelaya , the only President of Honduras , has made things very clear : he has made it very clear that he is giving the situation one more week and , if it is not decided within a week at the Costa Rica talks that he should return , he will return anyway .
Therefore , given the decision made by the only legitimate President , I hope that Parliament , the Institutions , the Council and the Commission will support his decision as the Organization of American States is doing , as the United Nations is doing and , by the way , as the United States is doing .
Consequently , I believe that it is very important that such a tone , a tone demanding the restoration of constitutional power and the restoration of President Zelaya , serves as Parliament 's identifying feature .
My fellow Members , I hope we come to the firm decision that this House condemns the coup d 'état unreservedly and supports the restoration of President Zelaya .
I also hope that we will , therefore , endorse all of the international organisations ' initiatives .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by joining with the previous speakers in condemning in the harshest possible terms the coup d 'état staged against the government of President Zelaya in Honduras .
His arbitrary detention and his expulsion from the country are in breach of the constitutional order , which must be restored as quickly as possible .
The military overthrow that led to Roberto Micheletti proclaiming himself as the new president brings to mind the darkest periods in the history of Central America that we have known , and this attack on democracy is unacceptable in our view .
I therefore welcome the Organization of American States ' decision to suspend Honduras ' involvement in the organisation , and the acceptance of President Oscar Arias as a mediator helping to find a solution .
However , I am also very concerned , Commissioner , about the commercial relations that the European Union maintains with this country .
For several months negotiations have been taking place between the European Commission and Central America on a new-generation association agreement .
Following the coup d 'état , meetings planned last week have been cancelled .
We should be glad about that .
I thought I understood you , but I should like to have more details .
Is the Commission determined to suspend the negotiations until the institutional political situation in Honduras has returned to normal ?
That is what I and my political group are asking , but I should like to have more details concerning the Commission 's position on this point .
Another issue that I wish to raise , Commissioner , is that of the Generalised System of Preferences Plus , from which Honduras benefits .
Several organisations from civil society have reported arbitrary decisions and human rights violations since the coup d 'état , particularly as regards freedom of movement , association and expression .
The European Commission has to be very firm on this issue .
The GSP + is an incentive , the benefits of which are dependent on clear commitments .
The testimonies are more than enough to cast doubt on whether the State of Honduras is fulfilling its commitments under its self-proclaimed president .
I therefore call on the Commission to launch an investigation into the possibility of temporarily withholding the preferences granted to Honduras under the GSP + .
( FR ) Mr President , our peace-loving principles must not lead us to give the impression that , by appealing to both parties of the current conflict to show restraint , we believe that the perpetrators of the coup d 'état in Honduras and the constitutional government are as guilty as each other .
In a case such as this , the violence of the insurgents who are fighting for the return of President Zelaya is legitimate and that of the putschists is criminal .
The personal involvement of the Heads of State or Government of Central and South America to secure the unconditional return to power of the Constitutional President , Manuel Zelaya , shows that the entire continent wants an end once and for all to the period of coups d 'états and dictatorships .
Following the unanimous decisions of the UN and of all the regional cooperation organisations , Europe must play its part in this fight , since it is a fight , not an arrangement .
It is a historic fight .
Europe must break off all relations of all kinds - political , commercial - and all negotiations with the factious regime until the time of President Zelaya 's unconditional and non-negotiable return to power , since there is nothing to negotiate where democracy is concerned .
Europe must call on the Obama Administration and on the United States to break off their commercial and military relations with the factious regime , too .
This is the price at which we will prove equal to the principles that we so often claim to observe in order to criticise those of others .
( PL ) Mr President , the situation in Honduras requires that the European Union continue specific and resolute action which will lead to stabilisation , restore constitutional order and prevent a growth in the conflict between supporters and opponents of ousted President Zelaya .
Therefore I support the initiative proposed by Mr Salafranca to say as soon as possible that a mission endorsed by the European Parliament can be sent to Honduras .
The disputing parties should be led as soon as possible to begin talks , which will enable an agreement to be made allowing