Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 9 June 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Welcome
I am very pleased to welcome a delegation composed of four members of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Parliament of the Seychelles and two senior parliamentary officers , headed by their Chair , Mr William .
The delegation is here in the European Parliament this week to take part in a four-day study visit organised by the Office for the Promotion of Parliamentary Democracy .
We hope you have a fruitful visit , ladies and gentlemen , and we know you will be following with interest the report by Mr Cadec on the fisheries partnership agreement between the European Union and the Seychelles , which will be put to the vote tomorrow .
All we ask is that on your next visit you bring a little sunshine to Brussels .
Composition of committees : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Written declaration ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has asked for the floor .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we discussed Russia in our last part-session .
At the time , we sent messages to the President of the Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council telling them to discuss the Russian elections .
We have now been informed that one party in Russia has been denied registration .
On the other hand , the OSCE has informed us that they have been permitted to send observers to oversee the elections .
We would like to receive a statement on the state of affairs in Russia as soon as possible .
We also want to have a debate on this .
I think that would be appropriate .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to endorse this motion .
However , it is up to the Conference of Presidents , as a sign of political will , to allow us also to have a brief statement and a debate on this matter in the July part-session , when the High Representative will also be here .
We are not having a debate now .
We take note of this request and will pass it on to the relevant bodies .
We now move on to the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 9 June 2011 pursuant to Rules 137 and 138 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Having consulted with the political groups , I would like to submit to the House the following proposed amendments to the final version of the draft agenda :
Thursday 23 June 2011
1 .
The vote on the report by Mr Kastler on the European Year for Active Ageing ( 2012 ) is postponed to the July part-session .
2 .
The report by Mr Tatarella on tractors placed on the market under the flexibility scheme will be included directly in the vote .
The deadline for tabling amendments is at 16 : 00 today .
Are there any comments ?
There are no comments , so these amendments are accepted .
In addition , the following changes have been requested :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has requested that today , on Wednesday 22 June 2011 , the debate on economic governance take place immediately after the debate on preparations for the European Council meeting and before the Dess report on the common agricultural policy .
( The amendment was rejected )
We shall now move on to the order of business for Thursday .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has asked to postpone to a later part-session the vote on the reports included in the joint debate on economic governance ( Ferreira , Feio , Ford , Goulard , Wortmann-Kool and Haglund .
Mr Klute has the floor to present the request .
Mr President , I would like to move that we postpone the debate and the vote on economic governance to the July part-session .
Our reasons for wanting to do so are quite simple .
The Ecofin Council met on Monday and once again made amendments to the compromises that had been negotiated .
As MEPs we have not had sufficient time to have a proper look at these .
The necessary translations were not available , either .
We see this as unacceptable pressure being exerted by the Council and would ask you as fellow Members to resist this pressure and to vote in favour of the motion to postpone the debate and vote .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , Europe urgently needs a strong foundation for the euro .
We have been discussing this package for many months and now there is 98 % agreement with the Council .
We would like to have the vote tomorrow so that Parliament can express its views in a vote in plenary .
Further negotiations with the Council are needed so we can get a final agreement before summer in order to have a strong foundation for the euro .
Mr President , we are looking at a package that has had last-minute changes made to it by the Economic and Financial Affairs Council , which have not yet been translated into the various languages .
First of all , there is only one version - at least , I have only had access to an English version - which does not give us an exact picture of what happened .
The second issue is that the facts involved are vitally important and the consequences are very serious for our countries and our peoples , not least bearing in mind the situations that are now being experienced here in the European Union , for instance in Greece and Ireland and , as is being announced , Portugal .
We therefore think a more careful approach to these issues is required .
That is why we insist that we need to put off voting on them until July .
The request is rejected .
The order of business is thus adopted .
Preparations for the European Council meeting ( 24 June 2011 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparations for the European Council meeting of 23-24 June 2011 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , President of the Commission , honourable Members , this is the last occasion I have to address this House on behalf of the Council in a plenary debate .
In January , we promised to run a Parliament-friendly Presidency .
Aware of the consequences of the Lisbon Treaty , we realised that close cooperation with the European Parliament and its members would be essential for the success of any Presidency in the future .
The European public looks to the EU for results , without bothering too much with distinguishing between Parliament , Commission and Council .
And they are right in doing so .
We have a common responsibility and therefore our success or failure is shared .
The forthcoming European Council marks the end of the Hungarian Presidency .
Therefore , this debate is a golden opportunity to give an account of what it has achieved on a number of dossiers , in close cooperation with this House .
Let me start with economic policy .
The European Council will bring the first European Semester to a conclusion .
It brings together in one policy cycle the two arms of economic recovery : financial stability that is based on fiscal consolidation , reflected in stability and convergence programmes , and structural reforms for a smart , sustainable , socially-inclusive and job-creating growth .
Thanks to the excellent cooperation between Commission , Council and Member States in handling national reform programmes and recommendations , the first European Semester has lasted a semester , and not a day longer .
The European Council will be invited to endorse the country-specific recommendations approved by the Council , which should be reflected by all Member States in their national decisions as regards their budgets and structural reforms .
Even in the trialogue negotiations , we included a reference to the European semester so that Parliament could be duly informed of these developments .
Regarding the Euro Plus Pact , most of the Member States participating have presented commitments amounting to more than a hundred separate measures in total .
Those commitments are a good step towards achieving the objectives of the Pact , which must now be implemented at the national level .
However , the degree of ambition and precision of these initial commitments is uneven .
In preparing their next commitments , Member States will ensure a broader scope , a more concrete approach and a higher degree of ambition .
Allow me now to turn to the six legislative proposals on economic governance , called the ' six-pack ' in our common jargon .
I will not go into detail as it is on the plenary agenda in its own right .
Let me just remind you that the Hungarian Presidency was given a mandate by the European Council to reach political agreement with Parliament by the end of June .
After the adoption of a general approach by the Council in March , we got down to business immediately , engaging in intense trialogue negotiations with Parliament and the Commission .
The three institutions have done immense work .
The initial position of Parliament carried approximately 2 000 amendments .
By now , we have managed to reduce the outstanding issues to one single major issue and some technicalities .
I am convinced that the text we have on the table now is stronger and more suited to preventing future crises .
We will inform the President of the European Council accordingly , thus reporting back to the body which gave us this mission .
I have been personally involved in fascinating talks with many members of this House .
I take this opportunity to thank you all sincerely for this experience .
As a Parliament-friendly Presidency , we hope that the results which have brought us to the verge of agreement will not be wasted .
The financial markets , European business and , most importantly , our fellow European citizens , expect us to show responsibility and decide and act against indebtedness - the chief predicament of our economies .
Finally , we know too that the issue of Greece will be also on the agenda of the European Council .
Let me now turn to Justice and Home Affairs .
The European Council will address strategic issues relating to asylum , migration and Schengen ; building on the conclusions adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 9 June 2011 .
In the light of recent developments , the European Council will discuss ideas and provide more political guidance and cooperation in the Schengen area .
It will also discuss ideas as regards a possible safeguard mechanism .
But let me stress that the good functioning of Schengen requires Member States to fully implement the rules and thus enhance mutual trust among themselves .
It also requires an effective and updated monitoring and evaluation system .
Let me touch upon the free movement of persons .
It belongs to a different chapter of the acquis comunautaire than Schengen , yet they are inextricably linked .
Both belong to the most visible and popular achievements of European integration .
The Member States are aware of this and fully intend to safeguard them .
The logic behind Schengen is unchanged : ever more efficient management of the external border is the precondition for travelling without border controls within the Schengen zone .
As you know , there have been intensive negotiations on the Frontex Amending Regulation .
We have in Frontex a European tool par excellence which is essential for controlling our external borders .
The Presidency welcomes the positive result of the most recent trialogue meeting .
Member States are discussing the results this afternoon and we are optimistic that an agreement can be reached in time for the European Council .
Regarding the European Asylum policy : recent developments have put this under strain .
Safe and efficient asylum procedures are required for people in need of protection .
It is therefore crucial for the Common European Asylum System to be completed by 2012 - a system based on high protection standards combined with fair and effective procedures capable of preventing abuse and allowing for rapid examination of asylum applications in order to ensure its sustainability .
The European Council will also review the progress on the preparation of the plans for capacity development to manage migration flows and refugee flows .
The objective must be to address the root causes of irregular migration .
To that end , partnerships will be developed with Southern Neighbourhood countries .
As a first step , a wide-ranging structured dialogue on migration , mobility and security will be established with those countries , with the aim of securing tangible benefits for them as well as for the EU .
Let me now say some words on Croatia .
Closing the accession negotiations with Croatia was listed among the top priorities of our Presidency .
As a result of the tremendous efforts made by Croatia , the Commission and the Presidency with the essential support of this House - for which it deserves immense credit - the European Council will call for the conclusion of the accession negotiations with Croatia by the end of June 2011 .
The signing of the Accession Treaty before the end of the year is being envisaged .
These developments bring a new momentum to the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
The European Council will return to this matter at its December 2011 meeting .
In this context , it is expected to welcome the arrest of General Mladić and his transfer to The Hague .
Serbia has taken a giant step towards EU accession .
Regarding the Southern Neighbourhood : the European Council is expected to endorse the new approach to relations with the EU neighbours which was agreed at Monday 's Foreign Affairs Council .
Given the serious developments in parts of the Union 's southern neighbourhood , the European Council is also expected to adopt a declaration on recent events in the region .
Among other issues , let me inform you that the European Council is expected to appoint Mario Draghi as the next Governor of the European Central Bank on whom this house takes a vote .
Last but not least , the European Council is likely to endorse the EU Strategy for the Danube Region and the EU Framework of National Roma Integration Strategies , thus realising two further priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
The Danube Strategy is designed to enhance opportunities for an entire region that embraces a diversity of Member States and third countries in the Western Balkans - nations , peoples and communities alike .
With the EU Framework of National Roma Integration Strategies , we will tackle the plight of the Roma people for the first time at European level and turn it into an opportunity for all of us .
A special thanks to this House for producing such an excellent report - the Járóka report - and the decision , which was an excellent base for our work in the Council .
Europe thus will show that , in the words of Prime Minister Orbán , it ' has a heart and not only a brain ' .
Mr President , President of the Commission , honourable Members , the Hungarian Presidency chose ' Strong Europe ' as a motto .
Let me express hope that you will agree with the judgment of President Buzek , who recently said ' after the Hungarian Presidency Europe will be stronger and better ' .
Thank you again , from the bottom of my heart , for your cooperation in the last six months .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , this week 's European Council has a very substantive agenda .
Minister Győri has presented the agenda in general , on behalf of the Hungarian Presidency of the Council .
I wish to thank her , at this juncture , for the commitment shown over the course of these six months .
Let me focus on some specific points : I have written a letter to the members of the European Council outlining the positions of the Commission on what I believe are the most important items on the agenda , and I would like to share our positions with you .
At the end I will also make some comments regarding Greece .
This European Council will take very important steps towards ensuring that the European Union 's economic policy-making is both more coherent and more effective .
Firstly , we have the economic governance package .
I would like to thank this Parliament very sincerely for the extremely hard work and commitment it has shown in maintaining a high level of ambition on this issue .
Later this afternoon , Commissioner Rehn , on behalf of the Commission , will express our detailed positions on these extremely important matters .
Now I expect Parliament and the Member States to come to an agreement , because the adoption of the governance package is fundamental to our comprehensive response to the crisis .
Agreement on this package is vital .
It will be extremely difficult to explain to our citizens why we are not able to agree on the fundamental pillars of the response to this crisis when we are trying to respond to challenges of the current magnitude .
I believe the agreement on this package will strengthen our economic surveillance mechanisms at European level .
It will make the European Union far better placed to prevent the development of unsustainable public debt and deficits , and the emergence of harmful macroeconomic imbalances .
Although prevention is better than cure , we will also be better placed to take action to correct these situations if they do emerge .
Secondly , I expect the Heads of State and Government to endorse the country-specific recommendations that the Commission presented on 7 June .
This is , as you know , the first time we are carrying out this kind of collective exercise at European level .
The recommendations are based on an extensive analysis by the Commission of Member States ' plans for sustainable growth and job creation , married to sound public finances .
They are focused , measurable and tailored to each country 's most pressing challenges .
Of course , discussions between the Commission and the Member States on these recommendations have sometimes been very intense , but I am pleased that the overall result has maintained the high level of ambition .
We cannot reap the benefits of the single market on the one hand and ignore reckless economic policy-making on the other .
There is no point in signing off on a brand new economic governance package if , the very same week , Member States question the methodology and independent Commission recommendations in the country-specific exercise .
This new way of policy-making is also a strong appeal for collective responsibility , because the European Union 's economic space is so much more than the sum of our different economies .
Thirdly , the European Council is due to endorse the treaty change needed to allow for the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism in 2013 , with its capacity to assist - on the basis of strict conditionality - euro area Member States in financial difficulties .
The ESM , combined with the increase of the effective lending capacity of the EFSF , is a clear demonstration of our commitment to safeguard the stability of the euro area on the basis of sound and sustainable public finances .
You may remember that , in January when the Commission presented the annual growth survey , a very important topic was the need to reinforce the effective lending capacity of the EFSF .
At that time we were very much criticised , but now - unanimously - the governments of Europe have decided to increase the effective lending capacity .
I wonder if it would not have been possible to approve it some months ago .
The economic governance package , country-specific recommendations and the stability mechanisms : this is how Europe should seriously draw the lessons from the crisis and act upon them .
The Commission will do its utmost to maintain this level of steadfast resolve in all matters to be discussed .
To respond to the economic crisis , every sector needs to contribute , and none more so than the financial sector .
I have promised Parliament that the Commission will bring forward a formal legislative proposal on a financial tax .
The proposal will have three aims .
Firstly , to avoid fragmentation of the internal market for financial services , because there are an increasing number of uncoordinated national tax measures being put in place .
Secondly , this financial tax also aims to create appropriate disincentives for overly-risky or purely speculative transactions .
Thirdly , to ensure that financial institutions make a fair and substantive contribution to the sharing of the costs of the recent crisis , as well as to address concerns about excessive profits .
The very high bonuses that are still being paid to bankers - bankers who have sometimes been saved thanks to huge amounts of taxpayers ' money - suggest that there are excessive profits in the banking sector and that the banking sector should also contribute to the common public good .
( Applause )
The second major issue for the European Council is migration .
The issue of migration has come to the fore in recent months , particularly under the pressure of recent events in the southern Mediterranean .
I spoke to Parliament in May about the Commission 's migration package , which sets recent and future policy initiatives in a framework that allows the EU and its Member States to manage asylum , migration and mobility of third-country nationals in a secure environment .
Migration , let us face it , is a very emotive issue .
But let me state clearly that the Commission will not accept any attempts to undermine the Schengen principles .
In fact , I think that we will see exactly the opposite , through a reinforcement of the European approach to migration and free movement .
The Commission has proposed strengthening the governance of the Schengen area , thereby reinforcing Member States ' confidence and trust in the effective management of our external borders .
This will be done both through strengthening the Frontex border agency and through an evaluation mechanism whereby national border agencies will work jointly on assessing threats .
We are also exploring the feasibility of a safeguard system which would allow the adoption of decisions at European level to confront possible difficult situations where our common external borders are subject to exceptional pressure or where Member States are failing to comply with their obligations to control their borders .
Decisions on the best way to handle such situations should be taken at European Union level , avoiding unilateral action by Member States .
As a last-resort mechanism , and if the critical situation justifies it , these decisions could make provision for the temporary reintroduction of internal border controls , but always within a Community framework .
This does not mean rolling back the abolition of internal borders .
This is a way of strengthening the European dimension of the system so that individual Member States do not feel pressured into acting unilaterally .
I will be looking for clear backing for this approach from the European Council , so that detailed Commission proposals can be finalised and have an opportunity to succeed .
The migration package is completed by proposals for a common , efficient and protective asylum system which guarantees asylum seekers equal treatment across the European Union .
I am confident that Parliament and the Council will endorse the proposals set out in the Commission 's reviewed proposals on minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers and on refugee status .
I will call on the European Council to lend its support to the completion of the entirety of the asylum package as quickly as possible within the agreed deadline .
The European Council has also discussed the situation in our neighbourhood , in particular the implementation of the Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean .
This partnership is extremely important to our Arab partners , who are looking to the European Union to support the democratic transitions in the southern Mediterranean .
We must not let them down .
Another item on the upcoming European Council agenda is the Commission 's recommendation that Croatia become the 28th Member State of the European Union , hopefully by 1 July 2013 .
There is still substantial work to be done , but I hope that at the end of the month we can sign off on the remaining chapters in the Accession Conference .
Finally , a word about Greece , because I hope Member States will also have the occasion to discuss at the highest level this situation , which is important not only for a Member State of our Union but , I believe , for the stability of the euro area and for the stability of the European Union as a whole .
The issue of Greece raises very important issues , not just in terms of financial stability , but also in terms of social commitment and in terms of the political determination of the European Union .
Last night 's vote in the Greek Parliament allows the government to build consensus in support of the reform package , agreed with the European Union and IMF , of fiscal measures , privatisations and reforms that are necessary in Greece 's journey back to growth .
Because , let us be absolutely clear , there is no alternative to this plan .
So let us act upon it .
I know that many people in Greece are living through a period of great hardship and uncertainty .
My message to the Greek people is that if the government acts , Europe will deliver .
If Greece can demonstrate that it is genuinely committed to the reform package agreed with the European Union and the IMF , we will accompany Greece on its journey back to growth .
Fiscal consolidation is entirely necessary , but the goal is growth .
We should never forget that one euro spent on interest rates to pay the debt is one euro that cannot go to the people of Greece , so it is critically important to reduce debt and to control the deficit so that we can restore confidence in the Greek economy , in order to promote growth .
At the same time , it is extremely important that the Greek people understand that in the face of such difficult circumstances a national consensus is necessary : a national consensus and not short-sighted partisan politics .
We need a national consensus in Greece so that Greece can win the confidence of the partners and the markets in terms of the very important reforms that are needed .
( Applause )
On Monday night I met with Prime Minister Papandreou , and we also discussed a more strategic use of our European structural funds .
Greece has the potential to access a significant amount of European funds under the cohesion policy .
I believe we should increase their rate of absorption and accelerate those funds , aiming for a significant impact on improving competitiveness and employment .
This will be done within the existing funds .
It will be a comprehensive programme of technical assistance focused on growth and jobs , but with an emergency character because - I repeat - Greece is living in an emergency situation .
I will discuss these issues with the European Council : what we can do together with Greece .
We , the Commission , can put this in place , bilaterally with the government , but I believe efforts are necessary from all those that can contribute , namely in terms of technical assistance coming from different Member States .
The Greek Government is ready to engage with us in this approach .
I believe we should also be ready to react in a very positive way , always on the basis of strict conditionality regarding the necessary reforms for that country .
The implementation of Greece 's reform plans calls for exceptional efforts from the Greek people .
The Commission is now proposing an exceptional response as a sign to the Greek people that there is hope .
They are making sacrifices , and we know they are making sacrifices , but at the end of that road there is hope , and solutions are within their reach .
They are making some important cuts , but those cuts are necessary for growth .
Growth is the answer , and we will work with the Greek authorities and the Greek people to achieve that objective .
Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , Minister Győri , I would firstly like to say a brief word to you , in acknowledgement of all the work you have done and especially of the methodical approach you employed and the hours you devoted to this work , with Parliament in particular .
I think that is worth mentioning and so , once again , thank you .
( Applause )
You are applauding her , but it could not have been any other way : we have trained her well within our group .
Therefore , she knows what Parliament is all about .
Seldom has a European Council meeting taken place in such difficult and tense circumstances .
Seldom have expectations been so high among the people in our various countries , expectations of brave and united decisions from their leaders on the burning issue of the euro and the debt crisis , as well as on economic governance .
In several countries , and especially in Greece , our fellow citizens are confused , anxious and deeply concerned about their and their children 's future .
I would like to take this opportunity to send out three messages to our Greek friends .
Firstly , Europe is in solidarity with them , and we Europeans are doing everything within our means to extricate them from an extremely difficult situation , in a spirit of solidarity and responsibility - and I stress the word responsibility .
Secondly , the situation that they - and indeed many other countries in Europe - are experiencing is the result of many years of living beyond their means .
This has to be said , and I call for all Europeans to face up to reality .
My third message is a product of the first two : Europe can only help Greece , or any other country in difficulty , if it does everything it possibly can to consolidate its economic and financial situation in the long term .
This will involve making sacrifices , but it will result in positive changes for the country in the end .
This too must be said , and I cannot help but think of the example of Latvia here : a few years ago , it was on the verge of bankruptcy , and thanks to a courageous recovery policy led by the country 's twice-elected Prime Minister , Valdis Dombrovskis , it has restored a balanced situation .
Two different attitudes can be adopted with regard to the current situation : either people settle for marching in the streets and striking - that is part of the trade union movement ( I myself was a trade unionist ) - or , after having expressed their concern , they set about redressing the situation on the basis of a fair policy .
My group , ladies and gentlemen , is calling for a shake-up .
It is calling for all of our countries to wake up to the fact that changes are both necessary and beneficial .
We will emerge from the crisis not by pinpointing scapegoats ( Europe , the International Monetary Fund and others ) , but by rolling up our sleeves - and when I say ' us ' , I am of course talking about the political class , but also about all of the 500 million European citizens .
This brings me back to the European Council , from which we are awaiting confirmation of European solidarity .
However , beyond the current crisis and in order to achieve a sustainable recovery , we are also awaiting far-reaching economic governance reforms because , while we have completed the monetary side of the economic and monetary union , with the euro , the economic side is inadequate , and we are paying a high price for that today .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is appealing for the Community method to be used to negotiate the legislative package merely to prevent our Member States from being able to shirk their obligations too easily , as they have done in the past .
When the Council , with Parliament , decides upon economic regulations to be complied with by the 27 Member States , it is not so that they can be waived at the first opportunity .
We simply want an assurance that they will be complied with .
If we can take anything away from the crisis we are going through , it is the need to learn from the past .
I call on everyone in this Chamber to recognise that .
I will conclude on a positive note , by welcoming the anticipated Council decision on the forthcoming accession of Croatia , which is set to become the European Union 's 28th Member State in a few months ' time .
This decision will reward the tremendous efforts made by the Croatian people and their government , whose courage and sense of public good I wish to commend .
This accession is an important and positive signal for Europeans , who are doubting themselves right now .
However , the values that Europe embodies - solidarity , tolerance , openness towards others , respect for minorities , respect for human rights and human dignity - have never been more deserving of support than in these times of globalisation , when the balance of power too often takes precedence over everything else .
I am certain that if the people of Europe so wish , and if the Union overcomes division and populism , we will emerge stronger from the difficult times we are currently experiencing .
I hope that the Heads of State or Government will promote this vision over any other view .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rarely has the European Parliament prepared for a European Council meeting during a worse crisis .
I believe that we should be under no illusions .
This European Council meeting will be a historic one , because it will decide on the future of this Union .
I read an interesting line in a German newspaper this week .
The markets - writes the German newspaper - distrust the European Union because they no longer trust it to find solutions to the problems .
The people of Europe , the citizens , distrust the European Union because they no longer trust the governments to find solutions to their problems .
We are in a severe crisis .
We are in a crisis of confidence in the European project .
We all have the crisis that we deserve .
Our problems have been known for a long time .
The question is whether we intend to address them in a bold or a despondent way , and whether we have courage to do so or whether cowardice will bring us to our knees .
I will say one thing , which is perhaps one of the most unpopular messages that could be given in Europe right now .
I will say it nevertheless , because I am firmly convinced that it is right .
We do not need less Europe , we need more of it !
We need more courage to overcome the crisis using European resources .
( Applause )
Why do we need more Europe ?
This Council meeting is mainly about two things .
Firstly , the Heads of State or Government must regain their governance , because it is not the Heads of State or Government alone that decide .
In this world in which we live there are 43 companies with a balance sheet totalling more than the national budget of a medium-sized EU Member State like Poland .
That means that there are 43 heads of companies that are at least as powerful as the Polish Prime Minister .
These people also decide on the fate of the people of this continent .
Has the fact actually ever been discussed - and this is another issue - that always right on time just prior to an Ecofin meeting , just before a European Council , one , two or three credit rating agencies assess whatever is on the table as a solution to the problems as being inappropriate ?
Who in actual fact are the people who are wielding the real power over economic development in Europe ?
Who is behind them ?
Who is actually paying the credit rating agencies for their ratings ?
They are clearly not working simply for a reward in heaven .
Of course , they receive money for their proposals from stakeholders .
The Heads of State or Government must have the courage to regain the sovereignty of their national , democratic power to act .
The only way that they can do this is by uniting .
( Applause )
They will not be able to do this if they split into their constituent parts .
The EU currently has 7.8 % of the world 's population in its 27 Member States .
Population statistics tell us that in 2050 only 4 % of the world 's population will live here .
The remaining 96 % of the world 's population will not only take their bearings from Europe .
The emerging powers and the emerging economies of this world are not waiting for Europe to split into its constituent parts , from large parts like Germany down to very small parts like Malta , in the belief that each individual part will be able to survive on its own - the renationalisation rhetoric that many politicians are giving their people .
We will only survive in intercontinental competition - environmental , economic , financial and monetary - if we unite .
If we have the shared will to make the strongest economy in the world - because that is what Europe is if it holds together - into a success by standing together in solidarity .
Solidarity means sharing .
Strong shoulders more so than weak shoulders .
For us , incidentally , that does not mean a financial tax ; it means a financial transaction tax .
If I go to the supermarket and buy a carton of milk , I pay value added tax .
If I sell a financial product , I pay no tax .
That is not right .
Therefore we need this financial transaction tax .
( Applause )
All of these things have been explained .
They are on the table .
Either we will manage to knit Europe together in unity and not play one nation off against the others , or play the feelings of one off against the feelings of the others , or the European integration project is in real danger .
However , if the European Union fails as a transnational project for securing peace and prosperity and breaks apart , then it will be more than just a political union that breaks apart .
Then the demons of the 20th century that plunged this continent into misery will quickly reappear .
The defence of Europe is more than one European summit , it is the defence of a great idea .
( Applause )
Welcome
I would like to welcome the delegation from Mexico comprising members of Mexico 's Chamber of Deputies and Senate , who are present in the official gallery .
Preparations for the European Council meeting ( 24 June 2011 ) ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the preparations for the European Council meeting of 23-24 June 2011 .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all the key question of this debate today is what we can expect from this European Council on Thursday and on Friday .
What I hope , and what my group is hoping - as , I think , are the majority in this Parliament - is that we can end this Summit with a more decisive , more comprehensive and bolder approach to the current crisis .
Let us be honest , we do not have a global comprehensive approach to this current crisis .
It is not on the table today either in the Council or in Parliament .
I would say to Martin Schulz that I also have some questions about rating agencies and the role they are playing in the current crisis , but let us try to find errors and the sources of the crisis within our own ranks , and maybe not outside the European Union and outside its institutions .
Let us be honest about another thing : the crisis is not over .
Those who think that by giving some additional money to Greece this crisis will come to an end - as regards Greece and the euro - are wrong .
This crisis is not over , and this crisis will continue if , first of all , we do not find a structural solution for Greece and , secondly , if we do not create a real , economic and political union in Europe .
Such measures should end the crisis as regards the euro and Greece .
Again , is it possible to have one currency and 17 governments , 17 economic strategies and 17 bond markets - as we have today and is a situation which does not exist elsewhere in the world ?
It is only us in Europe who think that we can have one monetary union and 17 different policies , 17 different governments and 17 different bond markets .
It is not only us - the federalists in the European Parliament - who are saying that .
Yesterday , Mr Lipsky , the current Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , said that Europe should create one political and economic union to face this crisis .
Yesterday it was Mr Geithner , the US Minister of Finance , who was saying ' maybe they can stop and talk with each other ; let them create an economic and political union ' .
If they know on the other side of the Atlantic what we have to do , why do we not have the courage to take this enormous step forward to an economic and political union ?
That is the key question for the tomorrow 's Council .
As regards my second point , we need to help Greece - and not only in a defensive way .
We need a bold austerity programme , and that is currently what is being discussed with the Greek Government .
Maybe there are plans to go further than what is on the table now .
If so , we need a positive plan for it .
They cannot emerge from the crisis based only on austerity .
They need to have growth and investment and we can deliver on that within the European Union .
Let us , for example , give guarantees for private investment .
Private investment no longer exists in Greece .
Let us give them loans from the European Investment Bank .
Why not use part of the privatisation programme not for fiscal consolidation but to create new investment and growth in Greece .
I now have a request for Mr Daul , and will therefore continue in French .
( FR ) I am going to make my comment in French .
Mr Daul 's group comprises members of the Nea Dimokratia party .
We need to be very clear on that .
Moreover , if we want all the other countries to give money to Greece , we also need a political consensus to be reached in Greece .
I believe that we can call on Mr Daul , who was right in what he said , to convince his political friends to reach this political consensus in order to deliver this policy for Greece .
( Applause )
That is what we need .
I am well aware that it is an onerous task that we are setting you , Mr Daul , but I know that you are capable of rising to this challenge .
It is true that a country in such a situation yearns for political unity , and it is not by playing petty political games , as is currently the case in Greece , that this situation will be resolved .
I experienced this in Belgium for nine years , Mr Lange .
Mr President , let us be very honest .
We need a bolder economic governance package than we have on the table today .
I want to ask President Barroso something directly : yesterday , the spokesman for the European Commission said at the press conference that there was no need for more reverse QMV in the governance package .
I would ask you , Mr Barroso , to rectify this .
I would ask that the Commission , together with the European Parliament , employ a more Communitarian method for the economic governance package .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to say the following to the Chair of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe : I am sure that when he , with his liberal governments , manages to establish full solidarity for all the various countries , I and my group will have already beaten him to it where Greece is concerned , and I will remind him of that here in this Chamber .

( FR ) Mr President , in most of the countries to which Mr Daul was referring , we are in a coalition with the Christian Democrats , so that certainly must have an impact .
However , I do not think it appropriate , this afternoon before such an important Council meeting , to play the party political card by pitting one particular government against another .
I urge you , Mr Daul , not to pit the liberals against the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) or against the socialists .
What I was asking of you was to convince your friends from the Nea Dimokratia , a party of which , incidentally , many of the members are also our friends and have even , in some cases , moved over to my group , and which has only one aim : to unite the people of Greece so that they can emerge from the crisis they are going through .
You can play a major role in this .
I am counting on you .
( The speaker agreed to take two blue-card questions from Mr Koumoutsakos and Mr Ransdorf under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )



( EL ) Mr President , I was delighted to hear Mr Verhofstadt say that everyone now realises that Greece 's problem is a European problem .
What does Greece have a duty to do ?
Greece has a duty to push ahead with major structural reforms and privatisations .
I should therefore like to advise Mr Verhofstadt , because he has obviously been misled , that on these two issues , which form the cornerstone of the reforms , Nea Dimokratia has not only agreed ; it was Nea Dimokratia that made the proposals .
These are Nea Dimokratia proposals , which the government has been unable to implement for 18 months now .
That is the truth .

( CS ) Mr President , I listened attentively to Mr Verhofstadt , the Chair of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , and I would like to ask him whether I am correct in thinking that his motto might be that Greece is everywhere , since Greece is not just a Member State of the European Union , but is actually a state of mind , and that Greece is therefore everywhere .
Mr President , it is obvious that if we do not resolve the Greek problem we will have huge problems in the whole euro zone .
We already have problems in Portugal today ; we already have problems in Ireland today .
The difference in spreads today - between Portugal and Germany , between Ireland and Germany - is more than 800 basic points .
So what we are doing - with the solidarity that we needed from the beginning of this crisis but which was not there - is not only for Greece ; it has to be for all Member States of the euro zone .
It was because of this lack of solidarity that , in December 2009 , we created a far bigger problem - the problem we are facing today .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , it is very entertaining today in the House .
There are still , let me remind you , a lot of us who experienced Communism and who since then have made enormous and swift progress to prepare ourselves for membership of the European Union .
We were rightly made to prove ourselves , to prove that we met the Copenhagen criteria , to prove that we enjoyed fully-functioning market economies and so on and so forth , but unfortunately this level of scrutiny was not applied to some European countries when entering the euro zone .
Why ?
Simply because it was constructed as a political and not as an economic project , and therefore the criteria were ignored ; figures were changed to bring in countries that were not yet ready .
That is the core of the problem , and now we are living out the consequences and we are at a turning point .
Believe me , despite the fact that most members of my group are from non-euro zone member countries , we do not want the euro to fail .
At the same time , it cannot be defended at any cost .
We are surely on the final pages of the bail-out chapter .
This European Council should send a clear signal that if a country 's position is unsustainable within the euro zone then , unless it makes dramatic changes , the euro zone should not hesitate to raise the possibility of restructuring its debt or even - however cruel it might seem - of its leaving the club .
Mr Barroso , if you do not do that , then I will tell you what will happen next : your opponents - or rather the opponents of your successor - will not be nice , decent Eurosceptics like me , but really nasty anti-Europeans .
And why ?
Because they will be elected by angry German taxpayers and by desperate French and Dutch private entrepreneurs fed up of paying other people 's debts , and I know that neither you nor I want this to happen .
So let us act accordingly .
In the same way , I would ask you to please stop using or misusing every crisis as an opportunity to pursue further the supra-nationalistic agenda towards something like fiscal union or tax union , because it leads us nowhere .
This is not a crisis of Europe .
This is just a crisis of one wrong , outdated concept of European integration , and that is all .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , ladies and gentlemen , I am amazed at how raucous the debate on the deepest crisis that the European Union has experienced for a long time has suddenly become .
When we realise that we are currently defending Schengen , that we have been unable to defend the freedom of the press in Hungary during this Council Presidency , that we needed a long time even to begin to find a common European language with regard to Libya and Egypt , then it is no wonder that , in the face of the worsening situation in Greece , all we can say is that , although we now have many leaders in Europe , we have no leadership .
I believe that that is one of the major problems that has not been properly addressed .
In this crisis that has lasted much longer than the Greek crisis , we are also in a situation where all of the solutions that the Council comes up with are coming too late and are too narrow in scope .
The idea that the European Union can only continue in the way that we want it to and also provide a better life for all Europeans if we rescue Greece and stabilise the South is one that has not been communicated at all up to now , and I believe there is actually an institution responsible for this and that is the European Council .
I would say that Parliament is not always a shining example , either .
For example , Parliament refused to come together in good time prior to this historic Council meeting to adopt a resolution to address the problems relating precisely to this historic crisis .
I found it very regrettable that even those Members on the left who sit here to my right were not able to gather themselves together in good time to make a statement on behalf of Parliament with regard to Greece .
I would like to take up the subject once again of what is wrong in Greece , because I think that Mr Daul has a responsibility towards Nea Dimokratia .
However , with regard to justice , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament also has a responsibility towards Mr Papandreou and his government .
As pleased as I am that he received a vote of confidence yesterday , the Greek Government will also be involved in deciding on fair programmes in the crisis .
The fact that this is so unfairly distributed , that the burden is only being borne by the lower sections of society , that no capital levy is being introduced in Greece and that tax evasion is also widespread in Greece is an unfair situation .
The national solidarity that was mentioned must also result in the elite in Greece , who are after all even today still profiting from the crisis , also taking their share of the responsibility .
( Applause )
We stick by everything that we have already said on many occasions with regard to Greece .
Longer timeframes , more favourable loans - we believe that there also needs to be a gentle , systematic and secure rescheduling of debt .
I believe that it is an expression of the incompetence of the political leadership in the European Union that what we have recognised to be right , namely that private creditors must also share the burden , is not implemented because we are afraid of the credit rating agencies .
Therefore , the issue that brought us into this crisis is still the dominating factor and so far there has been no political leadership to tackle this .
I believe that this is the main issue that needs to be discussed during the European Council meeting in the next few days .
Mr Barroso , I wish you luck with your plan for fairer taxation as a way out of the crisis .
I do not know whether you are still pursuing the financial transaction tax .
We are still in favour of it .
This Parliament has expressed its support for this many times .
However , I also believe that tax evasion , unfair bonuses and all the factors that helped to cause the financial crash have not as yet been addressed . That is also your responsibility .
Thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if we look at Greece at the moment , we can also learn something .
Austerity demands as well as the call to sell off the last of the state-owned silver will not rescue Greece .
However , everything is just continuing as before .
Before calling for commitments , yet more austerity measures and privatisations are being demanded .
At the same time , the attempt is still being made , by means of the European semester , to push this bankruptcy experience as a model for the Member States .
The whole situation has gone so far that we are considering the establishment of a privatisation agency based on the German Treuhand model .
Mr Lange , the German Treuhand agency did a number of positive things .
However , it also brought about massive de-industrialisation and a squandering of state assets .
The consequences can still be felt today .
I do not wish to represent this arrogantly as the mistakes of others , however .
Billions in additional aid for Greece without a clear change of course are nothing more than a safety net for the banks .
In this regard , we can also do without the voluntary participation of the private sector , so we are told .
In that case , I would say that this is a political belly flop .
Things will just carry on as before .
The only alternative in my view is a radical change in our financial and economic policy .
However , we lack the courage to do this .
The causes of the crisis are not being dealt with .
That is where the problem lies .
We lack the courage to bring about more democracy and transparency and to conduct less political activity behind closed doors .
This puts the European idea at risk and allows narrow-minded nationalism to gain ground .
I would ask that clear signals be sent out from the summit , but the signal must not be ' let us carry on as before ' .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , every time I ask Mr Barroso what his Plan B is , he says there is no need for one .
Mr Barroso , every time I predict that another country is on the verge of a bail-out you say , ' no no , there is no problem ' .
Here we are , on the verge of the second Greek bail-out , and you say , ' there is no alternative ' .
We must continue down this route .
We must ignore the fact that the Spanish bond market is telling us that they are going to be next .
What a fine mess you have got us into .
You have a 100 % record for being wrong with every single prediction about the euro and you say today that this package will put Greece on the road to growth , but no it won 't .
It will put Greece on the road to a third bail-out , which we will be discussing in a just a few months ' time .
I have to say I find it a truly sickening sight to see the country that actually invented democracy being bullied by you and the increasingly appalling International Monetary Fund and its people being told they have to accept this austerity package .
They have to accept cutting their economy to a level that will put them in total economic depression .
They are told there is no alternative to this ; it is a form of sado-monetarism , and it is sending them crazy .
They are on the streets and there is violence , and frankly this can only get worse .
You have stripped them not just of money ; you have stripped them of their democracy .
What good Europeans , really good Europeans , would do , is provide an alternative to help the Greeks re-establish their own currency , to allow them to devalue , to let them renegotiate their debts , because their debt-to-GDP ratio has passed the point of no return .
Then , and only then , can real austerity packages work .
Only then will the Greek people accept they have got to make these cuts .
If we carry on down the current road , it is the path to social and economic disaster .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to ask Mr Farage if he knows how big the United Kingdom 's foreign debt is and if he believes that the United Kingdom , as an island , could manage on its own .
Mr President , the United Kingdom went through this exactly twenty years ago .
We were part of the exchange rate mechanism .
We were trapped , trying to peg ourselves against the Deutschmark with interest rates that were double what they should have been .
It cost 1 million British people their jobs unnecessarily .
Mercifully we crashed out of exchange rate mechanism , interest rates came down and we had a happy time during the 1990s .
You cannot fuse together different economies with different rates of growth and with different patterns of trade across the world .
We learned our lesson .
We did not join the euro , thank God .
Those who did are , I am afraid , currently trapped inside an economic prison .

( NL ) Mr President , last Tuesday Mr Barroso said that Greece can count on European support .
' Europe will deliver ' , he said .
What does Mr Barroso actually base this power upon ?
Is it not the case that financial aid for Greece is expressly prohibited under the Treaty of Lisbon ?
Is it not the case that national parliaments have to approve such aid individually ?
Is it not the case that they are also allowed to say ' no ' ?
The power of the Commission is expanding further and further .
It is time we put a stop to that .
The Commission sees itself as the governor of all European countries , as the ultimate decision-maker under the leadership of Mr Barroso .
Mr Barroso was not elected democratically .
No European citizen voted for this man .
I have but one word for a government that rules without democracy , and that word is ' dictatorship ' .
A bureaucratic dictatorship that wants to subjugate the Greeks and that also wants to call the shots in the Netherlands .
It is unacceptable that Mr Barroso should decide whether the Netherlands should grant aid .
There is only one body that can rule on whether the Netherlands should help Greece and that is the Dutch Parliament .
Granting aid to Greece is useless .
It harms the Dutch economy and Dutch citizens .
On that point , Mr Barroso was actually right .
After all , on Tuesday , he also said himself that , even if the Greek debt disappeared by magic , the problem would not be resolved .
The European summit really cannot reach any other conclusion .
The only long-term solution to this problem is for the Greeks to reintroduce the drachma , which could be devalued on its own .
That way , the other Member States would not have to pick up the tab .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would just like to answer two concrete questions that were put to me .
I will not enter into this ideological discussion against Europe in which , may I say , it is interesting to see the extreme right and extreme left united against the euro and against the European project .
That is why I want once again to appeal to all the democratic forces in Europe , in this Parliament , in Greece , to unite in a consensus to do everything possible to ensure growth and prosperity in Europe .
The two concrete questions were about the financial tax and about our position on reverse qualified majority .
On the financial tax , I want to confirm that the proposal that the Commission will put forward , probably in October , will be on a financial transaction tax .
We have made an impact assessment .
We believe there are two possibilities : a financial transaction tax and a financial activities tax .
We have decided to come forward now with a proposal on a financial transaction tax , one reason being precisely that there is no equivalent of VAT for financial transactions .
So we will come forward with that proposal by October .
( Applause ) .
The second issue was raised by Mr Verhofstadt .
I want to make it clear that the Commission supports Parliament on reverse qualified majority voting .
We have been supporting your ambitious position .
At the same time - and Olli Rehn will have the opportunity to address you later this afternoon - we will make a strong appeal to you and to the Council to see if it is possible to come to a final agreement .
Because we also believe that , thanks to Parliament 's positions , great progress has been achieved in terms of the package that is now up for consideration .
I want to congratulate you , the Parliament , those that have been working most on this matter , and also the Hungarian Presidency of the Council , as it has done some very important work as well .
At the end , I want to say to all of you that , in terms of responsibility , the cost of not having an agreement on this matter will be extremely high , considering the current situation .
The Commission supports the Community approach .
The Commission supports the greatest possible ambition , which is the line that I think that you are also defining .
These are the concrete answers to the concrete questions .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , a lot has already been said with regard to Greece .
I would just like to add two thoughts on this matter .
The first is that , despite all the concern and fear being felt by the people , we must not lose sight of the principles .
The two principles that define Europe are solidarity - we stand by this - and a sense of individual responsibility - that the Greek people and all those who receive acts of solidarity also take responsibility themselves .
The second thought is that mention has been made of the big test for Europe and of the concern that the project could perhaps even fail and that old ghosts that we had thought we had eradicated could return to the European Union .
I would like to turn all of this around and look at it in a positive light .
We should not just talk about the problems , but also about the successes .
For example , we should mention that some of the Baltic States have managed to overcome the crisis and that , with European support , Ireland will succeed in returning to the bond markets next year .
This could also be a big opportunity to prove to the people that we are stronger together than we are alone .
In this context , it is quite difficult to deal with the second major issue for the Council meeting , namely that of migration .
However , there is a nice link that connects the two issues , because in relation to the migration issue , in particular Schengen , we also see the same principle at work , namely that one of Europe 's major successes is now being called into question as a result of national egotism .
I am sure that we have all seen the figures indicating that 18 000 refugees have arrived in Italy .
However , we all know that , for Italy , 18 000 refugees is hardly an excessive burden , because twice as many refugees have been received in the last year in Belgium alone .
It was therefore not right of Italy to react in the way that it did .
It was internal policymaking by Italy 's minister of reforms , Umberto Bossi .
On account of a few hundred people , France responded by reintroducing border controls , and that , too , was for domestic political reasons .
In Denmark , too , the reasons were of an internal political nature .
I would therefore like clear signals to be sent out from the Council meeting .
When the question of migration and Schengen is discussed , the Heads of State or Government of the European Union must respond with the clear message that we do not want national egotism , in particular in this area .
Instead we want to defend the huge success that is a free Europe .
Mr Barroso , you will certainly have Parliament 's support in that .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I would firstly like to say a few words on a subject that is close to my heart and that , of course , is Croatia .
I hope that we will succeed in taking a decision to allow Croatia truly to be accepted into the European Union now .
The Commission has done a good job here - Commissioner Füle , you yourself Mr Barroso and also the Hungarian Presidency in this regard .
It would be a good and important signal to a problematic region like the Balkans if the country that has completed its task well were to be next in line .
When I say ' completed its task ' that does not mean that all of the problems are solved .
We have just experienced some unacceptable situations in Split in connection with the Gay Parade .
However , it is important for the government to stand up for fundamental freedoms and fundamental rights .
Allow me to add a few words with regard to Greece .
Mr Barroso , you said that it will be difficult to explain it to citizens if we do not come up with a solution , for example in connection with the economic governance package .
However , Mr Barroso , it will also be difficult to explain it to citizens if we only concentrate on austerity .
You talked about growth and said that we need something to promote growth - but what exactly , Mr Barroso ?
You cannot believe that austerity alone will lead to growth if we do not at the same time offer alternatives .
Mr Verhofstadt mentioned a few problems .
It is not only left-leaning economists - in its economics section yesterday , for example , Le Monde , which is not a left-leaning newspaper , made it quite clear : austerity on the one hand - yes , we need certain restrictions - but we also need growth and investment .

When there is talk of privatisations , Mr Barroso , you know exactly how to force Greece quickly into a wave of privatisations now - just as Mr Bisky said , things are being sold off .
However , we must give Greece time to privatise those things that it is sensible to do so at a point in time when it will receive an adequate amount of money for them .
Secondly , we have to say that we also need to invest some of the money .
If you say that you want to release regional funds and resources from the Structural Funds then we need to move away from the obligation for cofinancing , because otherwise Greece will not be able to use them .
These are all proposals that we are waiting for from the Commission , Mr Barroso .
We are in favour of a frugal policy and of savings where these are necessary , and we are in favour of restrictions and restructuring measures .
However , it will not work without growth .
At the end of the day , if we carry on as we are , we will not rescue Greece or our banks , nor will we save our taxpayers ; we will instead end up in chaos .
Therefore , Mr Barroso - and this of course applies to the Council , too - in addition to the structural measures , we also need growth .
Proposals for growth and employment are crucial for the future of Greece and also for that of Europe .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( CS ) Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Swoboda whether he agrees with the view that the crisis is being used in certain Member States as a tool for relieving citizens of their assets by stealth .
Does he also see it in this way ?
( DE ) Mr President , in all of the countries that are experiencing a crisis , there have been genuine problems .
There is absolutely no point in denying that .
This situation can be abused from two different sides .
It can be abused , as some credit rating agencies are doing , for example , by giving advice that drives countries to ruin .
However , it can also be abused by making political statements to the effect that we do not need to change anything .
If some of the demonstrators , in Greece for example or in other countries , believe that we do not need to change anything and that we can carry on as before , then they are wrong .
We are therefore in favour of giving our full support to the measures proposed by Mr Papandreou 's government .
These measures are a step in the right direction .
They must be supported , and that is something that some of the trade unionists in Greece also need to recognise - the only way to overcome this is if , at the same time , we pursue a policy of growth together .
I wanted to make that absolutely clear .
In other words , no abuse from either side .
That is extremely important .
( DE ) Mr President , following the confidence vote yesterday in Athens with the result that we are all aware of , the Bild newspaper in Germany printed the headline ' Greek leader has survived - Europe can breathe a sigh of relief ' .
I have to say that I was also pleased with the result of this vote , but I think it is far too early to breathe a sigh of relief .
This is because we now need to put the substantial austerity package successfully in place in the next week .
That is the next big test .
Even then , we will be a long way from being able to breathe a sigh of relief .
Further steps and measures will still need to be taken before this crisis is overcome .
I believe that what has been said here is right .
The people in Greece need a light at the end of the tunnel .
However , I would also like to make it quite clear that the people in the countries from which most of the aid is coming also need a light at the end of the tunnel .
They have the feeling that they are giving and giving and giving and there is no end to it .
In Greece the people have the feeling that they are saving and saving and saving and there is no end to it .
That is why a growth strategy is so important .
That is why privatisations are crucial to break open and liberalise this encrusted economy .
That is why it is right for us resolutely to promote and support the reduction of public debt in Greece .
Democracy has to endorse this .
What is happening with respect to Mr Samaras is totally irresponsible .
However , it is right for us to give guarantees for investments , for example .
It is also right for us to draw out unused EU funds , Mr Barroso , and make them available to Greece , because ultimately it will not only be Greece but the whole of Europe that will benefit from more growth .
If we look ahead slightly , one thing is also important : the Stability and Growth Pact must be strengthened .
We must prevent future crises .
This is where this reverse qualified majority comes in .
No ordinary citizen will understand what that actually means .
To put it plainly , either the Stability and Growth Pact has this strange technical element that I have just mentioned , and then the Stability and Growth Pact will have teeth , or else it does not .
Then we will not be able to support this package .
Reverse qualified majority voting in the preventive phase of the Stability and Growth Pact is absolutely essential as far as we are concerned .
Mr Barroso , I am extremely pleased to hear you explain once again that the Commission is of exactly the same opinion .
I would like to see substantial support for this project from this House .


( DE ) Mr President , thank you Mr Lambsdorff , I am of the opinion that Greece urgently needs political unity .
However , that of course starts with the fact that the proposals put forward there must ultimately be fair .
There will only be unity in the country if there is renewed trust in the political and economic elite there .
For that to be possible , the proposals made need to bring about unity .
However , the question that I would like to ask you is this : I would also like to see some consistency in your group .
Here you are calling for Eurobonds , but in Germany you have declared Eurobonds to be a kind of blasphemy .
It is from your group in the German parliament that we see the greatest opposition to common European ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Giegold , you cannot use the blue-card procedure if you are not going to ask a question .
Therefore , Mr Graf Lambsdorff surely has nothing to answer .
( EL ) Mr President , as a Greek , I should like to thank the European Commission , the Council and the European Parliament for all the support they have given Greece to date .
In particular , I should like to thank everyone in the Commission who has been working so hard for 18 months now to resolve the Greek crisis .
We have talked about Europe a great deal in the European Parliament today .
I should just like to make one patriotic comment in this multinational Chamber .
We Greeks gave Europe its name and we made a decisive contribution to what we refer to as ' European civilisation ' and ' European values ' .
What are we Greek politicians and the Greek people asking for ?
We are asking for your respect and your solidarity .
What can we promise ?
That we shall work very hard to put the country which we brought to this point - this is , first and foremost , our problem and we are to blame - back on its feet .
Allow me to make three proposals : .....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the presence of large numbers of alleged asylum seekers from Libya and Tunisia will be on the agenda .
Tunisia is a country that has toppled its dictator , so what are these Tunisians fleeing from ?
Democracy ?
Perhaps we should expect to see Mr Ben Ali , a recently retired dictator , at the head of the queue .
Libya is a war zone .
But people do not become asylum seekers simply because they live in a dangerous country .
There must be something about that particular person that places that person in jeopardy .
The argument seems to be about whether Italy or Malta should accept them for settlement because they are the first country they reached , or whether they should be accepted for settlement by other Member States .
My answer is that neither should accept them for settlement and they should sooner or later be returned to North Africa .
If EU asylum rules really say that a mere claim to be an asylum seeker is enough to create an obligation to accept them , then the rules must be changed .
Rules are man-made and can be unmade .
If that means Member States , and indeed the EU itself , repudiating other international agreements , then so be it .
Member States have been changed beyond recognition by migration .
The time has come to stop the flow and encourage its reversal .
The accession of Croatia is also on the agenda .
What steps will the EU take to ensure the referendum will be held fairly , with both sides being heard and equal amounts of money being spent ?
I suspect that a free and fair referendum in not on the cards .
The country will be deluged with EU propaganda and those arguing against Croatia 's accession will be phased out of the debate .
( HU ) Mr President , the next European Council meeting will also be about trust .
We have reached a historic moment .
It is historic , because we will identify the challenges that the European Union has to face , and to which we now have to give nothing but responsible answers .
These answers , however , are closely interconnected .
First , however , I would like to congratulate the Hungarian Presidency on its great work and express my thanks for it .
In particular , I would like to thank Minister of State Enikő Győri , who was always present everywhere , for her work .
She set a strict timetable that the Presidency as a whole managed to keep , while maintaining a Parliament-friendly attitude , for which I thank them again .
This half-year has been a real challenge , because it was not only a new task for the Hungarian Presidency , but the tasks themselves were new as well .
Just think about the initiation and institutionalisation of the European semester , and the ' six-pack ' of economic governance , created within the framework of the co-decision procedure , that will bring a fundamentally new economic approach .
There are great expectations towards the approaching Council meeting , and towards issues of the package that have yet to be resolved through compromise .
At the same time , the Council and Parliament bear a huge responsibility over the agreement , because they have to decide whether they want to follow the bad practices that have lead to the weakening of the Stability and Growth Pact and indirectly to the crisis as well , or put an end to the policy of agreements made at Member State level and bad bargains , and finally give space to a new economic policy approach that will offer common European solutions , is built on commonly established rules , and will finally complete the economic policy aspect of integration , with a strong Europe in focus .
Citizens , national parliaments and the markets all expect the European Union to shape the European economy uniformly , following commonly accepted rules , to ensure the stability of the common currency and to protect European citizens from the crisis efficiently .
( ES ) Mr President , the Members of the European Parliament fully understand that the debate on the European Council which is set to be held on 23 and 24 June will continue to focus on the persistent crisis and the problems faced by the euro , and Greece .
However , I should like to join those who have pointed out that the agenda does not end there .
We also have a duty to discuss the question marks raised over elements that are central to the area of freedom , justice and security , specifically Schengen , which is probably the key asset for the free movement of persons .
We cannot allow the cry for democracy that has spread across North Africa to be met with anything other than a clear , categorical response .
Moreover , this response cannot be a reform of the Schengen Treaty .
On the contrary , it should be a strengthening of the Schengen Treaty .
There are precedents clearly indicating that , faced with unexpected , abrupt migratory pressures , as was the case in the Canary Islands , in Spain , between 2004 and 2006 , the response given cannot just be more , better Europe , but also a supportive contribution to the demand for better democracy in the neighbouring countries .
We know that Malta , Italy and France have been subjected to this pressure , but we have to be very clear that the Council must do its part by completing the asylum package , completing the immigration package , completing the reform of the Frontex Regulation and , not least , by updating the solidarity clause included in Article 80 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which means updating Directive 2001 / 55 / EC .
Lastly , I should also like to express my concern about the message that has been sent out , aimed at instituting a response mechanism that will enable re-establishment of the Union 's internal borders in certain extraordinary circumstances .
We must be extremely clear about what we are dealing with and what the European dimension will be , strictly in relation to the EU institutions , so that we will not find ourselves on a slippery , or indeed counterproductive , slope .
Mr President , after an era of openness , tolerance and enthusiasm for Europe , we have seen in recent years a deterioration of our unity and a division among Europeans , even in this House , on issues such as freedom of movement , immigration , national interest and , above all , money .
Unfortunately , this global economic crisis highlights the worst of our nationalist and populist views .
The chaos of daily declarations on Greece by national politicians and stakeholders is only adding to the confusion and creating more speculation on the markets .
The risk of contamination of every single Member State is a real one .
While Greece shares its burden of responsibility in its crisis , our European leaders share theirs as well .
If a year ago the EU had shown a unified and total commitment to helping Greece , we would not now be jumping from one rescue plan to another .
We do not need more technical solutions .
What we need is cohesion , determination and unity , because what we are playing is a psychological war and what the market is testing is Europe 's unity , not the Greek austerity plan .
It is crucial to send an unequivocal message of support and encouragement that Europe is standing behind Greece .
In addition , we should lower the interest rate and show more flexibility in accessing EU funds .
Besides , Greece must also be ready to take its fate in its hands .
While reforms and austerity measures are necessary , we should also remember that this is not enough in the long term to recover .
We must go back to the basics , encourage investment and promote growth .
I hope that tomorrow no European leader will default on solidarity , because Greece is just a page in the book which is Europe ; so if we stand by Greece , we stand by Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of Greece I will say that one only needs to listen to what has been discussed to realise what stage European governance is at .
In fact it is steering by sight , with no precise aims .
We have not been told anything for which I would keep my fingers crossed if I were a Greek citizen - perhaps a Greek worker or a small Greek entrepreneur facing ruin .
As regards immigration , I have heard Italy criticised for not wanting to accept any refugees .
A few hours ago , however , Mrs Malmström issued a public statement saying that when the tragedy of the Libyan exodus began everyone undertook to receive at least 800 refugees per country .
In practice , nobody is receiving them , and she highlighted the positive case of Norway .
They land in Lampedusa and a few in Malta , and we are the only ones taking them in .
Italy has received them .
Italy .
People were talking about Minister Bossi , and there is also the Home Affairs Minister , Mr Maroni : both ministers are from this racist Lega Nord party , which has received the refugees .
Unless there is proof to the contrary , that is the truth .
Lastly there is the Croatia chapter .
It is very important for Croatia to join , but it is also important to remember that the Pope warned the Croats to beware of a bureaucratic , centralist structure .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is precisely the complexity and , if you like , the toughness of the agenda for the Council of 24 June that bring us up against the shortcomings of the instruments available to us .
What exactly is available to us ?
The European Union is .
The European Union is a work in progress , an unfinished work , which we have so often failed to complete precisely because of our weakness and fear .
The European Union is available to us , but the United States of Europe is not .
That means that , when national governments are wavering due to internal issues , we do not have an instrument that we can activate in order to implement what might be a solution to our problems .
To succeed in finally making the United States of Europe available to us will require leadership not only from the national governments but primarily from the European institutions .
I believe - President Barroso is not here any more - that his prudence won him his second election .
I would very much like to vote for him for a third time , but this time for his courage .
In other words , as he has been re-elected once for his prudence , I would like to re-elect him for a third term for his courage .
Therefore , given the tough agenda to be tackled by the Council on 24 June , I expect the leadership shown by the Commission and the European institutions to persuade the national governments to put our ideals before whatever is in our interests .
I think that is the only feasible way forward .
Otherwise , we will continue to hold debates in which we grumble about the fact that perhaps the French Government has taken an initiative about Schengen for internal reasons , or the Italian Government has refused to admit someone or other , or the Greek Government is still too weak to really be able to take responsibility for its own decisions .
The main issue , however , lies elsewhere : unless the political nature of the European project is clarified , we will be incapable of dealing with our problems .

( EL ) Mr President , may I start by adding my thanks to those expressed by Mrs Tzavela - and I wish to thank her for that - to the parliaments and people of Europe for the support which they have given and are continuing to give to my country .
As developments over the last few days have illustrated , Greece is determined to continue with and make a success of its efforts to restructure its finances and promote structural reform .
However , if these efforts are to be crowned with success , two conditions need to be satisfied .
The first condition is that we must be able to give the people not just austerity , but also positive prospects , prospects of growth , prospects of employment and prospects of new jobs .
The second condition is that we need an environment of security and support from the European Union , an environment of political cohesion because , throughout the crisis and , in particular , over the last few weeks , we have seen an informal public dialogue between European capitals , the European Commission and the European Central Bank , with the credit rating agencies acting as a strange sort of referee , in connection with the much talked about involvement of the private sector in the new Greek bail-out .
This strange sort of refereeing does not do credit either to the European Union or to political union .
We need to silence this cacophony , because it is only in an environment of political cohesion that we can hope for the right conditions that will allow the tremendous efforts being made by the Greek people to be crowned with success .
Mr President , the big question facing EU leaders tomorrow is whether they are up to the task of saving European achievements in the common currency and free-movement zone .
' More Europe ' is not the answer to everything , but on key issues like these we do need strengthened ability for European decision-making .
I welcome President Barroso 's much tougher statement today than in our debate on Schengen and migration in May .
He should then have read the riot act to Italy and France in the way that Manfred Weber of the PPE did earlier in this debate .
In an excellent article published in the Financial Times yesterday , Mario Monti deplored both the excessive deference to big Member States and the ' culture of politeness ' in the Council , which meant that Member States refused to call each other to account for failings .
I would rather more crudely call it : ' I will scratch your back if you scratch mine ' .
This was disastrous over the issue of Greece 's fraudulent statistics .
We need EU-level powers of decision and action on major issues , but we also need the honesty without which mutual trust is impossible .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have seen that no country can face the problem of immigration alone .
It is essential to have a policy governing large migration movements that supports development cooperation and provides for multilateral and bilateral agreements with the migrants ' countries of origin and of transit .
Unfortunately , the new European external action instruments have not been used in the spirit or with the vision of the Treaties , as Italy is now finding .
The front-line Member States have in fact had to face the refugee crisis by means of unilateral initiatives , without being able to rely on European solidarity .
I therefore call on the Commission to define the cases in which we can talk of a ' mass influx of displaced persons ' under the terms of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC on temporary protection , thereby setting precise , measurable criteria that can be regarded as permanent .
Such clarification is important for promoting an effective common policy on migration and ensuring that the burden is shared .
( FR ) Mr President , I too would like to offer my warm congratulations to Minister Győri , President-in-Office of the Council , on her Presidency .
I would also like to welcome the Vice-President of the European Commission and make two remarks .
The first concerns Greece .
I think there is a need to consolidate the financial situation and to devise measures to promote growth .
With regard to financial consolidation , it is clear that dealing with the past while planning for the future is extremely difficult .
I propose the creation of a kind of credit mediator , which could house Greece 's bad debt in a suitable financial , or hive-off , structure .
Since the political consensus we have reached is not to allow capital losses , why not split the Greek debt up and thus allow the Greek Government to manage the future and this mediator basically to sort out the past through restructuring ?
As regards interest rates , a contribution is required from the banks , which made huge profits by purchasing debts at 16 % and then doubled their capital when they dropped to 8 % .
I also propose an investigation into financial transactions involving sovereign debt , which the European Securities and Markets Authority could be entrusted with carrying out .
Credit institutions have to a certain extent provided what we call , in French law , a form of unfair assistance to an over-indebted structure .
They are therefore guilty of misconduct and have caused harm : they need to make amends for that .
On the subject of growth , we must support President Barroso 's proposed EUR 1 billion plan , and we must deliver a proper development plan for Greece .
I approve of the idea put forward by Mr Cohn-Bendit : why not focus on military expenditure , which accounts for 4 % of GDP ?
Furthermore , if the European Union could arbitrate between Turkey and Cyprus , I believe we would save Greece 2 % of its GDP .
Those are the kinds of measures which would help bring about a development plan for Greece .

( PT ) Mr President , my expectations for the forthcoming Council are rather low , because division reigns in the European Union : instead of decision there is hesitation , and instead of solidarity there is selfishness .
That is how Europe is going .
Let us look at the case of Greece .
I am not going to talk about my own country , Portugal , because the new government has only just come to power .
All I can do , therefore , is to wish it every success for the sakes both of the Portuguese and of Europe .
Let us talk about Greece , then .
Greece is not just any country .
It has been a full Member of the European Union for decades , and it belongs to the Euro Group .
It is important to remember that Greece was the cradle of democracy .
These facts should be enough for Greece to be treated with greater respect by the European Union .
The Greeks are responsible for the terrible situation that they are in , but so are the European institutions .
Mr Papandreou , the Prime Minister , has done everything in his power to get out of this difficult situation .
With enormous courage and dignity he has adopted the austerity measures , whether they are feasible or unfeasible .
What is happening to Greece may one day apply to Ireland or Portugal , to Spain or Belgium , or to Italy or France .
I have a question for the European institutions : how can countries in difficulties bear the scandalous interest rates imposed on them and at the same time reduce their budget deficit and public debt and promote economic growth and create jobs ?
Do you not think that with that kind of treatment these countries run the risk of dying not from the disease but from the cure ?
That is not the right path .
What is needed is a concerted plan to defend the single currency , to fight off speculation on sovereign debts and to denounce the rating agencies , which are primarily to blame for the crisis we are undergoing .
( FR ) Mr President , the first precaution to be taken if we want to prevent a large-scale blaze is to stop playing with fire .
I agree with President Barroso when he states that the Greek Government must do everything it can to put its house in order so that the European Union can , in turn , take action .
In other words , Greece must regain its credibility .
Does the same call for responsible behaviour not deserve to be addressed to all the governments in the EU ?
Are all the political leaders aware of the impact of the statements they have made about Greece over the last 18 months ?
The time has come for the European Council to put a stop , tomorrow , to the discord among its members .
Four things are needed in order to prevent the Greek crisis from having a much-feared domino effect across the entire euro area : firstly , a united Greece with an economic and budgetary recovery plan ; secondly , a European Union and a Euro Group which are united by the same objective ; thirdly , a little more time than initially planned , particularly for privatisations ; and fourthly , solidarity which is properly understood and which comprises not only new loans , but also , and above all , technical assistance from its partners , and in particular from the Commission .
( PT ) Mr President , first of all I must say that I am expecting some highly responsible decision making from this European Council , particularly in view of the economic climate we have been experiencing in recent weeks .
It must be more responsible than the last Council , which tried to put a problem off for three months merely because of electoral timetables .
What I expect from this responsible decision making is essentially for people to realise that economic and financial issues are crucial and decisive for Europe , but that they are instrumental for Europe 's primary purpose , which is to keep the peace .
If we take an approach to problems that only leads to the Member States beginning to mistrust each other , to sowing mistrust between the various states , to creating and exacerbating differences and rivalries between southern and northern states and between central and peripheral states , the end result will be the decline of the European Union .
I believe that what is at stake in this European Council , regardless of the technical solutions or political disagreements , is knowing whether or not we want the European project to continue to be a valid blueprint for a strategy for peace in Europe .
I believe that is what is at stake .
What I notice in the speeches of many leaders , whether they are in countries in difficulties or countries that pay out and are net contributors , is an irresponsible discourse that often even appeals to certain extremely negative features of their nationalities .
For that reason , and that reason alone , I appeal to the sense of responsibility of European government leaders to come up with solutions that enable Europe to find a way out and to resolve the situation .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , mutual fear and mistrust - as Mr Mauro was saying just now - are guiding the decisions made by European governments on the crisis .
Europe looks to me like a football team that is losing 2-0 whose players think they can recover by not passing the ball any more and trying to score alone .
No match can be won by playing alone , however .
Not even Maradona or Pelé could win the match of this crisis by themselves .
The Greek crisis could have been controlled in its early stages .
Instead , we pressed on and have now reached a very tricky point , which must be tackled by leaving damaging jealousies and failed economic recipes behind once and for all .
We should tell the truth and admit that many of today 's heads of government are proving to be second-rate leaders .
They cannot understand that the crisis was certainly not caused by Greece or even by the sovereign debt situation , but by the financial markets , which until the other day were unregulated .
Now the governments are again offering us the usual poisoned bait : let us sort out our public accounts and then we will see who is left alive .
Nobody will be left alive , however , and above all the vital part of European society will not be left alive .
Instead , we need to aim for growth by aiming and focusing resources on research , training and the major challenges , and starting a virtuous circle .
Lastly , we should speak plainly about immigration .
Schengen should not be touched ; at most it can be strengthened , but it should not be touched because it is an inalienable achievement that keeps the European Union standing .
Migrant flows must be governed from Brussels in a way that rewards inclusion , solidarity and security .
( RO ) Mr President , the Council will bring the Hungarian Presidency to an end .
The efforts of this Presidency should be commended for completing important dossiers , including some extremely controversial ones .
This is a very important meeting because it will be seen whether the European semester is going to be implemented .
The recommendations must be applied by Member States to prevent stability being jeopardised .
Now is the time when Member States need to prove their responsible commitment to abiding by the new mechanism .
Stability or convergence programmes and domestic reform programmes are needed , but are not enough .
Agreement must be reached on the meaning of economic governance .
Parliament has achieved a compromise with great effort , which I hope will be supported by the vote tomorrow .
It is the Council 's turn to adopt this package of paramount importance to the Union .
The Schengen area has been a major talking point recently .
The evaluation mechanism obviously needs to be revamped .
Reintroducing borders unilaterally is not a solution .
If a Member State is unable to meet its external border responsibilities , support measures and the involvement of Frontex are required .
If the situation is not resolved , the Council , at the Commission 's suggestion , can decide by qualified majority to reintroduce border controls for a limited period .
I believe that introducing borders unilaterally , as is happening at the moment , is not a solution .
Approval of the Presidency 's report on the means for promoting Roma inclusion in the European Union and of the conclusions concerning the launch of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region may mark important steps in the implementation of these vital policies for the European Union .
Mr President , the weakness of the Stability Pact has been one factor in this deepening economic crisis , which has grown into a credibility crisis .
Nobody is blameless in this respect .
We have now reached an emergency situation where solidarity and responsibility are all that count , but solidarity does not just mean all for one .
In exactly the same way it means one for all .
Every Member State has to take responsibility for the ownership of our Union and start acting for the common good of Europe .
We do need more Europe , and more Europe means more discipline , including concrete measures against those who continue to violate the rules .
To restore the euro zone 's credibility , the Commission 's role has to be to become both stronger and more independent in exercising economic governance and conducting surveillance .
The Commission needs a mandate to assess the economic situation in the Member States , so it can issue recommendations and warnings in time .
But the crucial issue will be the political will and ability to apply fines .
Their application should become a rule , not an object of political bargaining .
The role of the Council should be duly limited , in procedures that lead to potential sanctions .
The EU 's credibility can be restored by improving the quality of statistics , excluding in the future any manipulation and falsifying of fiscal data .
My country , Estonia , faced a deep economic crisis three years ago .
However , we acted , balanced the budget and entered the euro zone .
Latvia acted too and is clearly back on track .
All for one and one for all .
We all have to act in reforming our societies .
Cutting expenses hurts , but remains the only way back to growth and stability .
Mr President , we have heard a lot today about giving and giving and giving and cutting and cutting and cutting .
I want to add another dimension to the mix , and that is ' taking and taking and taking ' .
I am referring in particular to the interest rate being charged by the ECB to my own country , Ireland .
We are struggling manfully to reach our targets in relation to the bail-out . But this is not helping us .
Thankfully , the EP and the Commission see that we are being unjustly and unfairly treated .
Charging an interest rate like the one we are being charged is akin to tying a millstone around the neck of a drowning man while you are sending out the lifeboat to save him .
I would ask , particularly tomorrow , for the Council to reduce the interest rate on Ireland .
If it does so , we will return to growth , we will meet our commitments and we will be a great nation , part of Europe once again .
( HU ) Mr President , the European Council will hopefully endorse the three successful objectives of the Hungarian Presidency : the Danube strategy , the Roma strategy and the conclusion of accession negotiations with Croatia .
The key objective , however , would be the adoption of the ' six-pack , ' the legislative package on economic governance .
Hungarian experts and diplomats deserve the highest praise for their great work , because they managed to reduce the number of issues between the Council and the European Parliament to only a few .
In order to break the deadlock of the negotiations , the Hungarian Government needs to achieve compromises at the highest possible level .
Whether the government of Viktor Orbán has enough political capital to do so , however , is still in question .
Is Mr Matolcsy , who had openly and harshly attacked the European semester before , able to argue credibly in favour of strengthening economic governance ?
I hope that we can still reach a breakthrough in the Council .
Europe needs the introduction of economic governance as soon as possible .

( PT ) Mr President , what the serious economic and social situation affecting several Member States of the Union deserves from this forthcoming June European Council is very careful consideration , deep reflection on its causes , and acceptance of responsibility for the increasingly neoliberal Union policies , such as privatisations and the devaluing of labour , which are causing more social inequality , greater economic divergence , and more unemployment , poverty and social exclusion .
The Council members are indifferent to the struggle of workers and ordinary people and , unfortunately , what they are proposing is to make permanent the neoliberal policies that have already led to serious crises in Greece and Ireland and are threatening Portugal and other Member States .
In the end , what they are trying to do is to make it easier to gain more profit from capital and from greater financial speculation , and always at the expense of the same groups as ever : workers , micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises , farmers and people affected by these investment cuts and austerity policies .
( DE ) Mr President , the EU 's current migration policy has failed .
An example of this is the Commission 's plans for so-called mobility partnerships in order to give the mass influx of people from North Africa a semblance of legality .
Mrs Malmström has declared many times that Europe is allegedly dependent on immigration from North Africa .
However , the fact that many Member States are having to deal with high levels of unemployment , particularly among young people , is deliberately ignored .
In Libya , the population has doubled in the last 20 years .
Thus , if the gates to North Africa were opened , the pressure on the European labour market would increase further .
Therefore , we do not need more immigration from North Africa , but rather a stop to immigration altogether .
Our citizens do not want mobility partnerships in this regard ; instead they want readmission partnerships .
Our fellow citizens do not want open borders , but rather the reintroduction of controls and a strengthening of Frontex .
This also ought to be considered at the forthcoming Council meeting when ' progress ' in immigration policy is discussed .
( PL ) Mr President , we have spent most of our time discussing the crisis in Greece , and quite rightly so , for it is an enormous problem .
Yet during yesterday 's debate , Mr Barroso also asked us for our support on the Schengen issue .
The fact that Mr Barroso has asked us in Parliament for our support means that he must be anticipating a very difficult situation , and difficult talks with the heads of the various governments .
I would like to say that the Schengen area , and the freedom it brings to travel around Europe , was a symbol of freedom and of the European Union , and one of the chief assets and greatest merits of the European Union , for me personally , as a Pole , and for all Polish people .
We cannot allow this freedom to be limited , or for the Schengen area to disintegrate , for it is precisely decisions and policies of this kind that determine how the EU is perceived .
Therefore I would call not only for the Schengen system to be defended , but also for Romania and Bulgaria to be included , or rather involved in this system as soon as possible .
( PL ) Mr President , it has given me great satisfaction during today 's debate to see the two camps which have emerged in respect of the reasons behind this state of affairs and the recommendations ; the neo-liberals on one side , and the left-wing Members on the other .
It is apparent that after so many months of debates on the situation in Europe , we have come to the conclusion firstly that there is a very high level of threat , and secondly that cooperation is necessary .
In connection with this , I was happy to hear Mr Barroso say today that a proposal will be submitted regarding a tax on financial transactions .
I am pleased that this is the case .
It is a shame that we are not already working with a final draft , but the fact that a draft exists is very much to be welcomed .
If I may , I should like to emphasise one more matter : for the time being we are focusing on the euro area , but we also have a ' non-euro area ' in the European Union , and we should ensure that this does not experience problems either .
( MT ) Mr President , on the immigration issue , we expect three things tomorrow .
Firstly , that the Schengen Area is defended because it represents freedom for our citizens and constitutes one of the most visible elements for European Union citizens .
Secondly , we expect shared responsibility on the external borders too , not just on the internal ones .
This will require a stronger Frontex Agency , as well as increased solidarity and the parcelling out of responsibilities in a fair and just manner .
It will also necessitate greater cooperation with the Southern Mediterranean countries that have undergone revolutions .
Above all , what we need most of all tomorrow is true political will .
If this is lacking then we will never practise what we preach .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's lively and animated debate is clear proof that the agenda of the European Council is highly relevant and critically important for the future of Europe .
Greece was very much present in most of our interventions .
We know that the situation in Greece is very difficult and that there are no easy solutions .
I agree with all of you who said that it is very important to demonstrate to the Greek people that it is not only about cuts and austerity , but that there is also light at the end of the tunnel and that we can actually help Greece to get back onto the path of growth .
Austerity must therefore be accompanied by pro-growth policies and measures .
I am absolutely sure that the European Union and the Commission can do that .
We can help Greece to increase administrative capacity .
We can help Greece to absorb structural funds better and put them in strategic pro-growth sectors , and we can help the Greek authorities to improve the quality of their tax collection .
We know how to help countries improve their educational systems .
I think we can all do it now , and the Commission is ready to proceed in that way .
We are prepared to put together technical assistance programmes which will accompany the difficult austerity measures the Greek authorities have to go through .
By this , we would like to show clearly that Europe cares ; Europe is solidarity and Europe can help if the country is in such distress .
However , the same message needs to come from the Greek political establishment .
We can do our best , but what we need from the Greek authorities is a clear show of unity , and a clear show of resolve to tackle the difficult issues in that country .
This would be my appeal and the appeal of the Commission to the Greek political representatives : cooperate , show us unity , show us a united approach to the very difficult issues .
The time is right and this would be a highly responsible gesture .
Not many of you touched upon the very important element of the conclusion of the European semester .
However , I will mention it here because we need the help of the members of the European Parliament to go back to their constituencies and explain that the European semester is over and national semesters are starting .
I think we know what to do ; we have country-specific recommendations which are very fair , very honest and very detailed for each Member State , but now we need the cooperation of the national authorities and of the national governments to actually deliver and to carry out the reforms in the Member States .
Only by this will we change the quality and competitiveness of the European economy for the better and put the European economy on new wheels .
I would like to confirm once again that a financial transaction tax will be proposed by the European Commission .
We needed to carry out a very thorough impact assessment and that is about to be concluded .
This will be one of our proposals , and one of our inputs into the global debate on these very important issues .
Again , Europe will provide leadership on this issue and we hope that our global partners will follow .
Several of you referred to the Schengen area and to the importance of having high quality immigration policies in place .
I would like to assure you that we are absolutely aware of the fact that freedom and the rights of persons to free movement within Europe is one of the most important achievements , and we should treasure it .
The Commission will act as the guardian of the treaties and would be ready to act if the basic foundations of these projects are called into question .
After recent developments , we also have to acknowledge that we need a complex solution for all aspects of migration and that we need to consolidate trust in the system .
Therefore , the Commission is convinced that only a coordinated and Community-based process is adequate as opposed to unilateral initiatives by Member States to re-introduce internal border controls .
We also need a common European Asylum System that is more efficient and more protective .
We will do our utmost to ensure that the system is up and running by 2012 .
This is the Commission 's approach and I hope that it will be supported by the European Parliament and by the Member States .
Please allow me a few short words on economic governance and the ' six pack ' .
You have already heard the position of the Commission President and you will have a chance to discuss this issue in greater detail with my fellow Commissioner , Olli Rehn .
I would underline only one element and that is the importance of having an agreement sooner rather than later , because time is pressing and we need our new tools in order to govern European economies in better and more reliable ways in the future .
A concluding remark on Croatia .
I think that it is time and it is appropriate to congratulate Croatia , because it is approaching a historical moment and I believe that this should give a very positive signal , not only for all Croatians , but for all the peoples of the western Balkans .
I would also like to congratulate the European Parliament and its rapporteur , Mr Swoboda , and also the Hungarian Presidency , which did an excellent job of pushing this so far forward , enabling us to have these very good results at this time .
The last word of thanks goes to Ms Enikő Győri .
She said many times that she wanted to lead a parliament-friendly Presidency .
I think she has proved it with her frequent presence in this House .
I would also like to thank her for her excellent cooperation with the Commission .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me use my mother tongue this last time that I participate in the plenary session .
First of all , I would like to thank you all for recognising our work , as we could hear many MEPs from various groups conclude that the Hungarian Presidency did a good job .
I personally believe that it is indeed worth leading a Parliament-friendly Presidency in the European Union .
President Barroso alluded to the ' six-pack , ' and Vice-President Šefčovič mentioned the negotiations with Croatia and the different dossiers .
The existence of the co-decision procedure in the European Union gives the Council and the Presidency the opportunity to build personal relations with a large number of Members , and to raise mutual awareness within the institutions of each other 's problems , which I believe is a great opportunity for us all .
Thank you for organising this debate today .
I believe that we agree on the fundamental principles and basic values , of which much has been said today , and even European integration philosophies have been discussed , and I have to say that most of the Members ' speeches reflected this agreement between us .
We also agree that the European Council has to tackle extremely difficult issues today .
I would be more careful when using the word ' historical ' , because I think we depreciate the concept if we use it too often .
I strongly agree that fear and mistrust are bad counsellors , and EU leaders should not be led by these emotions during the meetings tomorrow and the day after tomorrow .
It is my credo , and that of the Hungarian Presidency as well , that we have to base all our steps on trust - and I would even say mutual trust - , on taking responsibility and on solidarity , just like you have urged us .
Whether it be about economic policy , Schengen reforms , asylum or enlargement , this is what we must build on .
The solution - as proposed by the great majority - is more Europe , a stronger Europe ; the Hungarian Presidency has been working for the last six months with this in mind .
It is indeed our firm belief that deeper integration is the solution to our common problems .
Finally , I would like to report on the issues which were given to the Hungarian Presidency as homework by the previous European Councils , and more specifically : what results and achievements will be presented at the summit starting tomorrow , because , after all , we had to make a deal about specific dossiers with you and we had to reach agreement on other issues as well .

Let me start with economic issues .
We have already talked about the European semester , and I would like to thank Vice-President Šefčovič , because it is really worth informing the public about what the semester means .
It is about providing the transparency needed to know how Member States manage themselves , so that we may send them warning signals in time .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament followed this practice with close attention ; in this European semester we encourage the Member States to maintain stricter budgetary management , and , at the same time , we lay down the basis for the practice of seeking growth in hard work and creativity .
As far as the ' six-pack ' is concerned , there will be an in-depth debate on it soon in this House .
Let me give you two reasons why I would prefer the adoption of the current agreement .
Firstly , because this package is good .
It is better than the initial Council proposal , and because Parliament was given concessions by the Council on every single issue on its agenda .
We have even achieved concessions on reverse qualified majority voting .
So , I have to disagree with Mr Lambsdorff 's opinion that the whole package has only one tooth , namely reverse QMV .
The advantage of this package is indeed that it builds several checks and balances into the system , through which crises like the one of 2008 can be avoided in the future .
As far as free movement of persons is concerned , let me tell you that at the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 9 June the Hungarian Presidency unanimously adopted a conclusion stating that free movement has to be preserved , that we need to revise the measures already available to us , and only after we have exhausted them and only if new problems actually arise , requiring the adjustment of our current acquis , can we take extraordinary measures in extraordinary situations , and that the modalities should only be elaborated once there is a concrete legislative proposal at hand , which , as far as I know , will happen this autumn .
I have just received news that parallel to this plenary session the Council agreed on the only open question regarding Frontex , so the negotiations on the strengthening of Frontex have been concluded with success .
I thank Parliament for their cooperation .
The other homework given by the European Council was to increase the lending capacity of the European Investment Bank , and in this regard we were able to come to an agreement with this Parliament , which is another success we achieved , and I believe this was an important step towards the reconciliation of the situation in the countries of North Africa .
As a quick side note , I must respond to the words of Mr Tabajdi .
I must reject his remarks concerning the members of the Hungarian Government , which I think are based on domestic political motivations .
First , I would like to ask you to inquire from your colleagues in the Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs about the work of Minister for National Economy György Matolcsy , because the atmosphere in the hearing yesterday was slightly different from what you have talked about here today .
I would also recommend that you read the responses of the Member States to the Commission 's proposals concerning the European semester .
Everyone is free to react and criticise the content , because everything works out through debates and interchanges of opinions in the European Union , and it is true that many Member States have criticised the content already .
Second , I would like to point out to you one of the positive traits of the Hungarian Presidency , the key to our success in reaching agreements with European institutions on so many issues , namely respect for the Treaties and for the competence of the institutions .
We submit the ' six-pack ' to the Council in the knowledge that the Hungarian Presidency has done everything it could to come to an agreement , as praised by President Barroso and by your colleagues in this House in committee meetings .
Therefore , we now submit the package to the European Council , whose President 's name is Herman Van Rompuy , and who will decide on a course of action .
Last but not least , I would like to talk about the accession of Croatia .
As I said at the beginning , I am careful with the use of the word ' historical ' .
However , in the case of Croatia I think we have indeed come to a historical moment , because we are sending a very important message to the Western Balkans , namely that they have a future in the European Union .
I truly hope that the heads of EU Member States and governments will take the political decision tomorrow and the day after tomorrow about the accession of Croatia , and that the negotiations can be concluded in the final hours of the Hungarian Presidency , on 30 June at the latest .
The European Commission worked around the clock to be able to issue a positive report on 10 June .
I can assure you that both the Croatians and the Hungarian Presidency have been working day and night to make this happen .
We have had Council working group meetings every day to enable us to complete the work .
Finally , I would like to thank not only this House - which I have done already - but also our partners in the trio , Spain and Belgium , for their excellent cooperation and for the fact that we were able to complete the 18-month trio programme , and may I wish Poland all the best and a Parliament-friendly Presidency .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
The forthcoming European Council is of particular importance because the two great facets of European integration will be at the heart of the debates .
The first is economic integration in the shape of the economic governance package , which should make it possible to find the best solutions for getting out of the economic and financial crisis , as well as concrete measures for the countries in especially difficult economic situations ; to this end the Council should send out a clear message of solidarity and responsibility .
Secondly , this period of troubles and great migratory pressures that we are experiencing cannot serve as an excuse for weakening the great success of Schengen , a synonym for freedom of movement .
We cannot do a U-turn on this success , but instead we must protect , strengthen and develop it .
I hope this Council sends out a strong , clear message to this effect , emphasising that the Member States need to respect and implement the Schengen rules properly and effectively .
It must draw attention to the need to improve solidarity and the sharing of responsibilities among Member States , and to increase the powers and resources of Frontex .
It must also stress the need to set up a real evaluation mechanism for Schengen that will check compliance with the rules and border controls , identify problems , help solve them and , as a last resort , penalise Member States if they persist in not complying .
The dramatic effects of the so-called austerity measures are highly visible .
As many people warned a year ago , the International Monetary Fund-European Union ( IMF-EU ) programme for Greece has not only caused economic disaster and social devastation , but it has proved incapable of fulfilling the very objectives that allegedly justified it : the deficit reduction targets have not been met , the country 's public debt must be around 170 % at the moment and the interest rates that the markets require on the public debt have soared .
Nonetheless , the European Council is preparing a fresh assault .
In addition to the identically tailored IMF-EU programmes that they want to implement in Ireland and now Portugal , they are preparing to reinforce the attack on Greece , squeezing its people even further .
These are the latest steps in this process of interference and extortion , which is openly colonial in complexion .
They intend to use economic governance to institutionalise and make permanent the interventionist policies and measures associated with current , ongoing examples of IMF-EU meddling .
They want ' cross-compliance ' to become permanent , as well as external control over national accounts and policies , which are closely supervised by the major EU powers .
Infringement ( or even a mere threat of infringement ) of their dictates would result in heavy penalties .
These are unacceptable developments that show how retrograde , reactionary and anti-democratic this European Union really is .
We are at a crucial moment , when Europe 's economic future is being decided in the shape of the economic governance package .
Furthermore , in several days ' time the EU will decide on the next tranche of economic aid for Greece .
In my opinion , if we are to exit the crisis then we need greater economic integration within Europe , not additional sanctions or restrictions .
Today 's European Union comprises both the euro area and the remaining countries , and while the euro area itself admittedly shares one currency , it is also made up of 17 bond markets and 17 governments ' development strategies .
My political group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , is therefore in favour of adopting positive solutions , such as closer economic integration .
We also believe that the burden should fall on those who are responsible for the economic crisis , hence the idea of a tax on financial transactions , and not those who are its victims , for example the citizens of Greece .
The current European Council meeting is also the last during the Hungarian Presidency of the Council , which has not earned the praise that should be due to it , since a number of concrete projects on the EU 's agenda upon which the Hungarians have worked , including those concerning economic governance , have been overshadowed by political issues , such as the media law or the Hungarian constitution .
I hope that Poland , which is next in line to take over the presidency , will not follow the example of our neighbours , and that the election campaign for the Sejm will not overshadow its successes .
I am wondering what the outcome of this Council will be .
It is supposed to be an opportunity to debate the progress made in the application of asylum and immigration policies , and the consequences of the Arab revolutions , at Europe 's borders .
If we have chosen to seize this opportunity in order to strengthen external border checks , then it should be said straight away that we have picked the wrong target again .
It is not enough simply to pursue a repressive policy which we know is ineffective and causes great human suffering .
Let us remember that there are people in need of protection at Europe 's doors , doors which remain closed to them under the false pretexts of cost and abuse .
Following the recent World Refugee Day , let us insist , above all , on our responsibilities as Europeans , responsibilities which the Member States are , wrongly , afraid to shoulder .
Otherwise the 2012 deadline , to which those same Member States have committed themselves , may well be missed .
in writing . - We are preparing for a busy European Council meeting which will , in my opinion , be even of historic importance .
The Hungarian Presidency has some important success stories under its belt : the Danube strategy and the adoption of the Roma strategy .
However , I do hope that after the good quality work they have done on a professional level , they will have enough political weight and agility to reach important goals in other areas , such as the Croatian accession , migration and the very pressing issue of economic governance .
They have to work hard to achieve an understanding between 27 Member States , to reflect Europe 's unity and willingness to overcome the crisis and preserve the essence of European integration .
I am impressed that my country 's first EU Presidency happens to be during such a challenging period and I hope that the European Council this week will live up to the expectations .
in writing . - ( DE ) Whereas the immigration world champion Canada attracts more highly qualified migrants than any other region of the world - in which regard , those who are not able to make a living are also quick to leave again - Europe almost pursues a policy of ' compassionate migration for the unqualified ' .
The fact is that the majority of Africans who come to Europe are not refugees , they are economic migrants .
This human horse trading under the false heading of ' refugees ' as well as the humanitarian call for asylum is causing irreparable damage to the asylum system .
A European asylum policy is doomed to failure on account of the undesirable side effects of previous proposals : the Dublin Regulation was intended to prevent asylum tourism .
Now , countries with easily accessible external borders are swamped , but the majority of asylum seekers nevertheless are landing in the countries with the most generous social security systems .
The fact that granting asylum seekers equality with the national population in terms of access to the labour market and social security has boosted economic migration was only to be expected .
The increased rights of illegal immigrants make deportation almost impossible .
A uniform asylum law would only be desirable if it was based on the most stringent national asylum law , like that of Denmark for example , and if there were consequences for contraventions of the law , like the tourist visa for illegal immigrants .
A European asylum system based on the central principles of humanitarianism and muddling through is to be firmly rejected .
There must finally be a clear differentiation between refugees with a right to asylum and economic migrants .
Moreover , Frontex and readmission agreements must be developed further and illegal immigrants must consistently be deported .
In view of the European Council meeting on 23-24 June , I would like to raise the issue of Croatia 's accession .
I would first of all like to say how pleased I am that my position , supported by an amendment to the resolution on the 2010 progress report for Croatia , tabled along with my colleague Bernd Posselt , is in the process of becoming a reality .
This is why I welcome the agreement reached within the General Affairs Council on concluding negotiations with Croatia by the end of this month .
I hope that the European Council will formalise this matter .
After six years of negotiations , the time has come for recognition to be given to Croatia 's efforts in meeting the accession criteria .
I hope that in 2013 we can welcome Croatia as the 28th Member State .
The Council 's decision will send an extremely strong signal to the Western Balkans as a whole , encouraging the governments in this region to continue their reforms .
This is a long process which requires sacrifices to be made . However , the integration efforts are rewarded in the end .
At the same time , I welcome the positive attitude shown by the Croatian authorities to the use of the monitoring mechanism up until the actual time of accession as an additional incentive .
However , there should be no option for extending its use after this date .
The Schengen area will be one of the issues discussed at the Council 's forthcoming meeting .
In this context , I would like to draw the House 's attention to the ever-increasing number of people talking about the reintroduction of border checks .
Denmark was planning to take a decision to this effect .
The reasons given , namely the fight against cross-border crime and the increase in illegal immigration , are very serious problems , but they cannot be solved by closing the borders .
This course of action runs counter to EU regulations on the free movement of goods and services .
It will also result in a rise in xenophobia and a growth in the influence of parties proclaiming populist and nationalist slogans .
What we need most of all is joint and more effective solutions for protecting the EU 's external borders and uniform standards for all Member States as far as immigration policy is concerned .
In this context , I would call on the European Commission either to uphold its resolute opposition to a reintroduction of border checks or to establish joint , uniform and reasonable rules , criteria and mechanisms for a possible reintroduction .
in writing . - ( RO ) First of all , I share the sentiments of my fellow Members maintaining that we should show solidarity with Greece .
The European Union must take a firm , united stance on this decision .
Secondly , the Schengen area is one of the EU 's biggest achievements , the principles of which must be observed and defended .
In this context , I think that restoring border controls within the Schengen area is not acceptable , nor is the introduction of additional criteria for Member States which would like to join the Schengen area and fulfil the specific technical criteria .
Thirdly , I welcome the European Council 's adoption of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region .
There is a long history of cooperation in the Danube region .
One of the first European institutions , the European Danube Commission , was founded in 1856 , with its headquarters in Galaţi , in Romania , its aim being to ensure freedom of navigation on the Danube .
I call on the relevant Member States to give priority to the implementation of this strategy , thereby ensuring economic and social development for more than 120 million citizens living in this macro-region .
Finally , I call on the European Council and Member States to remove the current barriers preventing the free movement of Romanian and Bulgarian workers .
Lifting these barriers means respect for the EU 's fundamental principles such as the free movement of persons and solidarity .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Council has a few things planned for the agenda of its meeting .
With regard to the Greek crisis , it is finally to be made clear that the European Union does not just stand for ' give ' or ' take ' but that it works on the principle of ' give and take ' .
However , that also means that if a country receives help , this country must also follow the measures that are put in place for this purpose .
The improvement of the Stability and Growth Pact is very much to be welcomed , simply to prevent any further financial disasters being experienced by a Member State .
With regard to the planned accession of Croatia , the fact that Croatia fulfils the accession criteria is something to be welcomed , but it nevertheless has to be asked how the funding of approximately EUR 500 million to which Croatia is entitled is actually to be financed .
The CAP towards 2020 : Meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Dess , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the CAP towards 2020 : meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 50 years ago , in 1961 , I began my training to be a farmer .
Ever since then , I have been guided by the common European agricultural policy .
It has become an important mainstay of the European unification process .
Since the beginning of the CAP there have been fundamental changes to its tasks .
The first task was to increase food production in order for us to be less dependent on food imports .
Sometime later , Europe was in the position of having to deal with food surpluses .
With an ever-changing situation , there were also more and more reforms .
Today , we are debating the next reform , the new approach of the CAP after 2013 .
As rapporteur for the CAP reform towards 2020 , I am pleased that we have achieved a cross-group compromise .
Even if not all of the individual interests could be taken into account in a compromise , the report was adopted with a large majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The clear vote is an unambiguous signal to the Commission of the form that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development sees the CAP taking towards 2020 .
I am certain , Commissioner , that the new approach of the CAP after 2013 will also bear the stamp of the European Parliament .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives us that possibility .
My thanks today go to my fellow Members for their involvement and support , and to the committee chair Mr De Castro , the coordinators and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation and willingness to compromise .
I would like to thank the staff of the committee secretariat , the political groups and in my own private office for their splendid cooperation .
Turning to the report now : food safety and the security of supply for half a billion people remain the main goals of the common agricultural policy , not only in the EU , but also worldwide .
The CAP is intended to be sustainable and competitive , to supply consumers with safe , high-quality food and also to promote renewable forms of energy .
The two-pillar structure of the CAP is to remain so as to create certainty of planning for our farmers for this next period .
The report clearly states - and here we support the Commissioner - that the agricultural budget should remain at the current level in the next financial period .
I cannot understand President Barroso 's statement that massive cuts are to be made in the second pillar .
I believe that there will be cross-group opposition to this .
The simplification of the common agricultural policy remains an important task . That is a core demand of our compromise .
We are also calling for a fair distribution among the Member States .
That is also necessary in order to create a level playing field in terms of competition .
We are seeking to move away from historical and individual references towards area-based premiums .
The role of small farmers is to be recognised and , on the basis of subsidiarity , the Member States are to decide themselves how to support these small farmers .
The importance of young farmers is mentioned .
From my point of view , it was important to avoid introducing a new additional payment system that would lead to extra control and sanction systems for greening .
Overall , we have found a compromise that many Members will be able to support tomorrow so that we can send out a clear signal as regards the new approach of this agricultural policy .
A large majority of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will support this report .

Mr President , Mr Dess , honourable Members , this report has come at a pivotal time , just as the Commission is drafting detailed legislative proposals that it plans to present to Parliament and the Council in October .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Dess , for his work over past weeks and months .
I would also like to thank the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their hard work and the fruitful discussions that we have had since I began the task of preparing the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Many elements in the report are in line with the Commission 's vision as set out in the communication on reforming the common agricultural policy , which was presented at the end of 2010 and was intended to spark debate .
I am thinking in particular of the question of food security , which is one of agriculture 's underlying aims .
I am also thinking of the importance of preserving the two pillars of the common agricultural policy , as Mr Dess has just said , whilst also recognising the need to make the policy greener and to focus more on integrating the sound management of natural resources .
I am also referring to a fairer distribution of common agricultural policy money between European farmers and to the need for a budget that is able to address food and regional issues , but also the management of natural resources in the European Union .
I also note that you have included a proposal for higher ceilings for direct payments .
At this stage , let me stress the considerable contribution that many large farms make to rural employment .
Criteria such as employment will therefore be taken into account when we define the ceilings for agricultural income aid .
Adding a green component to the first pillar in conjunction with a stronger rural development policy is another key objective that will help to tackle climate change and environmental issues , but will also contribute to achieving the Europe 2020 strategy .
I am pleased to see that the report stresses the importance of closer links between direct payments and conservation of natural resources .
I want to establish an effective , pan-European instrument that achieves the objective of simplifying the direct payment system .
I am a strong advocate of decoupling direct payments , which has proved beneficial in helping farmers to adapt better to market conditions .
However , I share the view expressed in your report , namely that we need to be practical and realistic .
In certain situations , specific segments and sectors that are economically , ecologically and socially sensitive , I feel that optional coupled aid should also be available .
Direct payments will continue to play an important role in maintaining regional vitality .
This is a particular challenge in areas with significant natural limitations .
That is why the Commission communication stressed the value of providing income aid in addition to the second pillar payments made to areas with natural constraints , which will continue to be awarded .
We will examine the concerns expressed in your report , which suggests that this component should not be included under the first pillar .
In the communication on the future of the common agricultural policy , I suggested creating a specific support scheme for small farmers , which would help them by minimising the administrative red tape associated with direct aid .
Under the second pillar , small farmers could also receive significant support for restructuring or to allow them to contribute more at a territorial level , but also in economic terms , by becoming more profitable and more competitive .
Limiting direct payments to active farmers is another point on which your expectations and my vision of the future common agricultural policy coincide .
Here again , we want to establish a European definition that can also allow for the specific conditions in Member States .
I have also paid close attention to your proposals on market measures .
Strengthening management capacity and the negotiating power of producers and producer organisations , transparent pricing and other risk-management measures are all subjects that I am committed to examining in detail as part of the impact assessment .
I intend to develop specific legislative proposals on these points .
I agree with your comments on improving and enhancing rural development measures .
I also agree that we need measures that will allow us to respond more effectively to challenges associated with global warming , biodiversity and the sustainable management of natural resources .
The second pillar of the future common agricultural policy will have to address all these challenges and will also have to consider how technical knowledge can be used to build a future that combines competitiveness and environmental concerns .
I can tell you that the entire Commission - the full College of Commissioners , including President Barroso - is in favour of a strong second pillar in the future common agricultural policy .
I was interested to read your proposals regarding young farmers .
Rural development policy must provide a wide range of support measures that will meet their needs .
I would also like to consider what could be done under the first pillar of the common agricultural policy for young farmers .
In future , I would like Member States to be able to define thematic sub-programmes : packages of measures which specifically target young farmers and recognise that they are a priority group in the Member State .
I am thinking of measures for setting up , vocational training , training services , investing in modernisation and restructuring farms .
As you emphasise in your report , our policy will need adequate funding if it is to address future challenges .
We are currently waiting for the Commission communication on the next multiannual financial framework , which will be published by the end of June .
We will build on that communication when we present our impact assessment and legislative proposals in the autumn , as I said .
Thank you once again for this report .
I am happy to answer any questions .
I hope that this will be a very productive discussion .
Mr President , Commissioner , today we are debating the common agricultural policy .
A lot of people criticise the common agricultural policy , because they believe that it has caused environmental damage and has in the past and even today continues to put developing countries at risk on numerous counts , especially in terms of agriculture and development .
Those who levy this criticism are right , but those calling for a reduction in funding for the common agricultural policy are wrong .
The common agricultural policy is not just a policy for agriculture ; it is an instrument for redistributing resources from the towns of Europe to the countryside .
It is the European citizens in the countryside who take care of our forests , rivers and lakes and who give us food , clean air and water .
We need to provide incentives for them to make changes where changes are needed .
However , if we want to apply serious policy , we should increase funding for our agricultural policy , for a fairer , more effective and more viable common agricultural policy .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we were to ask European citizens what they expect from European politics they would answer quality of life , using terms like health and environment .
With this common agricultural policy , we are facing precisely this task of fulfilling these expectations of European citizens in us as politicians , but also in politics in general .
The contribution from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is an important one in this context , because we want the same things European citizens do .
We want wholesome food produced in a diverse system , and by diverse I do mean biological diversity , but also diversity in terms of production .
We must enable the preservation of the environment in which we live .
We need to take care of our water bodies , the air and the soil .
We need to ensure that the rural habitat continues to be developed and does not become the poorhouse of Europe .
We need to pursue an agricultural policy that involves the development of all regions .
We need money for this and we need the money to be properly and fairly distributed .
Mr President , my apologies !
Please start timing .
I wish to present a number of comments from the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development .
It is a shame that they were not fully incorporated into the report of the Committee on Agriculture .
They are as follows .
Food security at EU and global level and globalisation necessitate a new and strong common agricultural policy , which will firstly improve our competitiveness on the international market , secondly ensure a fair income for farmers , thirdly ensure that consumers can buy high-quality products at fair prices , fourthly ensure the sustainable development of rural areas and fifthly help to improve the state of the environment .
In order to accomplish these tasks , objective , transparent and simplified criteria need to be established , which guarantee equal support for farmers in all Member States under the direct payments system .
It is time to move away from the use of historical payments .
The CAP should incorporate measures for regulation of and intervention in the agricultural market , and a risk management mechanism .
Finally , the CAP should pay more attention to small , family-owned agricultural holdings , given the need for diversification to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Dess , the shadow rapporteurs and other contributors on the work that they have done to draft this text .
In my opinion , it is both balanced and ambitious .
We will be voting on the report tomorrow .
Almost six months after Mr Lyon drafted his report setting out the European Parliament 's views on the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) post-2013 , the European Commission decided to draw on the report by including many of its ideas in the communication issued on 18 November 2010 .
The new report , which was adopted almost unanimously by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , affirms the new direction that we would like the common agricultural policy to take in the coming years .
Our farmers are not there to produce mere commodities , or wares to sell .
They are there , above all , to produce food for Europe 's 500 million citizens , but also to help to feed the rest of the world .
Stating it in these terms is not just semantics : it is a philosophical choice that we are making .
Mr Dess 's report endorses a positive approach to agriculture 's environmental and ecological contribution and therefore appeals for a reduction of the often onerous administrative procedures generated by European and national legislation .
By arguing in favour of graduated direct payments and a review of the regulatory instruments , the report also provides a new perspective on social perception of the CAP and of global trade .
As we speak , the G20 in Paris is beginning discussions on regulating the global commodities markets , with particular reference to agricultural commodities .
Parliament 's approach , then , has not been defined in a vacuum , where we are cut off from the world .
Rather , it is part of the wider deliberations on how to come up with a global response to a global challenge .

As with Mr Lyon 's report one year ago and Mr Garriga Polledo 's report on the financial perspectives last month , tomorrow we will be voting in favour of maintaining the agricultural budget for the 2014-2020 programming period .
I am sure that it will be a close-run thing , but we do need to take a stand and to make choices , because we will not have the money to do everything ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Dess , Mr Dantin was cut off , but he was going to explain that the global food challenge is important , and it is important .
As has already been said , this report , together with previous reports and the Commission 's communication , seeks to demonstrate that Europe 's aim is to have a common agricultural policy that guarantees food security in Europe and contributes to global food security .
That entails political commitments on market regulation , which is what is under discussion today .
We too will have to push for this in our debates at EU level .
At a time when there are plans to eliminate Europe 's food security programme , we need to remember that food security is still a matter of solidarity and is still extremely topical in Europe : almost 30 million Europeans are currently suffering from malnutrition .
Let us not lose sight of that fact .
Essentially , this report sets out the broad thrust : the greening of agricultural policy .
Of course farming needs to take a positive approach to environmental issues .
In particular , it needs to focus on the European element and ensure that it is factored in by incorporating environmental issues into the first pillar .
Another important point is that this compromise is the result of lengthy negotiations , in which I have always been involved , on the question of graduated support .
At long last , support will be allocated in accordance with two criteria : employment - I believe that agricultural policy needs to allow for the notion of providing employment - and , of course , the production of public goods .
This approach is better than continuing the debate on aid ceilings and never coming up with any solutions .
I am making the point this afternoon because it is my honest opinion .
Let me conclude by saying that this report and Parliament 's commitment are pointless unless the agriculture budget remains at its current level .
That is my response to the comments made by the Commissioner and the President of the Commission on the second pillar .
We cannot accept a budget cut .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I think the world-renowned Scottish poet Rabbie Burns might have described this report as a bit of a ' cow 'rin , tim 'rous beastie ' in its original form .
Thankfully , through the good work that Albert Dess and all the other shadow rapporteurs have put in over the last months of negotiations , we now have a report that has some real substance and one that has many areas that we can support .
I believe , however , that it falls short in one important area , in that it fails to answer the fundamental question asked by our taxpayers and our consumers who pay for the common agricultural policy : what are the direct decoupled payments for ?
That is a fundamental question that we all need to face up to .
There is no longer any linkage with food production because they are decoupled .
There is a link to public goods through cross-compliance , but I do not think this fundamentally answers that question .
I believe that the report should perhaps have gone a little further in responding to that question by backing the idea of a more targeted direct payment , containing a major incentive to develop a more sustainable and competitive model of agriculture , and giving the possibility of a targeting of payments at LFA areas - the so-called greening of the direct payments , which I believe the Commissioner is very much favour of .
If we move down that road , I believe it gives us the ability to respond to that question and explain to the public exactly what direct payments are for .
It also negates the call for caps and ceilings to be put on aids because , if there are public goods attached to the direct payments across all the direct payments , then the bigger the farmer , the more public goods that farmer will deliver .
So there is no need to cap them .
I believe that the report hints at that direction and I welcome the move towards that type of model .
I hope we can improve the report tomorrow .
If we do so , our group will certainly be happy to support it .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , can I also take the opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur .
He certainly proved during the time that negotiations were going on that he had a very big back indeed , because there were a lot of people throwing knives at him during that period .
So he proved to be very resilient in his task , and he got there .
The first thing I want to do is to welcome the fact that it is going to be a Pillar Two structure , because I think that is what we are all agreed on .
I listened to the talk about greening .
When you speak about greening it means different things to different people in different countries , including how it is applied .
We have got to get our heads around this somehow .
It is not a simple throw-away line that you can use in some way or other , because it is going to have a tremendous effect down the line .
Mr Le Foll is right .
If the money is not there at the end of the day , there is little we can do in many of these areas .
We have got to be responsible , and we have got to be responsible as a Parliament as we move towards the legal text that the Commissioner will bring forward in the late autumn of this year .
That is going to be a tremendous challenge for us in this Parliament .
For the first time we are going to have a responsibility , a say , and be part of the final decision-making process .
So from that point of view , I am opposed to the present text when it talks about capping .
I will be supporting the amendments that have been put forward to reduce the degree .
This is something that we have got to talk about more but , as I said , it will all be no good if the budget is not there .
We have got to look at how we spend the money .
Are we spending our money as wisely as we can ?
Is there not too much of it going on administration ?
Is there not too much going on bureaucracy and red tape ?
And is not enough being given towards food security ?
Again like greening , people talk about food security as a throw-away line .
What are we doing to achieve food security ?
We could be facing a crisis in the next nine or ten years .
There are fewer farmers , fewer people working ; this is where I think we have to concentrate in the future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our opinion , the report takes us clearly in the right direction .
European agricultural policy needs to be fairer , and it needs to be fairer to the environment . I believe that we have achieved these objectives with the report .
At the end of the day , European agricultural policy must meet our objectives on climate and diversity .
This , too , is incorporated into the report .
European agricultural policy needs to deliver environmental services .
Then taxpayers will be prepared to pay for it .
We need a fair distribution between farms , but also between the Member States , and we need to practise a fair trade policy towards less developed countries .
This , too , is in the report .
Working through nearly 1 300 amendments has been a laborious process , but in the long term we have achieved our aim of reaching a major common compromise with clearly defined objectives .
Parliament has proved itself capable of making such policy .
Many points could have been worded more clearly in our view , such as the terms for payments under the first pillar - crop rotation , protection of meadow land - but fine , it is now down to the Commission to flesh out the final arrangements .
It is also important that degressivity is included .
Large farms need to deliver more when it comes to jobs and the environment .
This was supported by a large majority in committee .
It is also important that the role of farmers in trade is enhanced , and it is also important that the matter of the protein deficit is addressed .
In the long term we cannot afford to import from other countries protein crops equivalent to 30 million hectares of feed area .
It is high time that we made a start on this .
We are all agreed that a strong second pillar is important .
Rural development , environmental measures and measures for less-favoured regions - there must be a clear emphasis on these .
If Mr Barroso wishes to axe this point he will face huge opposition from Parliament .
It is precisely here that the opportunities for rural development lie , and we cannot turn our backs on the less-favoured regions .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report presented today outlines a new direction for the common agricultural policy .
It includes graduated public funding that reflects employment and environmental considerations , the fact that agriculture produces public goods and the concept of active farmers .
However , we have seen too many good intentions that have never improved life for working farmers .
Let us bear in mind the scenes being acted out right now in our rural areas .
Although the idea of a safety net is attractive , it is not enough .
We need to return to public intervention mechanisms in order to guarantee basic prices for small and medium-sized farmers .
Bringing together economic , social and ecological efficiencies will also put an end to the ultra-liberal free trade model that is currently destroying family farms .
The European Union needs to strive for radical changes in the World Trade Organisation and to work more closely with the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) so as to return to cooperation systems that include variable customs duties at the border .
We also need far more research funding in Europe .
Lastly , we need to ensure that the budget for the policy is maintained ...
( The speaker concluded off-microphone )
Mr President , we could not hear the English interpretation of the previous speech .
I was very interested in it and , if it is not too much of a burden on the speaker , and if you can do something so we can hear it in English , I would very much appreciate it .
Did anyone else not hear the English interpretation ?
Perhaps it is just a local problem in the back rows .
We are looking into the matter .
Apparently it was a channel mix-up .
We are working on the problem .
Please bear with us , but I am sure the speech can be read afterwards on the web .
We have web streaming and I am sure the interpretation will be there .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must thank and congratulate Mr Dess on the hard work he has put in , together with all the shadow rapporteurs .
We are particularly pleased that there are references in this report to less-favoured areas - mountainous areas are specially close to our hearts .
We are particularly pleased that there is support for small farms , which are fundamental because they are of great importance both for protecting the land and for the quality of the products produced on them .
We are also particularly pleased that there are substantial references to young farmers , who to some extent represent the future of agriculture .
We should all be aware , however , that a major battle must now be fought over the budget , which is why we are appealing to you , Commissioner , as you know it better than I or anyone else here does .
We cannot allow the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) to have its budget cut , because that would mean that agriculture is probably worth less in Europe .
Clearly , if agriculture is worth less in Europe , then agricultural products and hence all our food is also worth less .
That is not what we think , of course .
Lastly , Commissioner , I would like to mention the issue of imports .
As you know , imports do not of course come into the CAP , but they make up another essential piece of the jigsaw that should go alongside the CAP , because if we import cheap , poor-quality products our agriculture is bound to collapse .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Dess for a comprehensive report .
Like other speakers , I would like to emphasise the importance of an adequate budget for the new CAP .
I believe that it is hugely important to base our budget on the arguments around food security .
It is estimated that , by 2050 , we will need a 70 % increase in global agricultural production .
I would argue that the new CAP should aid this and keep that production within Europe .
We should not be doing anything to hamper the food production base that we already have .
I welcome the clear support for the two-pillar structure and I also welcome today 's affirmation from the Commissioner of his support for that as well .
However , I would have to add that I do not want to see the support for greening in Pillar One imposing further burdens and costs on our farmers .
For that reason I would like to see flexibility at national and regional level , given the wide diversity of farm structures and land bases across the EU .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the hard work done by the rapporteur , Mr Dess , and the shadow rapporteurs - and I congratulate them all , of course - is today entering its final stage .
A new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) means a lot to Europe for the future of its agriculture and the survival of vast rural areas .
The new CAP must enable people to enjoy an adequate supply of quality food , as well as being able to sustain the production of non-marketable public assets .
To achieve the goals indicated , there is a need for further , more effective and especially simpler instruments for farmers , together with easier access to funding and less red tape .
We also need market instruments to combat effectively the unfortunately recurrent crises , and also instruments to prevent and insure against the risks inherent to agriculture .
We need a CAP for young people , to whom we can entrust the agriculture of the future .
We have decided to promote protection of biodiversity and of the countless regional and production specificities of the European Union through a rural development policy that will enhance all the natural and human potential of rural areas .
At the same time we must seek to make farming businesses competitive .
That is why I would like to impress on the Commission the need to include technology transfer measures in rural development .
As approved in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I confirm the importance of supporting the introduction of ceilings for direct payments awarded to large economic players .
I think the introduction of a system of degressivity of aid as the size of a holding increases above a certain threshold is necessary to avoid overcompensating larger holdings that already enjoy major economies of scale .
I cannot avoid underlining the need for adequate financing for the CAP .
This House cannot accept a rural development funding cut .
( PT ) Madam President , with this reform we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament want to make the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) fairer , more equitable and more suited to the times in which we live , when the issues of the legitimacy of aid in relation to society and of food safety and food security in the broadest sense are more relevant than ever .
We have succeeded in seeing our main concerns included in this report .
They include the need to maintain an adequately funded common agricultural policy for the Union .
I must stress that we shall not agree to the withdrawal of any financial resources in order to guarantee the enforcement of the CAP .
We want a fairer distribution of aid both among Member States and among farmers , through the introduction of a new system not linked to production but based on environmental and social criteria ; that is to say , one that promotes employment .
We must also orient the CAP towards real farmers and create a specific mechanism for small farmers .
I am sure that with Parliament 's strengthened role under the Treaty of Lisbon we will be able to translate these goals , which for now are merely theoretical , into concrete actions .
( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Dess for his excellent work .
I would like to talk about one aspect of agricultural policy .
That is the enormous challenges that humanity and the whole world are facing .
These include the climate , biodiversity and the eutrophication of waterways . There are all sorts of examples I could give here .
In this context , I think that we need to realise that it is farmers who manage our environment and the prerequisites for our lives and our futures on a day-to-day basis .
It is in agriculture and forestry that we have the best tools and it is for the use of these environmental tools that farmers should be paid , and they should be paid well for this .
I would therefore like us in future to change our thinking somewhat and move away from income subsidies , which are difficult to account for , and ensure that we pay for the job that farmers do .
In other words , we should stop paying subsidies and start paying for the services provided .
The most important task for agriculture is , of course , to produce food - sufficient , good-quality food - but my view is that food should be paid for on the market .
Environmental services cannot be paid for there .
( PL ) Madam President , in many respects the Dess report is very good , but in one respect it is quite the opposite , since it rejects the idea of a fair equalisation of direct payments .
The bizarre and absurd principle whereby more assistance is given to those who are richer and less to those who are poorer is to continue to hold sway in the agricultural sector .
The farmers in the new Member States , and not only the farmers , are extremely worried and alarmed by these developments .
The agricultural sector is in decline , particularly in the new Member States .
I would ask you to look at how much land is lying fallow in Poland , Lithuania and Slovakia .
I would call on my fellow Members from the old Member States to end this discrimination .
Let us finally equalise direct payments fairly , and let us not create a two-speed Europe .
I should like to address the French Members of the House in particular to remind them of the slogan of ' liberty , equality , fraternity ' which adorned the banners of the French revolution .
We have liberty , but we do not have equality , and without equality there can be no fraternity .
Let us demand equality .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do agree that , as well as liberty and fraternity , there should be equality for farmers and the new Member States in Eastern Europe .
Yes , I agree with you .
I think that this report marks a huge step forward .
It was not easy at the outset : the situation was fairly confrontational .
However , the important thing is that we reached a consensus .
This consensus has allowed us to maintain the broader vision , and I believe that therein lies the European Parliament 's great strength .
We have succeeded , despite the difficulties , and I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Dess , and all the Members .
The first phase is complete .
In this document , we have reiterated the need for equality , justice and fairness for producers and regions .
I think that is important .
We have clearly stated and confirmed that we want to safeguard and develop small farms , that we want small farms to be taken into account because they are essential to quality and regional biodiversity .
In my opinion , this was another fundamental point .
The idea of making agriculture more scientific , of moving away from productivist industrial farms , is now enshrined in the texts .
We now need to make it a reality : only then will farming become a viable option for future generations .
This is not a question of ideology .
Lastly , at present , we are worried about the real budgetary threats .
We need to come up with unequivocal responses .
What we want now is to move into the second phase , which is obviously the legislative debate .
Why ? Because we need more than texts and lofty intentions : it is in debating legislative proposals that we will really see where we are going .
That is essentially what we are waiting for .
Let me close , however , by expressing my fury at Germany 's attitude . It has forced us to cut food aid to Europe 's poorest citizens to one-fifth of the original amount .
That aid was part of the common agricultural policy budget .
I want to find another way of helping our poorest citizens : the 80 million Europeans who do not have enough to eat .
( LV ) Madam President , a great job has been done , but the completed report is couched in very general terms .
The report clearly outlines a new direction - agricultural greening .
This could be a form of lifebelt for non-productive farmers , who could avoid having to engage in agricultural production and yet receive area payments .
In my view , we should , when applying this report in practice , bear in mind what is missing .
The protein problem is missing , the issue of the quality of imported food has not been incorporated , there is no mention of the problem of genetically modified crops , and land degradation issues have been insufficiently addressed .
There is still no clear definition of such terms as ' active farmer ' , ' new farmer ' , ' fair area payments ' , and ' family farms ' .
Unfortunately , a great many farmers will find no answers to their problems and their questions in this report .
In the future we must improve it .
Madam President , whilst the term ' greening ' of Pillar One may appeal to armchair farmers , it will pose major problems to heavy-land farmers who could well abandon land rather than attempt to plant it in the spring .
Had this policy been enforced this year , it would have resulted in total crop failures .
Proper inspection and enforcement of greening measures will also be impossible .
To be effective , the capping of single farm payments will need to be severe .
This will immediately motivate farmers to formally split their businesses with their spouses so that the full payment is retained on both divisions .
Added to that , I am informed that the savings made from capping will accrue to the EU and not the Member State that actually generated the savings .
Cultivation of GM crops should be the decision of individual Member States .
The suggestion that no single farm payment can be received by farmers who cultivate these crops is utterly nonsensical .
The world is short of food .
We should be encouraging the uptake of new farming technology and not vilifying it .
I hope the last three winters will have convinced all of you that there is no threat to us from global warming .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , how different the opinion of the increasingly outraged European citizens would be about the European Union if they found that their tax contributions were spent exclusively as public money on public interest and for the public good , proportionate to the public good produced .
The Dess report takes this direction in connection with the agricultural assistance provided by the European Union .
Tomorrow we will bear immense responsibility in deciding whether to adopt the ceiling , the maximum that was determined by the Dess report as a result of the hard work of those who submitted motions for amendment , for hectare-based and area-based assistance .
I would like to ask you to follow the sense of justice of your voters and adopt this ceiling .
Let there be a cap on public money that the green and red barons and other urban businessmen receive from the European taxpayers !
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , though today 's debate focuses on this important report on the reform of the common agricultural policy , I should like to comment on a side issue that affects us and could affect the viability of the postulates we are defending in Parliament in connection with the reform of the future of the CAP .
Next week , the European Commission will present its proposal on the financial prospects for the post-2014 period , in which , if my information proves correct , the Community executive is decidedly intent on proposing cuts to the EU agricultural budget .
It must therefore be borne in mind that the European Commission will not take on board the opinion that we will adopt tomorrow , in which we specifically request the expenditure of the common agricultural policy to be maintained .
I fail to see how , with a reduced budget , we will be able to rise to all the challenges described in that document ; how common agricultural policy subsidies will be made greener , a process we want to ensure will not require an additional effort on the part of agricultural and livestock farmers ; how we will be able to achieve this .

I fail to see how , with a diminished CAP , we will be able to respond - just to give another example - to price volatility , and establish a budget line , as is our intention , that will rise to the crisis we have come to know so well .
The CAP should not be measured merely in terms of expenditure because , in addition to the goods and services it provides , I believe it should be made clear - today of all days - that EUR 1 invested in agriculture generates EUR 10 of wealth in the agri-food sector .
This should be very much taken into account when it comes to setting the next budgetary framework .
Furthermore , it should not be forgotten that negotiations with third countries and with the World Trade Organisation pose a serious threat to the future of agricultural and livestock production in the European Union .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Dess report marks the beginning of a new phase in the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) reform process .
It is the result of several months ' hard work by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for which I would like to thank Mr Dess and all the shadow rapporteurs and parliamentary groups .
Today this House can give a clear opinion on the future of the common agricultural policy : it must be a robust , simple , flexible and greener CAP that takes young people and employment into account .
That , Commissioner , is why we are worried by the news in the press today about budget cuts , especially in the second pillar .
That would be incompatible with both the Dess report and the report on the European Union 's financial perspective by Mr Garriga Polledo , which we adopted in plenary in recent weeks .
The latter report introduced the important principle for the CAP of maintaining the current level of funding in the next financial programming period .
Therefore , Commissioner , we would like some clarification about the news that has been circulated , and we would like to know whether as far as you are concerned there are different guidelines from what we have been told up to now .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his persistent and positive work .
Where the future of agricultural policy after 2013 is concerned , we have to decide the direction in which we want to go .
Do we want an agricultural sector that faces up to the challenges by acting in an innovative , modern , courageous , self-aware , responsible and independent way in the market ?
Or do we want an agricultural sector that continues to be drip-fed by Europe and which needs its hand to be held and encouraging words from Mummy with each step it takes into the future ?
That is the course we are currently setting .
To cope with the challenges of the future we need to promote modern technologies in the agricultural sector instead of having endless debates on ideologies .
If farms are to be enabled to plan with certainty then we cannot keep changing course every couple of years .
It is too much of a strain on our farmers ' finances .
Everyone here must surely be aware that each political change of direction results in new laws and directives , which in turn demand investment by farms without at the same time increasing their incomes .
We should not care whether a farm is large or small ; instead we should be concerned with whether it is run in an economically sound manner .
We should not care whether it produces conventionally or organically , so long as it handles resources responsibly .
We should also not care how many animals are kept , so long as those animals are treated well .
The important thing for us must be that we have sufficient good quality food in the future at affordable prices in Europe .
After all , Europe is not alone in the world .

( CS ) Madam President , the day is finally approaching when a unified agricultural policy will apply in the old and new Member States , ending 10 years of discrimination against farmers from the new Member States .
I very much welcome this development .
I hope that no new discriminatory conditions will be imposed on farmers in the new programming period .
Unfortunately , I have to say that the Dess report contains such a proposal .
I am thinking primarily of support for the so-called capping of direct payments for larger agricultural undertakings .
I regard such a course of action as discriminatory against Member States such as the Czech Republic , which , for historical reasons , have larger farms than elsewhere in the European Union .
I therefore reject the idea of capping direct payments , since this is a move which will reduce the efficiency of agriculture throughout the European Union .
The primary aim of agriculture has always been to produce food .
Nowadays , however , a number of politicians , above all those from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and from the ranks of the left , want to turn farmers into biofuel manufacturers and anti-global warming warriors .
I cannot support such developments .
Madam President , I would echo group colleagues and other colleagues in adding my own congratulations to our rapporteur .
This has not been an easy job for him - or indeed any of us - and the report before us has been much improved through joint working and has much to admire within it .
I particularly like the idea of the continuation of direct payments and the explicit removal of the historical reference values in paragraph 15 and the fairer distribution between Member States , and within Member States in the regions and nations within them , in paragraph 16 .
Coming from Scotland , I am particularly glad to see a strong statement in favour of less favoured areas in paragraph 82 .
I know that farmers in Scotland - and everywhere else too - will be glad to see paragraph 44 , which contains an explicit statement that cross-compliance should be risk-based and proportional .
Commissioner , perhaps you could mention that paragraph in particular to some of your auditor colleagues .
While there is much to admire in this report , let us be honest with ourselves and with our voters .
Unless we have paragraph 1 , all of this is pointless - and paragraph 1 , where we call for a strong and sustainable CAP with a budget commensurate with the ambitious objectives , will be pointless too .
Like other colleagues , I wish to express my own concern , not least at today 's rumours that President Barroso is looking to make swingeing cuts to the budget and Pillar Two in particular .
Commissioner , you are going to need all the allies you can get in these discussions within the Commission and with the Member States .
We must have a CAP that is properly funded and properly ambitious for our farmers and our citizens .
European agriculture has a great story to tell .
Now is not the time to fall out over minutiae .

( GA ) Madam President , I welcome Mr Dess 's report on reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , and I thank him for his work .
This week 's vote will reflect what the European Parliament expects to see in the legislative proposals for the CAP .
The budget vote , which is upcoming , is also extremely important for ensuring appropriate future funding for agriculture .
We need to see a strong and sustainable CAP - based on two pillars - which will keep farmers on the land , ensure environmental protection , promote the rural economy and provide fairness and transparency for all those who work in the food chain .
Greening events dealing with the environment in Pillar 1 must be clear , properly designed and easy to measure , and funding for Pillar 2 must be strong and fair .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , of all Europe 's policies , the common agricultural policy is the one that has had to be updated the most over the years in order to cope with constant changes occurring on the economic front , including at international level .
It has always been updated with two main goals in mind : guaranteeing an income for European farmers and dealing with an ever-decreasing EU budget , while not forgetting a whole host of other objectives linked to quality of production , of the environment , of biodiversity and of water resources .
The CAP reform on which we will vote tomorrow is vital if we are to continue to support the income of our farmers , as my colleagues have already mentioned .
The aim , then , is not to reduce direct subsidies but to find a balance between such subsidies and rural development , so that the system is rendered simpler and fairer , without the rules of competition being called into question .
As regards the objectives of the CAP in the context of the Europe 2020 strategy , the CAP can contribute to the growth of a sustainable economy by responding well to new challenges and taking account of the diversity and richness of agriculture and the specific characteristics of the 27 Member States .
( EL ) Madam President , we obviously need a strong CAP .
The agricultural sector provides clear added value to the European economy .
It plays a multifunctional role , by contributing to the production of public goods for the benefit of society as a whole .
The CAP budget must , at the very least , stay at current levels and similar resources and objectives must be safeguarded for the new CAP .
The distribution of CAP resources between farmers in the European Union , which is at the top of the public dialogue agenda , requires care .
The idea of a flat rate throughout the European Union is broadly opposed .
In my opinion , we need objective criteria that take due account of the peculiarities of the agricultural sector in the individual EU Member States .
The proposals to cap direct payments , pay special aid to small-scale farmers and only to pay aid to active farmers are a good idea .
Agro-environmental measures should be easy to apply , should be flanked by adequate counterbalances and should not create any additional administrative burden .
With widespread instability on agricultural markets , climate risks and a food crisis , we need to activate effective instruments .
The current market measures need to be reinforced . We also need a permanent crisis management fund .
The proposal for a new farm income stabilisation instrument is a good idea .
Finally , I would highlight the need for effective measures for the benefit of young farmers .
My thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Albert Dess , for a difficult and complicated job well done .
Commissioner , any weakening of the CAP will come up against political opposition from the European Parliament .
I think that this is the cross-party message of this House and serious account needs to be taken of it .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur and I am pleased that the report bears unmistakably socialist , social democratic hallmarks .
We want a sustainable , ecological and social agricultural policy .
We want greening and we want it in the first pillar .
Cross-compliance and the agro-environmental measures of the system to date are not enough to achieve support for the whole of society , but that is precisely what we need .
Our primary objective must be to ensure high-quality and sustainable food production in Europe and for our rural areas to be active and vital .
We absolutely have to stop the increasing land abandonment , because we need people . People to look after the agricultural sector , as well as the areas upstream and downstream .
The rumours emanating from the Commission concerning plans for massive cuts in rural development in the next multiannual financial framework are not acceptable .
We must continue to work for a strong second pillar in the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , for rural areas and for Europe .
I would like to issue a general warning to anyone intending to cut agricultural funding .
If this is done , there will be no reform . Everything will then stay the same as it is .
That will be quite inexplicable to the citizens of Europe .
Madam President , Parliament 's demand to maintain , if not increase , the agricultural budget is in my view highly optimistic .
These are tough times and budgets are not limitless .
In my view , these proposals will need a reality check when the overall EU budget is determined some time next year .
We have to get back to the real priorities of the common agricultural policy . Food security , food safety , biodiversity , climate change , new technologies and creating a viable , competitive market-led industry have to be the focus .
In my view , the Commission 's proposals have lost the direction which we had from the previous two reports .
They lack focus and they are too complicated .
I am happy to say that , in his proposals , Albert Dess has set out a very sensible framework in which we can develop future reform .
( DE ) Madam President , the report by Mr Dess is about giving consideration to protection of the environment and the climate in agriculture , as well as increasing the competitiveness of agriculture .
We have negotiated good compromises on these points .
I feel that we should speak out in favour of well thought through upper ceilings for farms , particularly when the recipients are multinational groups which sometimes receive sums that simply cannot be justified .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is firmly on the side of farmers when it comes to removing bureaucracy .
The complete reorganisation of the systems and the associated introduction of additional checks , as called for by others , would make no sense whatsoever .
We need to be quite clear about one thing : if consumers expect European agriculture to move further towards greening and sustainability , then the measures concerned have to be given the necessary financial resources .
I am firmly opposed to cuts in the EU agricultural budget in the forthcoming budget period .
As regards the press reports stating that Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission , wants to take an axe to rural development , I would state quite clearly that if the Commission cuts the programmes for rural development then it will be cutting off the lifeblood of rural areas .
Well-functioning farming structures would be dramatically affected by cuts in the second pillar .
Mr Barroso would be well advised to heed what this House is saying .
The common agricultural policy is and remains a key area of Community policy and of the EU budget .
We cannot impose additional constraints on our farms , which are facing increasing global competition , and at the same time reduce their support .
On the contrary , investment subsidies under the second pillar will promote a keenness and a willingness for innovation . That will benefit everyone in rural areas .
We must particularly implement measures in respect of young farmers , in order to secure the future of agriculture .
Our future agricultural policy will decide whether or not Europe is self-sufficient in the future .
( ES ) Madam President , this afternoon 's debate clearly reveals that this House supports and is indeed set on achieving a strong common agricultural policy that can rise to the challenges of food safety , environmental sustainability and employment in rural areas .
If this is to be attained , we cannot allow - as , hopefully , will be upheld by this House - any cuts to the current CAP budget .
We need to have sufficient funding to respond to these challenges .
We have to be in a position that allows us to safeguard farmers ' incomes , and to put market mechanisms into place in order to prevent and avert price volatility such as we are currently seeing .
Furthermore , I should not like to forget the events of the last few weeks in the fruit and vegetable sector , which are proof that the new CAP must also provide crisis-response instruments for all the sectors concerned , instruments that are efficient , expeditious and adapted to the needs of each individual sector .

Madam President , thank you to Mr Dess for a very interesting and informative report .
Inevitably , on an issue of this complexity , there are bits you agree with and bits you do not .
With 42 % of our European expenditure going on the CAP , it is vital that we provide complete accountability to our citizens .
Most people , in the face of rising food prices - sharply rising food prices - and dire warnings about lack of supply , will be expecting to see a CAP which focuses clearly on increasing productivity and efficiency .
Yes , we have to take care of the environment - I am a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and we know that - but we are in real danger here of creating a report with a rhetoric moving into things like ' greening Pillar One ' ; we are talking about moving away from the real focus , which is efficiency .
On that basis , I do not support the capping of payments to large farms .
This move will be institutionalising inefficiency and there is no justification for it .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , as you have all done already , we must warmly thank our rapporteur for the commitment he has put into this report and also for his stamina in achieving these compromises .
I am sure it was not easy , but we have achieved good compromises .
We stand for competitive and sustainable agriculture in Europe .
That means that our farmers produce food of the highest quality .
However , we are also producing a cultural landscape that can be seen , that provides recreational spaces for you all , for all of us , for our society , that provides jobs not just in agriculture but also in tourism and in many other areas .
That is a service that agriculture provides for society , but this is respected far too little by society - and sometimes also by us .
It is an extensive service , and such an extensive service does not deserve to have the agricultural budget cut if it is at all possible .
Commissioner , we support you in your approach of bringing more ecology and more greening into the first pillar .
However , this must not result in those countries and those farmers which already have very ambitious environmental programmes in the second pillar being discriminated against by this new approach .
A solution needs to be found here that is fair to both sides .
Environmental programmes are expensive .
When I read in the newspapers - as has been mentioned already by many Members - that cuts are to be made in the second pillar , I reject it vehemently .
We need a strong first pillar .
We also need - and have spoken out in favour of this - a strong second pillar .
We will support you , Commissioner , in these efforts .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , Parliament , the Commission and the Council all agree in that the budget of the CAP should be appropriate and should be maintained at least at the current level .
It is important to keep the two-pillar structure , to maintain direct payments and especially the strong rural development policy , and to improve competitiveness and strengthen environmental awareness .
Innovation , research and development are of key importance as well .
Environmental public goods and technologies that reduce the effects of climate change and enhance biodiversity and water management should be the focus of rural development .
Further financial assistance is needed in the future as well to help new Member States close the gap and ensure that they can access rural development aid with better co-financing conditions post-2013 , as well .
It is important to provide equal competitive conditions and equal opportunities for the new Member States from 2014 .
And finally , it is important not to play off large farms and small-sized producers against each other .
( FR ) Madam President , let us admit that it looked like we were heading for disaster with 1 267 amendments .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has therefore chosen to table as few amendments as possible .
We are proud to stand strong and united with our shadow rapporteur , Mr Le Foll .
We are also pleased to have worked together with other groups and the rapporteur to produce an ambitious compromise .
In my view , it is vital that aid should be allocated primarily to active farmers , rather than to landowners .
This will foster food security , but also agriculture which is more sustainable and environmentally friendly and which ensures better management of resources and contributes to combating climate change .
In addition , we are delighted to see that the greening component will be a compulsory part of the first pillar , while direct payments will be shared out more evenly between individual Member States and different agricultural sectors .
In a historic first , we have created a degressive support system based on criteria linked to employment and environmental considerations .
As for young farmers , support measures and incentives have been introduced to help and encourage them to set up farms .
Essentially , we have all the ingredients needed to allow the Commission and Parliament to work together on defining the new common agricultural , food and environmental policies that we so urgently need .
( RO ) Madam President , we need a strong agricultural sector , guaranteed by a common agricultural policy , which will have a sufficient budget , capable of ensuring food security in Europe .
I think that Europe 's farmers are entitled to decent incomes , which , along with ensuring food security , provide a basic justification for preserving the CAP .
However , greater fairness is needed in the distribution of direct payments , both among Member States and farmers .
I hope that the future legislative proposal will provide a solution for getting rid of the unfair disparities .
At the same time , I want to thank the Commission for its intention to introduce a simplified funding programme for small farms .
Programmes for young farmers are also just as important .
They must be given support in embarking on their farming career , not only as a contribution to rural development , but also to ensure a generational changeover , which is absolutely vital to the medium- and long-term future of European agriculture .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that the Dess report has one very serious flaw .
Paragraph 16 blatantly contradicts the fundamental principle of equal conditions for competition on the single market .
On the one hand there is a proposal to move away from the historical reference values , and yet on the other hand there is a proposal to sanction huge differences in direct support for farmers from the individual Member States .
Some would be given EUR 200-250 per hectare , others EUR 350 or over EUR 400 , and we are not just talking about a division into old and new Member States , since farmers from Portugal , Spain , the United Kingdom , Austria , Finland and Sweden would also receive the lower rates .
It is high time to introduce equal conditions for competition in the agricultural sector , and any differences - which will be obvious - should result solely from objective criteria .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone is aware of the importance of the common agricultural policy and of the contribution it has made to the development of the EU and to food security .
Environmental challenges and the fight against climate change mean that the post-2013 CAP now has a new role to play , for which I believe we need a stronger and more sustainable CAP equipped with a budget that can meet the objectives to be pursued , with particular attention to the development of quality food products and to the needs of small farmers .
Speculation in agricultural commodities and extreme price volatility put food security at risk and require flexible measures .
Possible market fluctuations must be tackled with counter-cyclical measures , which should be included in the first pillar and be capable of responding swiftly and automatically .

( PT ) Madam President , this report does not address the future challenges mentioned in its title , but more importantly it does not address the serious problems of the present .
That is why we have tabled a set of draft amendments that we consider essential for a thorough overhaul of the current common agricultural policy .
I would like to highlight here the ones advocating market regulation measures and intervention mechanisms to guarantee farmers fair prices for their produce , and every country 's right to produce .
Among other examples , we propose keeping the system of milk production quotas as an essential condition for protecting producers in particularly sensitive countries ; we advocate maintaining planting rights in the wine sector and maintaining aid for the distillation of potable alcohol and emergency distillation ; and we propose setting up a public agricultural insurance scheme , financed from EU funds , to guarantee a minimum income for farmers in the event of natural disasters .
We have tabled proposals for socially and environmentally sustainable agriculture , a vision that is incompatible with shameless declarations of faith in the market and competitiveness , like those made in this report .
Madam President , my party favours withdrawal from the EU altogether , and therefore from the CAP .
However , the reality is that we are in it and we have got to make the best of it .
What do we think of the Dess report ?
Well it is a bit like the legendary curate 's egg .
Parts of it are good . The idea of making direct payments conditional upon cross-compliance with environmental protection and landscape management is potentially beneficial , but only as long as they are not tied to the semi-religious precepts of climate change and social diversity nonsense .
The report recognises that the agricultural sector must continue to be supported by government price intervention , because quantities produced cannot be predicted or planned precisely and demand for agricultural products is low in price elasticity .
That is important to ensure food security and avoid price volatility .
The most important thing from our point of view is that the UK must cease to be a net contributor to the cost of the CAP .
( PT ) Madam President , the long process of work that this important report required , including the many compromises reached , have made it a broad-based , well-balanced record of the various interests that the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) has to address .
This report provides good guidance for legislative proposals , and I congratulate the rapporteur on that .
There are , however , a few proposals that worry me , and I will make sure I follow their progress closely .
I am referring to the redistribution of aid , which I think should be done strictly within the scope of the first pillar and on the basis of purely objective criteria , so that the aim of redistribution is not subverted by criteria of correctness , which will only tend to maintain the status quo .
We need a fairer CAP with a large enough budget for what is asked of it .
I must also mention the need to place the much-abused dairy sector on the CAP political agenda by adopting Amendments 16 , 12 and 5 .
( PL ) Madam President , the aim of the common agricultural policy is to guarantee continuity in the supply of food to Europe 's citizens .
We must supply safe and high-quality food at affordable prices . This is what consumers expect .
We must care for the environment when producing and processing food .
We say yes to the common agricultural policy , and no to its nationalisation .
We say yes to a large budget , and no to cuts to the common agricultural policy .
Direct payments should be paid according to a simple method and on an equal basis , to all farmers in all Member States .
Let us not forget that direct payments account for only part of farmers ' income .
Market regulations are therefore important .
Good prices and market stability guarantee an income for farmers .
We must ensure access to public services such as education , health services , transport services , sport and culture for citizens of rural areas .
These are measures which should fall under the second pillar and cohesion policy .
Commissioner , let us keep in place a programme which enables us to supply food to Europe 's poorest citizens .
( RO ) Madam President , food security is one of the challenges of the future .
The CAP must respond to this challenge .
The new policy must continue with the positive features of the current policy and rectify the errors .
I believe that this is what the Dess report does .
Two pillars are being proposed : direct payments and rural development .
Historical criteria are to be removed and objective criteria are required .
There is no suggestion of an equal direct payment for all Member States .
There is to be a fair difference , based on geographical and economic conditions , with a minimum and maximum limit in relation to the European average .
The emphasis is on the environmental element , which is also being simplified .
A strong rural development component is being retained and a request is being made for the amount of funding in the budget after 2014 to be at least equivalent to the 2013 level .
I am pleased that Parliament 's first report drafted after the Commission communication features very many guiding principles in common with the latter document .
( ES ) Madam President , the most important message issued by this House today is that it wants a fair common agricultural policy , or in other words a CAP that guarantees a sufficient level of income for all producers , irrespective of their activity and of the place where it is conducted .
To achieve this , we need ambitious policies in the areas of direct payments , market management - including up-to-date intervention prices - and rural development , thus adapting the CAP to the new reality .
Indeed , the new CAP must be adapted to the 2020 strategy , but this must not entail cuts of even EUR 1 , because there is no surfeit of resources for all the environmental , social and health challenges we intend to take on .
I am particularly satisfied with Commissioner Cioloș 's announcement that all possibilities will be explored also within the first pillar to draw young people into agriculture .
Sometimes , quite rightly , we focus on improving conditions for current workers , but disregard in public debate what we need to do to bring new workers into agriculture so that our production will be assured and improved , in view of the fact that the countries that have lent most support to young farmers are least exposed to land abandonment .
This challenge , which concerns the whole of Europe , is so serious that it should not by any means be left to the arbitrary determination of domestic policy .

( FR ) Mr President , a point of order : I would like to highlight the shocking attitude of the Hungarian Presidency , which is probably one of the worst that the EU has seen .
The Presidency attended the first debate on the European Council , left at the start of the debate on the common agricultural policy and has just come back in for the debate on economic governance .
This is an indication of how much it values European agriculture and European farmers .
Yet the CAP makes up 40 % of the budget : it should have been worth the Hungarian Presidency 's while to stay for the discussion .
I wanted to make that point .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we will vote in favour of this own-initiative report because the CAP is a fundamentally important tool for European agriculture and for the protection of EU producers and products as compared with non-European producers and products .
The main points of the report , which is based on maintaining current funding levels , provide for new and reasonable criteria for allocating funding , since the historical criterion has been abandoned as the parameter for redistributing direct payments .
Provision has been made for payments to farms , account has been taken of production output and costs , and payments have been simplified .
The report calls for direct payments to be capped and to be restricted to active farmers , precisely so that the recipients are those who actually cultivate the land , not speculators .
Another point that we consider significant relates to rural development and to the harnessing of all natural and human potential through quality agricultural production and the protection of mountain areas .
One of the objectives of the new CAP must be to integrate new farmers , particularly young farmers , with targeted budget headings , and to reduce burdens and bureaucracy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Dess report represents a major step towards reform of the common agricultural policy .
It is of fundamental importance that we find and deliver an efficient basis for the allocation of agricultural funding .
This includes making allocations in the first pillar , in particular , fairer .
I think it is high time to give up the historical approach .
We have many discussions on how funds are distributed between the Member States , but we also need to discuss how they are allocated within Member States .
There are major imbalances there , too .
Less favoured areas , particularly mountain areas and small farms , need to be given special consideration .
Where less favoured areas are concerned , Commissioner , 12 months ago this House delivered a report on the redefinition of these , in which we were highly critical .
We have heard nothing more about this and I would be very interested to know the Commission 's thinking in this respect .

Mr President , after over an hour spent debating the report by Mr Dess , I remain very optimistic , not only about tomorrow 's vote and the support for a report which , as I said in my introductory remarks , is very similar to the proposals contained in the Commission communication from the end of last year , but also about our future common agricultural policy .
I would like to repeat what I said in my introduction : I remain committed to the principle of maintaining a balance and complementarity between the two pillars of the common agricultural policy .
I also intend to keep a strong second pillar in the future common agricultural policy .
Indeed , we have many aspirations for the second pillar : on territorial balance , environmental issues , young farmers , small farms , local markets and rural development .
I can promise you that I , together with President Barroso and the Commission , see the second pillar as a priority .
It will not be sacrificed in discussions on the future common agricultural policy budget .
Let me reassure you on that point - and I speak for President Barroso too .
Nor do I want the question of food , which remains the primary and essential purpose of the common agricultural policy , to be pitted against environmental concerns - and the Commission communication does not pit them against each other , in fact .
What we are proposing is balanced support for a range of agricultural practices .
This will ensure a balance between the aim of being financially competitive and the desire to maintain and conserve our natural resources ' regenerative capacities .
In fact , I do not see how agriculture could be competitive in the medium and long term without careful management of natural resources .
That is why we want to find a balance within the CAP , rather than pitting food concerns against environmental issues .
Then there is the question of a more targeted common agricultural policy .
Mr Ashworth raised this point , although I see that he is no longer here .
The Commission is proposing more targeted direct payments .
Here again , I consider that the proposals made in Mr Dess 's report are very much in line with what the Commission plans to include in its legislative proposals .
We will propose measures that will allow us to deal with crises , be they market crises , health crises or crises related to extreme weather .
That is the kind of instruments that we will be proposing .
I would also like to thank Parliament for supporting us in this key aim , which will provide reassurance to farmers in the future .
Having made these additional comments , let me conclude by reiterating my confidence about tomorrow 's vote and in the quality of the Dess report .
I can promise you that in October , when the Commission presents its legislative proposals , you will recognise all the key elements .
I would like to thank you once again for this work , which has brought real added value to the legislative package that the Commission will be tabling .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank everyone for this intense debate , and also for the support that I have been given here .
Commissioner , we are all looking forward to your communication in October and then to good , positive cooperation .
European agriculture is a positive factor .
It feeds more than 500 million people , farms and looks after more than 170 million hectares of arable land and pasture , it provides many jobs in areas upstream and downstream , is an important buttress of rural areas and is already the most sustainable agricultural sector in the world .
I therefore cannot understand why President Barroso has spoken of huge cuts in the second pillar .
In so doing he is also jeopardising the EU2020 goals - in other words , his own goals .
When 14 million farmers are feeding 500 million people , is it too much to ask that European agricultural policy be used to ensure that the 500 million people also provide properly for the 14 million farmers , so to speak ?
Here I should like to emphasise - as has been mentioned a couple of times today already - that there have been departures from my original report on some matters .
I have been in the political game too long , and I know exactly why I drafted the report as I did .
Had I written the report as it stands today , what would I have had to offer in the compromise negotiations ?
I allowed enough margin to ensure that everyone could be pacified , and a good result has been achieved today .
My report therefore had a substantial buffer .
The result I wanted to achieve was for us to send a signal as Parliament that we are addressing the important aspects that are necessary if European farmers are to have a good future .
Once the legislative proposals are on the table , Commissioner , we will then work intensively to achieve a good outcome together .
I can already assure you that you are likely to have greater support here in Parliament than some other commissioners would have .
We are able to offer you that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 23 June 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Agriculture provides security of supply of affordable , quality food ; it provides essential protection for the environment and for balanced land use ; and it creates jobs , growth and wealth .
Giving money to farmers simply on the basis of the amount of land they own cannot be justified .
We have successfully pushed to change subsidies , so that 80 % of subsidies no longer benefit just 20 % of the largest farmers , and in this way we have helped small farmers .
We have paved the way for a common agricultural policy that is fairer to the countries of the European Union and to farmers and different kinds of production ; that respects the specific conditions in our regions ; that is environmentally friendly ; and that promotes employment in rural areas .
With regard to milk quotas , we have to check whether or not it is in fact a good idea to continue to implement a decision made eight years ago , on the basis of forecasts .
This point is extremely important for the Azores in view of the fact that the sector plays a strategic role and quotas have been very important to milk producers until now .
I must emphasise this , because alternatives to the milk quota scheme have not yet been put forward .
We are all aware of the potential and crucial role the common agricultural policy has in achieving environmental and climate targets , in providing public goods and also in attaining the EU 's food security targets .
However , it is extremely important that , when we talk about agriculture and the future of the CAP , ' simplification ' and ' innovation ' are the watchwords .
We must focus on those policy measures which do not impose new administrative burdens because we do not want to make our farmers ' lives even harder .
The common agricultural policy must become fairer and simpler .
I believe that we need to find a fair balance between the policy objectives we are proposing and the administrative burden .
We need to safeguard farmers ' welfare and strengthen local economies .
We have to protect the environment and also be concerned about producing high-quality , safe and healthy food .
When it comes to agriculture , we must not focus exclusively on technological solutions or on discussions about technological solutions .
We also have to take into account consumption patterns , the issue of waste and the complex relationship between the environment , biodiversity and health .
in writing . - Firstly I wish to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
The final document sends a clear message to the Commission , which is currently in the middle of its internal budget discussion on the next financial programme : namely that Parliament sees the future common agricultural policy as one that is capable of delivering for the European economy in terms of employment and growth .
It is a policy that will deal with the challenges of food security ; it is a policy that will deliver public goods , protect the environment and enhance biodiversity ; and it is a vehicle for tackling climate change .
Reducing European farmers ' capacity and hampering their competitiveness and viability with a weak CAP budget would be counterproductive and short-sighted .
This is a sector with a wealth of potential for expansion , for growth in the economy , for research and innovation and for tackling climate change .
The CAP produces measurable results and a clear return on investment with regard to the delivery of public goods .
The CAP post-2014 , as outlined in this report , has clear aims and priorities , on which European farmers can and will deliver - but they need the support of a credible budget behind them .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that the report drafted by Mr Dess is vital in the context of the global food crisis and current environmental risks .
The new version of the common agricultural policy includes values such as consumer protection and regional cohesion .
I think that long-term productivity depends , to a large extent , on the sustainable management of natural resources , which is another objective on the agenda .
I welcome the initiative promoting more active involvement by farmers in rural development programmes , which will help boost local competitiveness .
Food security is another priority in the new common agricultural policy .
Cooperation between Member States is essential , as demonstrated during the E. coli crisis this summer .
In order to avoid food price fluctuations , I support the adoption of additional risk-prevention measures available to all EU farmers .
At the same time , I think that it is important for agricultural funds to be distributed fairly .
On this point , I should stress , for example , the impact of direct aid on boosting small farms ' profitability and competitiveness .
Special payments must also be programmed for areas with natural handicaps which have special needs .
in writing . - As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and a committed environmental campaigner , I expected a Dess report which would represent a CAP for the carbon era - one based upon environmental incentives , resource management , and a strong investment in the wider environmental issues facing the EU .
As such , I am impressed by the degree to which the Dess report has committed to greening CAP ; to supporting small- and medium-sized food producers ; and to looking towards the future while also addressing the current concerns which face European agriculture .
Given that the Commission is broadly in agreement with the Parliament 's proposals , I call on this House to make their voice heard in ensuring that the European Council also supports this report 's environmental proposals .
in writing . - ( RO ) The common agricultural policy is faced with a number of challenges calling for the European Union and Member States to make a strategic decision about the future of agriculture .
To be able to tackle these challenges effectively , the CAP must operate in an environment of sound economic policies and sustainable public funding which will help the Union achieve its EU 2020 strategy objectives .
I think that the European Union also needs to have in the future adequate instruments for tackling the crises affecting the market and food supply , as well as the fluctuations in the prices and market in the agricultural sector .
I think that CAP funds need to be shared fairly for the first and second pillars , both among Member States and among farmers within a Member State .
This will tangibly reduce the great disparities in how these funds are shared among Member States .
The CAP 's second pillar is of paramount importance for rural development .
I think that particular attention should be focused on motivating and encouraging young farmers .
Consequently , I am in favour of introducing in this pillar targeted measures which will be defined by Member States , with the aim of achieving the EU 's priority targets so that compensation payments are maintained for the disadvantaged areas in the second pillar .
Agriculture is without a doubt the economic sector in which the European Union has achieved the most .
The current debate takes place against the backdrop of the Commission 's plans to unveil vital proposals for reform in October .
This House has reached a compromise in the report under discussion .
We have retained two strong pillars : the first pillar , direct aid , needs adequate funding that reflects the challenges facing agriculture , which means at least maintaining current financing levels .
However , it will also be brought more into line with the second pillar , support for sustainable development .
I believe that the greening of the first pillar needs to be judged correctly , so that it does not add to the environmental requirements with which farmers are already seriously burdened .
After all , their primary role is to produce food .
The report also reaches out to young farmers who , as we know , struggle to get started in the sector .
However , clearly these objectives can only be achieved if the Union 's budget is not cut .
What is the point of having ambitious aims if we do not have the means to realise them ?
We in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have worked hard to ensure that the new EU agricultural policy is oriented towards ecological standards .
In our view , farmers must be rewarded for providing services to society .
That is exactly what they do , and nothing could be rewarded less in the prices currently being achieved at market .
Retaining the two-pillar model guarantees that farmers will continue to receive a fixed amount in the future that they can rely on .
These payments are important for long-term planning .
By linking the direct payment to an economic variable we can achieve the transition from a Europe of 15 Member States to a Europe of 27 without offending anyone too much .
The report is a good compromise ; it is a European compromise .
The question now is what the Commission , and particularly President Barroso , will make of it .
Cutting the funding for environmental protection in particular suggests narrow-mindedness , and I hope Commissioner Cioloş will be able to talk him out of it .
This report proposes the continuity of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , though with some contradictions .
We therefore take a critical stance , and we have put forward alternative proposals that respond effectively both to the need for agricultural production to ensure food sovereignty and food security in every country , and to the problems of family farming and rural development .
These proposals all take into account the social importance of the land and of the people who work it , the specific characteristics of each country and social justice in the distribution of grants , both among Member States and among crops and farmers .
That is why we have put forward this set of proposals , in which in particular we clearly and unequivocally advocate the system of production quotas adapted to each Member State according to its food requirements , thus ensuring that farmers in countries such as Portugal are protected .
We want to guarantee every country 's right to produce , and we are against liberalisation of the dairy sector and of planting rights in the wine sector .
We also want to maintain aid for the distillation of potable alcohol and emergency distillation beyond 2012 , and we uphold the ' existence of market regulation instruments and intervention mechanisms to ensure fair prices for production ' , thus countering the deregulating trend of previous CAP reforms .
Europe will need a strong agriculture even after 2013 , because the principal means of guaranteeing European citizens ' food security is European agriculture .
Food production has to remain the primary aim of agriculture , because the world population continues to grow and is predicted to reach 9 billion by 2045 .
However , we need a strong common agricultural policy and strong agricultural assistance to achieve this goal .
I therefore consider it important that pursuant to the report , the agricultural budget be maintained at least at the same level as in 2013 in the next EU financing period .
This March , the Hungarian Presidency adopted presidential conclusions serving the interests of European farmers .
The excessive price volatility in the previous period is partly the consequence of wrong decisions taken by the EU , for instance the abolition of maize intervention .
Thus , we need an agricultural policy which ensures efficient action against extreme price volatility and speculation .
The milk crisis made it clear that measures to restrict production are needed in the milk sector .
In Member States where there was a higher-than-average decrease in sugar production as a result of the sugar reform , production must be allowed to increase .
in writing . - It is imperative that the CAP is adequately equipped to rise to the challenges it will have to face in the future .
The CAP cannot be monolithic ; it should be implemented with flexibility and within the current economic and political context .
A regulatory policy-based framework should be developed with long-term goals in mind .
This would afford small farmers greater stability and would enable them to draw up investment plans over a broader time horizon without concern for the disruption that could be caused by short-term quick-fix policies and give them the support they need to safeguard their business .
The agriculture sector 's susceptibility to market instability and price volatility must be addressed and the CAP should guarantee a safety-mechanism and provision for effective risk prevention , which would give farmers a measure of income security in these economically trying times and serve to provide foresight of how global price volatility will affect developing countries .
The global climatic challenges , the strain posed by demographic changes on food security , as well as the economic recession , should lead to the intensification of efforts to ensure sustainable growth , encourage and protect jobs .
Dedicated innovation and research will support Europe 's transition to becoming more environmentally and economically sustainable .
in writing . - ( FI ) This report was a victory for the advocates of Finnish and European agriculture .
Owing to our northern location , we in Finland are at a considerable natural disadvantage when it comes to growing crops , and so it is important that there are no changes to the amount of aid that we receive .
Parliament 's position is a strong message for the Commission , which is drafting its proposal for the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Restrictions on current levels of national aid cannot be acceptable after this .
Food security is and will remain the main challenge facing EU agriculture .
It is not the only one , as is also highlighted in the OECD-FAO report ' Agricultural Outlook 2011-2020 ' .
I think that we must focus particular attention on the demographic challenges affecting the countryside in particular .
If we fail to handle the demographic changes and make rural areas more attractive to young farmers , we run the risk , within a certain period of time , of this situation becoming a real obstacle preventing stable , high-quality agricultural production .
With this in mind , we need to offer young people new , attractive measures , consistent financial support and increased access to innovative services and infrastructures .
In addition to all these measures , there is also a need for better coordination between the financial support allocated to rural development and the other regional policies and for the maintenance of CAP funding at a level ensuring that all the proposed tasks can be achieved .
This will enable us to facilitate more active economic , social and cultural involvement from young people in European Union agriculture .
Unfortunately the bold and innovative aims initially proposed by the rapporteur have not survived our discussions .
In some cases they have been forced to give way to wishy-washy , colourless and insipid compromises .
I can live with that , particularly when it comes to a fairer distribution of direct payments in Europe to guarantee the smooth operation of the internal market .
However , I do regret our lack of courage on across-the-board greening of the common agricultural policy .
Our farmers want to produce healthy food efficiently in order to provide food security for Europe 's 500 million citizens .
Eleven Member States , including Luxembourg , have signed a joint letter to Commissioner Cioloş expressing their opposition to the end of the system of planting rights for vineyards in 2015 .
I am glad that the European Parliament has endorsed that proposal in Mr Dess 's report .
We do need to be careful however : our farmers must not end up working as underpaid landscape gardeners , leaving us dependent on imports of food and agricultural commodities from third countries , products subject to far less stringent requirements than those imposed on our farmers .
I fully support this position .
We expect to see it included in the Commissioner 's legislative proposals .
The European Parliament must stand up for a strong , fair and well-financed CAP .
It is time for us to ensure that direct payments are distributed fairly among Member States , regions and sectors .
We need to show European citizens that genuine European solidarity exists and not just pay lip service to it .
Mr Dess 's report marks a very small step , but it is in the right direction .
I also welcome the measures proposed for maintaining territorial balance in the EU .
I am pleased that support is expressed in the report for young people in the agricultural sector because we must combat depopulation of rural areas .
It is important that we maintain support for disadvantaged regions and the opportunity for production-related payments in the regions where there is no alternative to a particular production type .
I am pleased to note that my request for greater flexibility within the second pillar was also heeded .
The situation in agricultural sectors differs in the various Member States .
Greater freedom in defining countries ' priorities will offer genuine opportunities for agricultural regions to develop .
However , it is important for us to take care that the proposed measures do not introduce further red tape for agricultural producers .
Let us send a strong signal to the European Commission and Europe 's agricultural producers , showing our support for a fairer , simpler and more flexible CAP .
in writing . - ( DE ) A healthy farming sector - and I am not talking here about agro-industrial factories , but rather about small-scale family farms - provides a guarantee of the continued existence of rural culture , nature and our cultural landscape , as well as being essential to securing the supply of food for our population .
Just how important the latter is has been made clear to us once again by the recent enterohaemorrhagic E. coli ( EHEC ) crisis .
Consumers make great demands of organic produce .
They expect organic produce to provide ecological balance , which in reality is often more than questionable .
Rather than having an especially positive impact on sustainability , the prudent use of resources , CO2 savings and the protection of livestock , organic produce is often transported right across Europe .
The EU needs to act here - and I speak as a representative of Austria , the leading country in organic farming .
Greater importance must be attached to regional provision and seasonal availability , as well as strict labelling of the origin of foods .
Services provided by agriculture must therefore be recompensed by fair product prices .
Let us not use the common agricultural policy to promote agro-industry ; let us promote our farmers instead .
in writing . - ( FI ) The reform of the EU 's common agricultural policy is one of this Parliament 's most important tasks .
The report by Mr Dess is a good basis for continuing the reform .
We need a broader debate , however , to achieve the objective of environmentally friendly , resource-effective and diverse agriculture .
The answer to the global problems of agriculture will not be found by increasing production in Europe , but is part of a broader equation , in which economic , social and environmental issues are taken into account .
Instead of a narrow-minded agricultural policy , we need a food policy that considers the whole food production chain , from start to finish .
That is the best way that we can respond to the serious , all-encompassing challenges faced by agriculture in its present form in the 2000s .
I am delighted to learn that the new common agricultural policy will end the period of discrimination against farmers in certain Member States , including my own .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work , which is clearly the work of an author who understands the issues involved .
I am all the more alarmed by the attempt to establish new discriminatory conditions .
The capping of direct payments is a new form of discrimination against Member States in which , for historical reasons , most of the agricultural undertakings manage larger areas of land .
These agricultural undertakings comply with the same rules and provide the same services as small undertakings in other countries , and they fulfil the conditions for direct payments equally well .
The discrimination against large undertakings resulting from capping may put jobs in rural areas at risk , and stifle innovative potential .
If we want to talk credibly about a single market , can we really countenance discrimination against certain Member States in the form of differences in payments per hectare or capping ?
Farmers from the 12 new Member States have now reached the end of a difficult 10-year period , which they agreed to on the understanding that it was a transitional period which would not be extended .
Let us not prolong these inequalities contrary to the spirit of the EU accession negotiations , and let us not damage the credibility of the EU in the eyes of some of its citizens .
We are gambling with the future of the EU itself .
I would therefore like to call on all fellow Members to support Amendments 10 and 11 , which reject the capping of payments .
A fundamental requirement for fair competition on the internal market is the establishment of fair and transparent conditions for all farmers throughout the EU .
The report on the future of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is heading in this direction .
Many of the negotiated compromises should be welcomed unequivocally , for example the simplification of administrative procedures in various areas of the CAP , or the continuation of full funding for direct payments in the EU budget and the refusal to renationalise these .
However , I regard the issue of European farmers getting preferential treatment or being put at a disadvantage on the basis of additional criteria , for example the size of holdings , as problematic in view of the historically determined nature of the situation in the individual Member States .
I wish to express my satisfaction with this first text on the future of the CAP .
Even at this early stage , it aims to send the Commission what is a positive message for our farmers , pending receipt of the legislative text .
Indeed , I consider that many paragraphs contain information that I and some of my colleagues sought to include .
I refer to the important statements that promote our southern agriculture .
For example , direct aid will no longer simply be based on a premium per hectare , but the size of the farm , employment arrangements , labour productivity and legal form will also be taken into consideration at long last .
I am also very pleased that these payments will only be awarded to farmers who are truly active in the sector , so that the aid goes to those who genuinely need it and who use it to benefit agriculture .
Provision has also been made to distribute aid more evenly , bearing in mind that , for historical reasons , farms in the European Union have very diverse structures .
I fully support the paragraph calling for the new CAP to be equipped with the instruments necessary to limit price volatility .
I will conclude by mentioning the most common form of agricultural production in my region , olive oil production , and the measure that we are awaiting from the Commission : an updated private storage system and the introduction of private storage .
With food security being a key factor in globalisation nowadays , we need to maintain our capacity for being self-sufficient .
This means maintaining an ambitious common agricultural policy that can satisfy our most basic long-term need : food .
The CAP does , however , need to be tweaked to make it fairer .
European citizens would not understand if the bulk of assistance were to go to large agricultural operators : small farmers too must be able to make a living from what they produce , work in decent conditions and be paid fairly .
When allocating aid , we must also give more thought to natural constraints , such as global warming , mountain areas and scarce water supplies .
The current drought demonstrates that the CAP urgently needs to include practical resources that will allow our farmers to deal with water shortages .
I would therefore appeal for a subtle shift in the CAP to make it more relevant and able to guarantee our food self-sufficiency , the vitality of our agricultural sector and the preservation of our rural areas .
Prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances - Implementation of excessive deficit procedure - Requirements for budgetary frameworks of Member States - Budgetary surveillance in euro area - Surveillance of budgetary positions and surveillance and coordination of economic policies - Enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in euro area ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances _ - _ C7-0301 / 2010 -
by Mr Feio , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 97 on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure -
by Mrs Ford , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States - 2010 / 0277 ( NLE ) ]
by Mrs Goulard , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area - C7-0298 / 2010 -
by Mrs Wortmann-Kool , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1466 / 97 on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies - C7-0300 / 2010 - , and
by Mr Haglund , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area - C7-0299 / 2010 - .
Mr President , in the view of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the component of the economic governance package that deals with the Stability and Growth Pact is not the response that Europe requires at this time of structural crisis .
The package does indeed revisit the Stability and Growth Pact , but not to change its essence .
It revisits it to make its demands broader and its penalties tougher .
It would seem more useful to assume that the pact is impossible to comply with if a country 's economy is not growing and , in particular , if there is a crisis .
These issues should be at the heart of the political agenda .
We should discuss having a crisis management policy and its associated instruments in euro area countries and , on another matter , how to prevent the persistently divergent evolution of the euro economies from destroying the single currency .
If these issues are not resolved , the pact becomes stupid , as someone said .
There is , however , a glimmer of hope in the package : the new initiative to identify and correct the macroeconomic imbalances that build up , particularly in the eurozone , before they become insoluble problems .
Parliament wanted responsibilities as co-legislator and has carried them out to the full .
The text on which we are going to vote reflects a broad consensus , which was only possible thanks to everyone 's huge capacity for work and spirit of compromise .
As rapporteur , I wish to thank all my fellow Members from all political groups , particularly my shadow rapporteurs , and I pick out Mr Haglund especially , for whom I acted as shadow rapporteur as well .
The trialogue phase was long and hard , and the agreement we reached - sadly not a full one - was due to the Hungarian Presidency , represented by Minister Kármán , the Commission , represented by Commissioner Rehn , and all our partners .
Let us speak plainly : identifying macroeconomic imbalances is a complex and completely novel process .
Rather than merely applying sanctions , it is important to identify the risks competently , find out whether they are the country 's responsibility or whether they result from external impacts , and make correct , timely and practicable recommendations .
After the negotiating process , the scoreboard - that is , the set of indicators that have been negotiated - includes not only financial and nominal indicators , but also indicators from the real economy .
We also trust that the Commission will scrupulously respect the compromise of recital 6-A , which involves Parliament alongside the Council in future review processes .
Interpretation will also not be done automatically , but intelligently through in-depth reviews , which are demanding for the Commission but necessary .
The Commission 's recommendations will have to ensure consistency with all the other strategic documents , but the country will bear the main responsibility for proposing solutions to implement .
Parliament 's enhanced powers , the greater involvement of the social partners and respect for collective bargaining practices have all been guaranteed .
Penalties are justified in cases of lack of cooperation but not where countries are unable to meet the targets .
They are also graded , which is an important aspect .
We would have preferred to lighten the penalties , but we had to agree to them as part of the compromises .
Before agreement can be reached , there is one fundamental stumbling block : the recognition that in an internal market , in a monetary area , it makes sense that the variations in the scoreboard indicators should be observed whether they are positive or negative , and that both deficits and surpluses should be subject to observation , even though they obviously do not give rise to similar recommendations .
All of us - individual Members , political groups and institutions - have come a long way .
Agreement on a balanced , high-quality text is in sight .
I just hope that the spirit of compromise that has brought us this far will carry us through to a final agreement .
Mr President , this is a further stage in an exceptional piece of work that we have been doing in the European Parliament .
At this point I must warmly acknowledge Mrs Wortmann-Kool , Mrs Goulard , Mr Haglund , Mrs Ferreira and Mrs Ford , who have been rapporteurs with me throughout this economic governance package .
I must also offer a very special word of thanks to the various shadow rapporteurs who have helped us in our work .
Lastly , I must emphasise the exceptional work carried out by the Council on this issue , especially by András Kármán , who worked closely with us , and Commissioner Rehn , who also played an invaluable part in the whole process .
My first word is one of confidence , in a positive vein .
This economic governance package must show that Europe is capable : it is capable of overcoming difficulties and it is capable of guarding against future problems .
That is why I am highly confident about what is going to happen with this economic governance legislation in the coming days .
In the Stability and Growth Pact , for which I was rapporteur for the corrective part , it is possible to add the idea of growth to that of stability and budgetary discipline .
It is possible to innovate with the macroeconomic imbalance procedure .
It is possible to go beyond an approach of merely having a penalty mechanism , and that is why adoption of this economic governance package will lead to more Europe and better Europe .

In relation to the corrective part of the Stability and Growth Pact , for example , this economic governance package has brought us a more intelligent application of the pact , through the attention it devotes to the debt criterion ; the introduction of an average rate for debt reduction , to be carried out over three years , allowing for flexibility in fulfilling the rules ; a more detailed and appropriate list of relevant factors that the Commission should take into account in its assessment of the financial situation of the countries involved ; and the introduction of a three-year transition period for implementation of the debt criterion .
There are also other aspects that I want to highlight here , which concern other reports .
Because we worked in conjunction all the time , I must mention the important introduction of a European semester regime in the preventive part , and point out that the preventive part is essential and that penalties should only be applied as the final step in this whole procedure .
The procedure includes the introduction of symmetry in the analysis of macroeconomic indicators , the possibility that the Commission will produce a study on Eurobonds by the end of this year , an integrated vision of penalties as a final step in relation both to macroeconomic imbalances and to the Stability and Growth Pact , and the question of introducing reverse qualified majority voting for Council decisions .
All these steps have been taken as essential parts of Parliament 's role .
That is why we can send our citizens a very clear message right now .
The message is that we are preparing an institutional mechanism to prevent future crises .
Europe will be much better prepared with this economic governance package .
Europe is taking a crucial step with this economic governance package so that our economy can grow soundly .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the European Council .
We can all see the incredibly sensitive situation in Europe and especially in the eurozone which has required different countries to work together in a way that has never been seen before .
We can see the vital need to improve competitiveness and rebuild public finances in a sustainable manner .
Over recent days , weeks and months , we have constantly seen ministers from Member States coming together to try to help find ways out of each other 's individual problems .
In addition , never before have I seen such a desire from members of the public to understand where public money is spent .
So let me first talk about the directive that I have worked on .
The directive sets out a series of requirements in accounting statistics , forecasting and budgetary processes .
Let us not forget that inadequate budget planning and inaccurate information compounded this crisis .
It is a Council directive , not a co-legislative report , and the Council has debated this extensively .
Member States themselves have agreed that they will adopt fiscal planning horizons of at least three years to include all levels of government and government funds in their budget processes and ensure that information on , for example , contingent liabilities is disclosed .
Accounting and forecasting performance will be independently evaluated .
Let me say that many of the Member States already comply with large parts of this directive , but implementing this minimum series of requirements will introduce discipline and restore confidence , and is a first small step back on the path to stability in public finances .
In addition , Member States themselves have agreed that they will each introduce their own legislation on fiscal rules - not necessarily German constitution debt breaks - but rules tailor-made in each country to keep them in line with their obligations under the Treaty .
Now this is sensitive as well because different countries have different obligations under the Treaty and for that reason that section does not apply to the UK .
During the negotiations on the wider ' six pack ' a number of suggestions for improving this Council directive were made , many by the European Central Bank and by Members of this House .
The Council has worked in good faith to try and improve the directive where appropriate and improve transparency , but without stepping on the sensitive issues relating to individual national constitutions .
Briefly on the other directives .
Through these negotiations I have tried to be constructive in allowing euro zone Member States in particular to set up what rules and sanctions they see necessary to underpin their stability .
I have not supported colleagues who think the solution is just a stronger role for the European Parliament .
Over the weekend and on Monday night , the Council tried to offer a final compromise on an outstanding issue of votes in the European Council .
Whilst this is not , in my opinion , a deeply significant issue in my own Member State - as we do not intend to join the euro and resulting fines do not apply to us - it is an extremely difficult and contentious issue in many countries , including those who intend to join .
This is a time to try to understand each other 's problems but also respect each other 's differences .
Earlier this week I warned colleagues that heading into a direct confrontation between Parliament and the Council on an issue that I did not believe I could explain to any man on the street would not be a responsible position of this Parliament .
Indeed , I said I thought it would be irresponsible .
And this Parliament 's approach on that issue is not supported by many of my group 's members .
I cannot support Parliament 's changes to the Council text on the macroeconomic imbalances and I would like to see in the weeks ahead more clarity on the different positions between euro zone and non-euro-zone Member States .
Mr President , we have had countless trialogue meetings , some late at night , with other Members , the Commission and the Hungarian Presidency .
I would like to begin by thanking my fellow Members and our counterparts for the work that we have completed together .
The message from the Ecofin Council is that everyone needs to shoulder their responsibilities .
My immediate reaction is to say : ' All right , then , let us genuinely face up to our responsibilities . '
Not with a huge fanfare , not so as to be able to say that we reached an agreement rapidly , but with an eye on the financial problems in the euro area and the European Union and in an attempt to come up with some proper solutions .
Certainly , that was my group 's motto in these negotiations .
I doubt that the markets and our citizens would believe in speedy but superficial solutions .
In our estimation , substantial improvements are needed .
We have , I think , already achieved some of the objectives that we set ourselves .
Let me remind you that we are not the only ones with these aims : on several occasions , the European Central Bank has called on Parliament to beef up the Commission 's already bold proposals .
We have therefore firmed up the rules .
That was one of our guiding principles : not for the pleasure of rule-making , but because breaking common rules in a community based on the rule of law endangers the single currency .
We have introduced penalties for fraud .
Unfortunately this is one of the lessons that we have had to learn from the euro 's early years .
As Mrs Ford said , we have also tried to impose a degree of order on national budgetary procedures , if only so as to be able to compare practices in different countries .
One point was particularly important to me : if we go to our citizens with nothing to say other than ' we have increased automaticity ' , as the newspapers are putting it , they will be left with the impression that some mysterious machine has been turned on in Brussels and will rap them on the knuckles whenever something goes wrong .
If we want stricter rules , they need to be more intelligent , but above all we need more democratic debate and more cross-border discussions .
This is why we have proposed - and I would like to thank all the Members who have supported me on this point - creating what we have termed an economic dialogue , which must be proportionate .
There is no threat to national constitutions ; it is simply an expression of our desire for more discussion within the euro area in particular , but also in the Europe of 27 .
We want this House to be the forum for that transparent dialogue between the European institutions and the Member States , and in particular a place where Member States can voice their problems and explain their positions .
Some countries are lagging behind , others are further ahead , some are on the fringes , some have larger populations : we need to bear all that in mind .
I am delighted to see that this week in the German media Mr Habermas has again stressed that increasing democratic legitimacy is a vital necessity .
I would say to Mrs Ford that we are not arguing in favour of enhancing our powers , we are calling for a greater role for those mandated by the people to defend their interests in Brussels .
There are other important points , particularly on the macroeconomic side .
I believe that all Member States need to be subject to common surveillance .
Symmetry is an important issue .
The Council should understand what this means : intelligent symmetry that distinguishes between deficit and surplus , but symmetry all the same .
Let me close by mentioning Eurosecurities , which were one of the things that I championed .
I would like to make an appeal to all political group leaders : you cannot claim to support Eurosecurities but vote against them .
You might argue that you want more , I myself would have liked to go further , but I do fully appreciate the efforts that Commissioner Rehn is willing to make .
Let me remind you that the Commissioner himself put forward proposals in May 2010 in accordance with the Commission 's legislative initiative .
We want to put those proposals back on track .
We want the euro finally to take on the mantle of a world currency , we want a large and liquid market , which will reduce the cost of borrowing .
We want part of that borrowing - a limited amount , of course - to be shared in the long term using a full-blown market regulatory instrument .
Consequently , I hope that tomorrow 's vote will be favourable and that all those who claim to be in favour of Eurosecurities will discuss the issue in a spirit of open-mindedness rather than based on ideological prejudices .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , if one thing is clear , it is that Europe needs a solid foundation in order to prevent a new euro crisis in the future and to ensure sustainable economic growth .
Our group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , is satisfied with the results we have achieved so far in the legislative package on economic governance .
I would like to extend my warm thanks to all the Members , rapporteurs , shadow rapporteurs , employees , staff and everyone for the many hours we have spent together in order to achieve this because , in exercising its powers , the European Parliament has taken a firm and ambitious position .
I would like to thank the Hungarian Presidency , and in particular András Kámán , for the efforts put in to bridging the differences between the Council and Parliament .
Indeed , you personally have made it possible for us to reach a 98 % agreement , partly thanks to the helpful support of Commissioner Rehn and his staff .
This is an excellent result , but it was not an easy one to achieve .
Tomorrow , we will be voting on the reports .
My group is strongly committed to building on the high level of agreement that we have reached .
I hope that we will be able to bridge the last differences over the next few weeks so that we can finalise an agreement before the summer .
This is very important , because my group is striving for a final vote in the plenary in July .
The turmoil in the financial markets continues and we urgently need to find a solution to the debt crisis in several countries .
However , it is just as urgent - and therein now lies our task as co-legislator - that Europe demonstrates strong decision making in terms of an ambitious stability pact and economic governance .
Reaching a decision before the summer is crucial to restoring confidence in the euro , given that the Stability and Growth Pact was being broken as early as 2003 .
Instead of the rules being enforced , they were simply liberalised and we now need to put a stop to that .
This is about credible legislation , not behind-the-scenes negotiations between Member States aimed at avoiding penalties .
If Member States fail to take effective action in order to meet their commitments and reduce their deficits - and these are commitments , remember , that they have undertaken of their own free will - then decision-making must be effective .
That is why this House has proposed the reverse voting procedure .
Let us face it , the magic formula of our fellow Members on the left , the golden rule , will not deliver the solution .
Unfortunately , money does not grow on trees and the days of easy solutions and painless choices are now behind us .
That is why the PPE Group is calling for sustainable public finances and for 5 or 6 % budget deficits not to be permitted .
A debt burden - the painful evidence of which we are witnessing - stands in the way of economic growth , not only in our European countries , but also in the United States .
We need a solid foundation , and that is why I am pleased that the Council will exercise the preventive arm of the proposals , namely to ensure that Member States strengthen their own national responsibilities and involve their national parliaments in the process , clear deadlines , procedures and inspection visits , more public reports , peer pressure and public debates in this House rather than in the confines of the Council .
Obviously , the European semester is an important achievement , because we want jobs and growth .
We are facing an important and historic day .
Tomorrow , in the House , we will stand ready to shoulder our responsibilities .
I see that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance want to put a spanner in the works .
It seems that they only want to work in a spirit of compromise when it comes to their own reports .
Mr President , that is no spirit of compromise .
I would like to call on all Members who consider sustainable public finances important to support these six reports tomorrow .
They are not the final outcome , because tomorrow we will be taking a step towards consulting with the Council on how we can clear these last hurdles on our way to - what will hopefully be - an agreement in July .
Mr President , I believe that the events that we have been able to follow this week , both in the Council and in those countries that are wrestling with very serious economic problems , once again show us why the package we are now debating is so important .
If we do not manage to make headway on these matters , the problems are more likely to continue rather than be resolved .
I also believe that it is important to remember what happened in 2005 when we ought to have taken action and demonstrated that it is not all right to contravene the common allocation clauses .
We did not do that ; instead we changed the rules .
Now it is time to rectify this .
This package is important .
I would like to say a big thank you to my fellow Members .
We worked hard together .
As has been said many times , we are very close to achieving the goal , but at the same time it is important that we are successful in the voting today and in July .
I would also like to thank Mr Kármán from the Hungarian Presidency , who has done a splendid job .
We really appreciate what he has done .
As I said , I would also like to thank my fellow Members , and Mrs Ferreira in particular .
We have done an excellent job in creating a macroeconomic surveillance procedure , which is something new and which complements the work that is done to keep the common currency afloat .
That is something that Europe needs .
Going back to 2005 , the European Parliament is still demanding that we find a solution with regard to what we refer to as reversed qualified majority voting .
Why is that ?
It is because we have found that if we do not have an adequate automatic decision-making system in the Council , the necessary decisions do not get taken .
We cannot afford for this to happen any longer .
In this regard , we still have an unresolved issue , but I hope that the Council will manage to hold a serious discussion on what this is actually about .
The European Council is meeting on Thursday and Friday .
It must not be the case that , for reasons of prestige , no decision is taken on something that everyone knows is necessary .
Nor must it be the case that certain larger Member States think that they can agree in advance on certain matters , so making it a ' done deal ' .
The Council must take genuine decisions and the legislation must be decided on in consultation with the European Parliament .
The Council now has the opportunity to take wise decisions , and I am sure that the European Parliament can help it to take the right ones .
With regard to the macroeconomic element , I would firstly like to emphasise that , thanks to the work that we have done in Parliament , we have a proposal that we have agreed on with the Council and one that is sufficiently transparent and also contains a solution that is sufficiently automatic .
I believe that this solution means that we will also be able to feel secure in future with regard to the euro area and to the possibility of remedying the sorts of economic problems in an individual country that could otherwise result in the whole of the euro area being put at risk .
I think it is good that , in our report , we establish a system for dealing with countries that fail to fulfil their commitments , in other words a requirement for the problems to be remedied directly .
The first time a promise is broken , the country will be forced to pay an interest-bearing deposit , as we have called it .
This is necessary .
We cannot send out a signal to the effect that if a country promises to do something in particular , but then fails to do it there will be no consequences .
Unfortunately , that is what the original proposal was like .
I am pleased that we were able to rectify that .
This is an important matter of principle .
At the same time , we have also got to grips with the problem of fraud , where other countries are deceived .
This is also extremely important .
I think that the European Parliament has done a good job in this regard .
As several speakers have said , tomorrow 's vote is a very important one , and I believe that it will go well .
I hope that , at the end of this week and through the following week , the European Council will be able to have a serious discussion about what we can do to reach an agreement .
That is something that we will also do in Parliament .
Then we can have the legislation that Europe so badly needs .
That is crucial if we are going to be able to continue to have a common currency .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , before I go into the substance , I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the rapporteurs , the shadow rapporteurs and all representatives of the political groups who actively participated in the process for all their valuable contributions .
I am equally thankful to the Commission , and the Commissioner himself , for their efforts to facilitate discussions , not only during the trilogues here in Parliament but within the Council too .
The six legislative texts on economic governance have been the number one priority of the Hungarian Presidency .
I must emphasise that it was not the individual decision of the Presidency to designate this file as the top priority .
The Commission 's initiative has also been supported by the Heads of State and Government of the 27 Member States .
If we want to build a stronger euro , this governance package is an essential building block in that process .
The world economy , including Europe , has experienced the worst crisis since the Great Depression and we have had to draw the necessary conclusions .
We have to realise that the shock would have long-lasting effects unless we eliminate the core roots of the crisis .
Many of the lessons to be learned are addressed by the six legislative proposals put forward by the Commission last September .
More emphasis will be put on prevention in order to avoid the need for harmful procyclical policies in bad economic times .
So far the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) has concentrated on deficit but this has not prevented the accumulation of high debt , so from now on more attention will be paid to the debt criteria .
The lesson was learned that procedures have not been stringent and automatic enough .
That is why we are also addressing these questions here , in order to strengthen the credibility of the Pact .
We have also realised that coordination of fiscal policies through the SGP might not be sufficient in a Union sharing a single currency so we have agreed to introduce a new mechanism to tackle macroeconomic imbalances , which will be treated on the same footing as fiscal imbalances .
In order to better and more deeply reflect the requirements of the Treaty in national procedures of Member States , we are about to adopt rules improving the quality of national budgetary frameworks .
I am confident that the objectives of both Parliament and the Council are the same , namely to strengthen the economic governance of the EU and the euro area , prevent future crises and build a stronger framework for economic governance in the euro area and the EU as a whole .
After an intensive round of trilogues with the rapporteurs and discussions at the Council , the Council modified its general approach on Monday .
The result of this process was communicated to the European Parliament by a letter sent the next day , 21 June .
I share the view that during the trilogues the quality of the text has improved a lot , and that the package has become stronger and more coherent .
This is especially the case in terms of increased transparency and accountability and the more stringent and automatic application of the procedures .
Firstly , let me mention the major elements as regards increased transparency and accountability .
We are to describe the European semester in the legal text including the ample involvement of Parliament in the process .
We have added provisions specifying the process of economic dialogue among European institutions including the European Parliament , the Council and individual Member States .
The European Parliament would be involved on the same footing as the Council in the setting up and functioning of the scoreboard of indicators for an alert mechanism in the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances .
Regarding the governance cycle and the surveillance procedure , we fully respect the very important role of relevant national stakeholders , including social partners .
Secondly , turning to the issue relating to a more stringent and automatic application of the procedures , let me mention the following : an additional sanction , an interest-bearing deposit for Member States in the excessive imbalance procedure , would be introduced .
This has been a missing link in the procedures and it completes the procedure in a very logical way , similar to that provided for in the budgetary surveillance .
An additional fine for Member States falsifying their fiscal statistics is also provided for , at the initiative of the Parliament .
The application of reverse qualified majority voting is expanded to the recommendation on prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances .
Moreover , in the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact , we make provision for a review of the expansion of reverse qualified majority voting .
At the same time , the already existing comply-or-explain procedure would be enhanced .
In deciding on the staff in the SGP , the Council is expected , as a rule , to follow the recommendations and proposals of the Commission or to explain its position publicly .
The Presidency believes that the compromise reached during the trilogues reflects a good , balanced and comprehensive approach .
We think that all parties have a strong interest in reaching a swift agreement .
I regret that the proposal put forward to the plenary is different from the compromise we arrived at after a series of negotiation rounds and does not take into account the final compromise offer of the Council .
At the same time , I am grateful for your wise approach that the Parliament still leaves open the possibility to have a first reading agreement shortly .
It is high time that Europe joined forces and the Union is ready to live up to expectations .
All the markets and investors are vigilant and would like to see whether we can deliver or not .
The swift and timely adoption of the package is a must for all of us .
Vice-President of the Commission . - President , honourable Members , let me first thank the Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Sharon Bowles , rapporteurs Corien Wortmann-Kool , Elisa Ferreira , Vicky Ford , Sylvie Goulard , Diogo Feio and Carl Haglund , as well as the shadow rapporteurs who all played a major part in the negotiations .
The Chair , the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs have all represented this House with great distinction .
I also highly appreciate the outstanding role played by State Secretary András Kármán , who represented the Hungarian Presidency with such skill and determination .
And I dare to say that I am very proud of my team in the Commission and I will thank them once we have reached the destination , with your help of course .
I warmly welcome the texts that you have finalised .
In the course of the trilogues , Parliament 's negotiators have improved the Commission 's proposals in many important respects .
And you have gained a good many important improvements from the Council .
The Commission supports the texts which you are about to vote on , and we can welcome and agree on all of your amendments .
As we know , the Council agrees with almost all of them .
But it did so with some exceptions which present quite a challenge - let me come back to that in a moment .
There is no time to set out all the gains made by Parliament in these negotiations : my staff have made me a summary list of no less than 50 major improvements won by you .
For instance , you have codified the European Semester , you have set up a structured economic dialogue , providing for a prominent role for Parliament throughout the European Semester .
You have achieved the opportunity for detailed discussion of country-specific situations at every key decision-making stage of the policy cycle , including confirmation of Parliament 's right to initiate dialogue with individual Member States .
In all parts of the legislation you have won a better information flow to Parliament and more transparency .
You have got a commitment from the Commission to do a study on euro securities within six months of the entry into force of this legislation .
This will be accompanied by a Commission declaration , the text of which you have seen , setting out the scope for that report .
I will come back to that as well . The Commission will also commit itself in this declaration to reviewing the intergovernmental nature of the European Stabilisation Mechanism by mid-2014 .
You have got reverse qualified majority voting in a number of important cases - to improve the automaticity of decision-making - as the rule in the corrective arm of the Pact , where 24 Member States out of 27 now find themselves unfortunately .
You have also won an equal role for Parliament in determining the scoreboard for detecting possible macroeconomic imbalances , and you have inserted firm guarantees on social dialogue , respect for national traditions on collective agreements , wage formation , and the role of social partners , which we fully share .
There are going to be tough fines for statistical fraud and guarantees of independence for national statistical authorities .
You have introduced earlier sanctions in the excessive imbalances procedure .
I could go on and on .
In your first legislative encounter with Ecofin as a co-legislator in economic policy , you achieved almost all of your most important objectives .
This is a very good result for Parliament and for Europe .
On euro securities , in the context of this package I will only confirm what I said at the trilogue on 15 June .
The Commission intends to present a report to Parliament and the Council on the setting up of a system of common issuance of European sovereign bonds , or euro securities , under joint and several liability , in line with Article 8a ( 5 ) of the regulation on the enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area and within six months of the entry into force of that Regulation .
These euro securities would aim to strengthen fiscal discipline and increase stability through markets as well as , by taking advantage of the increase in liquidity , ensuring that the Member States enjoying the highest credit standards would not suffer from higher interest rates .
The report will , if appropriate , be accompanied by legislative proposals .
In other words , in our view such a report on euro securities goes hand in glove with and only makes sense with the prospective reinforcement of economic governance in line with this package now under deliberation .
Let me say a few words on the next steps .
I am worried .
Should the package not be agreed , neither the Council nor Parliament should think that they can successfully shift the responsibility onto the other .
That will not work .
People watching the decision-making from outside are not interested in the smallest detail .
If we fail - and I say we and I really mean us all - they will simply say that ' Europe ' has failed .
Europe would fail and people 's trust in the capacity of Europe to address their real problems would suffer a huge blow .
Moreover , neither institution should imagine even for a moment that - whether for tactical or substantive reasons - they might get a better deal in the second reading .
The Presidency has very skilfully extracted compromises from the Council that would most likely not appear on the table again if a first reading agreement could not be achieved .
Actually only one issue remains open : the scope of reverse qualified majority voting .
I believe you are all aware of the efforts we have made .
The Commission supports reverse qualified majority voting .
So does the ECB and a number of Member States , but not all of them and not in all places .
The Council has already agreed to reverse qualified majority voting in five out of six decisions where it is legally possible .
On the remaining one , there is a disagreement between Parliament and the Council .
I believe a solution can and must be found .
Therefore I appeal to you to seek a constructive solution on the remaining point in the next few days and I appeal to the Council too , to respond with a constructive approach on their part .
I can reassure you that the Commission will work until the last minute , the last second , to find a satisfactory solution .
Reinforced economic governance in Europe is simply too important to fail on this final remaining issue .
Let us recall that the Council is about to sign the treaty on the European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) which focuses on correction .
But the ESM will only complement the new framework for reinforced economic surveillance , which focuses on prevention and is of primary essence because it will substantially reduce the probability of crises such as we have experienced emerging in the future .
Let me conclude with a simple message .
If there is no agreement this week and no vote by the latest in July , it will be a very bad deal for Europe and for Europe 's citizens .
And it would only result in frustration , bitterness and a worse outcome for everyone if we must come back to these files in September .
You have agreed on 99.9 % of the substance .
I now ask both sides to go the last few centimetres to reach an agreement with the other .
It is of paramount importance , since this package really is the cornerstone of our comprehensive response to the crisis that is still ongoing .
It is absolutely crucial for the credibility of the European Union to conclude the package before the summer break , and then move on and put it into effective use .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make three groups of points on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The first is that as we adopt this economic governance package , we must ensure that the whole of the Treaty of Lisbon is taken into account .
According to the Treaty , taking into consideration objectives concerned with promoting a high level of employment , guaranteeing adequate social welfare and combating social exclusion is a cross-cutting aim that applies to this economic governance package also .
If I may say so , I sometimes get the impression that this aim has been relegated to a secondary priority .
This is why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was keen for the whole package to be based not only on Article 121 of the Treaty , which deals with the coordination of economic policies , but on Article 148 also , which deals with employment policy in terms of coordination between the responsibilities of Member States and the European level .
This is also why we feel that within the Union , the role of the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council ( EPSCO ) must be firmly guaranteed , on a par with that of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council ( Ecofin ) .
For if - and this brings me to my second group of points - in revising the Stability and Growth Pact our only objective is the kind of governance that will satisfy the rating agencies , then we will be missing an important opportunity in the history of our economic and monetary union .
History calls us today to take a much more overall view and to look closely at the purposes for which this economic governance is being put in place .
Of course we need to reduce debt , but we also need to ensure that this economic governance helps to guarantee the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
In this respect , we believe there are other approaches that could have been used .
Commissioner , why is it that only spending on pensions can be given special treatment in your assessment of Member States ' medium-term budget objectives ?
Why is it that this special treatment cannot also be given to the investment in the future represented by spending on education , or the spending we need to undertake to combat social exclusion , a goal that you set and that we included in the Europe 2020 strategy ?
Why is it that these aims and this kind of approach are not also applied to spending on research and development or infrastructures ?
My third group of points relates to how macroeconomic surveillance is conducted .
We consider it to be an essential outcome of this package , but this means it must be applied symmetrically .
Ultimately , for us here in the European Parliament , there is a fundamental issue at stake .
Mrs Ford spoke of it as a power struggle .
It is not a power struggle , it is a question of democracy .
If we want there to be European economic governance , there needs to be a space for public debate and for European democracy , in order for this European economic policy to work .
In this respect , I have to say that your refusal and that of the Council to allow the European Parliament to participate in establishing macroeconomic indicators through delegated acts does not seem to me to be the right approach .
for David Casa , rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - Mr President , Mr Casa has asked me to speak on his behalf because he is not able to be here at this time .
Many of the amendments from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have been taken into account by the six-pack rapporteurs .
We are sending the message that a society can only have a healthy economy when its members are able to contribute fully to its development .
A healthy economy is the basis for a good level of employment and social policies , and vice versa , a good level of employment and social policies are preconditions for a healthy economy .
Those Member States which had the most prudent fiscal policies and growth strategies are now performing best .
This is the proof that fiscal stability leads to growth and employment .
We need to respect the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is essential to achieve growth and jobs and to prevent the debt burden being placed on our children and future generations .
We have to understand that every euro used in paying interest on the public debt is one which does not go towards investment in education , social security and other fields that provide a necessary environment for the good development of the economy and for the well-being of the people .
Therefore it is essential that our indebtedness in the Member States is reduced as soon as possible .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are undoubtedly many reasons for the economic situation in which we currently find ourselves in the euro area and in the European Union as a whole , but two stand out in particular .
Firstly , we were basically far too late in realising the direction in which Europe was sailing .
Secondly , when we did realise it , the Council in particular refused for a long time to initiate the necessary measures - which are actually provided for in the Stability and Growth Pact - or to impose the necessary sanctions .
To put it bluntly , it simply failed to pull the ripcord .
The new regulation on macroeconomic surveillance should deal with these two problems .
Firstly , the completely new system it provides should enable us to recognise macroeconomic imbalances at an early stage ; and secondly , we should then be able to act quickly .
We have developed a good scoreboard , albeit through long discussions .
I should very much like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ferreira , for her positive cooperation in this connection .
We need to ensure that immediate measures are taken to counter imbalances .
That is precisely why it is necessary for a mechanism to be developed here that cannot be politically torpedoed .
That is why the use of reversed qualified majority voting is so important and so fundamental for Parliament .
If we want to implement the instrument efficiently , this naturally represents a transfer of powers from the national capitals here to Brussels .
That is more than likely necessary anyway in an economic and monetary union .
Only when the citizens of Europe see that we are now acting effectively , that we have learnt from the mistakes we have made , will we be able to regain the trust that has currently been lost .
I can assure you that my group will be supporting the Ferreira report tomorrow .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , you will not find many members in this room who disagree with the need to drag down debt and deficits to reasonable levels in the years ahead .
My group certainly takes the view that we need to do that .
This is not about political confrontation between fiscally virtuous or fiscally irresponsible Members in this House .
The division between you and us and between progressives and conservatives here in the House is about how we return to sound public finances , at what economic and social cost , at what cost for the future ability of Europe to compete in a global market .
You stick to the idea , Commissioner , that there is no alternative to your austerity-only agenda .
We think that this is very wrong .
In our view , your approach and that of the right-wing majority in the Council pose the biggest threat to the very future of the European idea because they are destroying the notion of belonging to a community , the notions of solidarity and cohesion .
The vast majority of the millions who have lost their jobs during this crisis are unemployed still today .
What message does the Council and Commission have for them ?
Or for the millions whose jobs are in jeopardy or who are living in poverty ?
What message for the hundreds of millions of people who are suffering as a result of cutbacks in public provision , in healthcare , in education ?
What message for them ?
What message from the Council this week ?
Well , I expect nothing quite frankly , nothing .
This week 's Council will not produce a single ray of hope for hardworking people , for the unemployed or the young people who are hurting so much .
They have been unfairly and severely hit by the crisis that was not of their making and now they will be hit again to repair the damage they did not cause .
Your political and economic agenda is totally unacceptable to us on this side of the House .
Throughout the legislative process , we have suggested sensible and balanced amendments to the Commission 's proposals , we have proposed firmly connecting national reform and stability and growth programmes using the first as a solid vehicle for the necessary promotion of public investment We made proposals to maintain sensible levels of productive public investment and we have proposed making the new rules clearly anti-cyclical .
I could go on , but the reality is that today 's economic and social agenda has been hijacked by the right .
There is not even space for moderate political approaches , let alone more progressive ones .
And please , Commissioner Rehn , do not tell me that these policies I am denouncing are being pursued by socialist governments .
You know , at a time when even the strongest economies in Europe need to bow to the demands of an irresponsible and increasingly dangerous financial sector , that no Member State can change this agenda alone .
In the end , I wonder who will benefit from the decisions that will be made this week .
It seems to me that the only people who will benefit are those who have caused the whole mess in the first place , the financial sector , and I think that is a disgrace .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , so far we have found agreement on almost all of the package and have demonstrated that codecision is working , with thanks to the hard work of the Hungarian Presidency and of course to András Kármán in particular , and to the Parliament negotiating team and the Commission .
The Presidency and Commission have already highlighted numerous - I think it was 50 - Parliament additions .
These include a legal framework for the Semester and surveillance of national reform programmes , independence of national statistical offices and fines for fraud , Commission surveillance missions , an economic dialogue between all stakeholders , and substantially greater transparency throughout .
We cannot conceal , though , that there have been significant differences in the negotiation of the package .
For my part , I do not see this as political grandstanding but rather the search for ownership , to enable ownership by the people .
What divides us in Parliament differs from our issues with the Council but , however difficult it may be , we have to stand up to our democratic duty .
It is this House that will confer ownership .
Some prefer intergovernmentalism .
Given that the agreed text is acknowledged as better than the Council general approach , this does not make sense .
Nor does it make sense in the search for ownership - so distinctly missing in much of the response to the crisis and so much a consequence of intergovernmental decisions .
From the realisation that the Stability Fund facilities had to be larger , to recognising the fact that punitive interest rates do not give sustainability and the chance to return to the markets , this House has not been afraid to lead and the Council has followed .
We are stronger when we work together and I believe the final differences can be resolved .
Mr President , the package of six proposals intended to improve discipline within the euro area is based on the belief that the Member States will comply more rigorously with the newly created and stricter architecture for supranational surveillance .
I regard it as problematic to think along these lines , particularly since some Member States have been incapable of following the less stringent rules to date , and effectively enforcing their implementation .
I would like to mention four points which I consider controversial .
The first is reverse qualified majority voting , which has already been referred to many times in this Chamber .
We regard reverse qualified majority voting as an instrument to be used in exceptional cases , the use of which must always be explained properly and thoroughly , with proper checks carried out to ensure that its use is consistent with primary law .
We do not agree with the increase in the number of areas subject to surveillance procedures for which the use of reverse qualified majority voting is proposed .
The proposed approach will increase the political power of the Commission and the European Parliament to the detriment of the Council and the national authorities , which is not what we want .
With regard to surveillance missions , I have serious reservations concerning the proposal for such missions , since they will be composed mainly of European Commission officials and will have significant powers entrusted to them , without the members of these missions having any political mandate .
This is a fundamental reservation .
People who are not subject to public control by voters , however good their intentions may be , cannot carry out surveillance over the heads of national political bodies or the highest national institutions .
The scoreboard , which attempts to draw up a list of macroeconomic indicators at supranational level and , based on this list , to assess the ability of national authorities and their economies to deal with economic imbalances , is a contentious idea .
The current situation in Greece is a good example of the fact that solutions to a situation dictated from outside provoke opposition from the country 's inhabitants , and are one of the causes of escalating social tension .
Mr President , the Greens want economic governance .
Not just to please people , not so that it will make a nice photo , but simply to give the European people instruments , by building on the euro , that will enable them to meet the challenges of the 21st century , in other words to ensure a decent standard of living for everyone , not just for the happy few , and to do it within the planet 's physical limitations - and this is what is new , of course .
In this respect , we support these reports on the budget frameworks and the macroeconomic component of the ' economic governance ' package .
We are satisfied with all the indicators that have been selected , even though we would have liked one of them to have been income inequalities , as they are a very clear sign of both a poorly functioning economy and a poorly functioning society and should therefore act as a warning sign .
However , our agreement on the macroeconomic component is conditional upon maintaining a symmetrical approach , and this is a point I make to the Council .
In other words , we believe that all the Member States should be in the same boat , whether they have a current deficit or a surplus , for example .
There is no reason why we should apply favouritism , as one country 's surplus is another country 's deficit .
As regards the Stability and Growth Pact , we cannot accept an instrument whose only outcome is and will remain austerity , austerity and more austerity , in other words which will result in making only the most vulnerable in our societies pay for the economic crisis .
We wanted balance , not by having less budget discipline but by combining it with disciplined investment .
Our proposal was to make the goals that Europe set itself with the EU 2020 strategy not only binding , but as binding as each other and as binding as the rules on the budget or on deficits .
I am disappointed that a majority could not be found in this Parliament to finally back this strategy and take it more seriously .
We might have agreed to vote in favour of this stability and growth package unchanged had it been accompanied by an ambitious fiscal package , combining a financial transaction tax , an energy tax , a fair tax on transnational corporations and , of course , measures to combat tax fraud , so that we could help the Union 's Member States fund the goals they hope to achieve .
However , there was not the slightest sign of this .
There is absolutely nothing in the pipeline , despite the declarations that Mr Barroso has made again today .
I say this to the right : you chose to form a narrow majority with the eurosceptics , as you were free to do , in order to create a form of economic governance which I can tell you now is unfair and will be ineffective .
We will see what happens , therefore , either in this Parliament when your pact with the eurosceptics has fallen through , or at the polls in France in 2010 and in Germany in 2013 , where I think the voters will agree with us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we , too , call for economic governance in our programme for the European elections in 2009 .
However , the ideas that we on the left have of economic governance differ from those contained in the economic governance package that is currently on the table .
For us , economic governance means laying down clear rules for the economy and setting boundaries .
For example , we feel that this means banning wage dumping and tax dumping , or setting minimum standards to stop competition being distorted on the labour market .
Naturally , for us economic governance also means effective regulation of the financial markets .
None of this is to be found in the economic governance package .
Instead , the current version of the package gives one the impression that it has come about mainly as a result of the pressure exerted by the credit rating agencies on the euro states of southern Europe .
As can already be seen from the examples of Greece , Portugal and Spain , it establishes a radical austerity policy which has consequences that are hard to predict for the future of the European project as a whole .
This radical austerity policy is currently driving citizens of Greece , of Portugal and of Spain , but also those of northern European countries , back into an ill-judged nationalism that we thought had long since been vanquished in Europe .
The much-needed improvements on the Commission 's original proposals that were elaborated in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and voted through there - particularly in Mrs Ferreira 's report - have been largely removed again and toned down under pressure from the Council .
In our view , the removal of the delegated legal acts from the Ferreira report is entirely unacceptable .
As a result , the European Parliament no longer has any influence over how macroeconomic imbalances are dealt with .
This is reserved for the Commission .
It bears little resemblance to democracy , and still less to a social Europe that is equipped to face the future .
In our view , the economic governance package - at least in its present form - is the wrong answer to the crisis with which we are dealing .
That is why we will not be supporting the package in its present form .
Mr President , Commissioner Rehn , ladies and gentlemen , when the euro was introduced it may not have been clear what the loss of monetary policy might involve for a Member State .
Today we are seeing the dramatic consequences in Greece .
The euro area was not and has not become an optimal currency zone .
A country hit by the financial crisis finds it more difficult to recover and could well drag other Member States into the abyss .
From Maastricht onwards , criteria have existed which are designed to prevent dangerous situations , and we have seen how miserably they have failed .
In 1999 Greece did not meet any criteria , and only two years later it was already in the euro .
Portugal , moreover , was the first country to receive warnings in 2002 about its deficit position .
Even in the past , then , there were signs , but now all European citizens could end up paying the consequences .
We are waiting to see , therefore , whether these new measures prove any more useful .
They are probably the last chance before the definitive failure of European economic policy is declared .
( DE ) Mr President , the drama surrounding the European Union is turning into a tragedy .
Tomorrow it will probably come down to every last vote .
As someone directly elected by 500 000 voters in Austria , how can I endorse this package ?
We can now explain the concept of economic governance even to highly eurosceptic people , but not if it has no democratic legitimacy and there are no checks and balances .
How is it supposed to work if , on the one hand , a protectorate is de facto established - Greece - and on the other the taxpayers in better-off nations have their bonds plundered via the European Central Bank and the bad banks ?
How can you explain to people who were adamant that they should not give up the schilling and the mark that we now suddenly need Eurobonds simply because the banks cannot be kept in check - by the way , Mr Hughes , it is very nice that the social democrats have now realised this .
The only way I can imagine that is if we finally give in and say we should have done this , that or the other at the time ; if we admit our mistakes and , as Europe burns around us , finally put forward a vision in which we are able to survive globalisation .
I do not see this in the current package , however , and that is why - quite apart from individual points - it is so difficult for any responsibly-minded person to vote for it .
( LV ) Mr President , it is the case that homes are typically designed by people with higher education , but are typically built by people who barely have secondary education .
What is more , if , during the construction of a home , there happens to be a building worker who is either foolish or dishonest , and does not pour the necessary amount of concrete into the foundations as called for in the design , then the home will be crooked .
In the case of the eurozone , the foundations , the stability foundations , were laid with the Stability and Growth Pact .
Unfortunately it has come to pass that various Member States - perhaps like lazy or careless building workers - did not adhere to the stability pact and created excessively large government debts , budget deficits .
When the world economic crisis came about , this eurozone house began to totter .
If the eurozone were a house , then logically , we should have to set to work again and lay new foundations .
In this case we have a completed economic governance package , which we should approve , in the way of reinforced foundations , so that in the future , when the next storm comes along , the eurozone cannot totter .
In addition , if we want to have some idea of what this tottering looks like , we need only look at events in Greece .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need to avoid the situation where in the future our house could totter once more , and the solution is to approve the economic government package . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to begin my comments with a question to Commissioner Rehn and to Mr Kármán of the Council .
Both have spoken of an outstanding matter in the argument between the parliamentary majority and the Council .
This week I noted that the Council had opposed text in the report by Mrs Ferreira , the rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , concerning the symmetrical approach .
Are you able to tell me that this problem has been resolved , because the Council voted in favour of the rapporteur ?
In actual fact , you would then still have a problem between the majority here and the Council - or did you forget to mention that ?
If so , I should like to know that too , because then I would think that you consider it unimportant .
I should like the two of you to explain this to me at the end of this debate .
Listening to the two conservative groups in this House , and also to the liberals , I get the impression that if we adopt what they have tabled here then the world will be put to rights .
Unfortunately , that is not the case .
The world would subsequently be worse , not better - because they have turned an opportunity to create a more common economic policy in Europe into an austerity package .
That is a bad thing , because it represents a policy that dates from the last century , because it represents an outdated approach which merely takes sanctions regimes from political techniques and not incentives , or smart taxation , or balanced approaches such as have been represented by us .
Various sides of the House have made sufficient pragmatic proposals to allow a balanced package to be tabled .
If Mrs Wortmann-Kool wants to claim that it would be blocked by the greens and the social democrats , that is of course simply nonsense .
Exactly the opposite is true .
To the Members of this House from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - who run after either the Commission or the Council - I would state that we are not here to let things through on the nod , but rather to think for ourselves .
That is what the voters expect of us .
I must therefore point out to you that at present you cannot tell whether a Member State is buying defence hardware , fighter aircraft or investing in its education system of tomorrow .
You are not in a position to make a qualitative assessment of its budgetary policy .
We do , in fact , want to equip you to do so .
We wanted a smarter pact which provides greater opportunity for the Commission to have an influence .
I cannot understand why Commissioner Rehn is not agreeing to this - more opportunities for influence and a modern economic policy which makes reference to the EU2020 objectives in the interests of our citizens .
You have derailed it , and that is a pity .
Consequently , this package is by no means balanced .
We will continue to fight for a better economic package .
We owe this to our electorate .
In truth , the answer has to be ' more Europe ' , not ' less Europe ' .
It has to be the right Europe , however - not the wrong package .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , Europe is in a difficult situation , but it is precisely in times of crisis that the EU is usually able to take bold decisions .
The fact that tomorrow we will be able to take a decision on stricter and clearer rules for economic governance is extremely important , not just for the countries within the euro area .
Everyone will be affected .
Europe 's leaders have hesitated and created uncertainty .
The nervousness has spread .
Their message changed from day to day .
The decision tomorrow will be able to demonstrate that Parliament is able to take difficult decisions in difficult times .
Greece used deceit to enable it to join the euro area .
That is true .
That is precisely why the German and French leaders are now showing clear leadership and taking responsibility for Europe 's future , rather than continuing to talk in unclear , muted tones .
The Stability and Growth Pact must be reformed and the rules tightened up .
Pacta sunt servanda - agreements must be kept - not a new Greece !
In Sweden , we know that the way to stability and growth is through healthy state finances .
Mr Bullman can ask the Swedish members of his group .
It is my hope that the Swedish Social Democrats will be able to support this proposal , particularly as we have managed to get rules through that safeguard the Swedish collective agreements .
Now the last impediment is being removed to enable the Swedish Social Democrats to be instrumental in Sweden becoming a member of the Euro Plus Pact .
If Sweden is to belong to the EU 's inner circle , we cannot simply trudge along behind EU critics from Hungary , the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom .
That is not good company to keep .
Mr President , I find myself in a difficult position in this debate as I believe that strong fiscal rules are necessary for a strong currency and a strong economy .
This , I believe , was the fundamental reason why my country did not join the euro .
Monetary union was always going to be difficult without significant steps towards economic union and it is this latter requirement which means I do not think the UK will ever join the euro .
For my political group here in Parliament , national sovereignty over decisions on economic policy is a fundamental principle .
If all six of these reports and their rules only apply to the euro zone , we would be able to more actively support the Euro Group in their decision to strengthen the principles that underpin their monetary union .
If all the Member States who use the euro want to strengthen and deepen the coordination of their economic policies , then that should be their decision .
The UK and other non-euro-zone countries want to be good neighbours .
However , attempts to bind those of us outside the euro zone with targets and processes designed to harmonise economic policy are unacceptable .
I do not wish to see the euro zone in prolonged difficulty , but the ECR cannot support EU legislation that transfers any further powers away from national governments who are currently outside of that euro zone .
All Member States will hopefully have learned the lessons of the crisis , namely that a balanced budget and strong fiscal discipline are rewarded by lower funding costs in the financial markets , and that honesty in statistical reporting is essential for continued market confidence .
Fundamentally , a strong euro zone and the euro as a global currency are in all of our interests .
New rules need to ensure it is made stronger and more sustainable .
( DE ) Mr President , we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance want to see strong European economic governance .
This means that on the one hand we need strong rules for dealing with imbalances - as set out in Mrs Ferreira 's report - and naturally we also need sanctions for these .
That is why we will be voting in favour of these two reports , just as we will for the report by Mrs Ford , which provides the statistical basis for our economic cooperation .
Likewise , as regards the three reports on the Stability and Growth Pact : a common euro , and in addition we need limits in Europe on deficits and debt .
Such limits have been exceeded in this crisis .
However , it is important to consider how the deficits and debt are reduced .
At present we are seeing time and again in Greece , Portugal and Ireland that , under pressure from the European Commission , in negotiations with the national governments results and packages have been put together in which it is the weakest that suffer , and in which the wealthy - who did very well out of the previous 20 years - are left alone .
This has shaken people 's faith in the process .
That is why we in the Group of the Greens want the EU2020 objectives to be fully binding in the Stability and Growth Pact and in the reports , and also the deficit and debt objectives .
In not accepting this , ladies and gentlemen of the liberal and conservative groups , you have opted out of one of the principles of social cohesion in Europe .
We cannot support that .
We consider it highly regrettable , because we would have liked to have seen a broad pro-European majority here in Parliament .
If these reports do not get a majority tomorrow then we are always prepared to work together constructively to achieve a common solution for economic governance that takes social and economic responsibilities equally seriously .
( EL ) Mr President , for us in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , this economic governance package is not only the wrong response to the crisis ; it also marks the end of Europe as we know it .
Its objective is not economic coordination and fiscal discipline , as it maintains ; it is to impose a permanent austerity memorandum throughout Europe , on all the workers .
The objective of the ' European semester ' and national stability and reform programmes is not convergence ; it is to abolish collective agreements , liberalise redundancies , privatise industry and do away with public pension systems .
These policies do not serve the interests of the people of Europe or their hope of real growth .
On the contrary , they serve the interests of the banks , which have knowingly kept toxic bonds subject to large-scale international speculation on their books , and the interests of large corporations which have found , in the common market , a haven for speculation and tax evasion .
I would mention , by way of example , the German company Hochtief , which manages Athens Airport ; it has not paid a euro since 2001 and owes EUR 500 million in VAT .
There is a great deal of discussion about Greece .
For a year now , the essence of the economic governance package has been applied to my country with disastrous consequences : the recession is getting worse , inflation has gone through the roof , investments have completely dried up , labour rights and collective agreements have basically been repealed , the biggest drop in the cost of labour has been in Europe , unemployment has reached 20 % and debt has increased , fuelling a dangerous vicious circle of recession , debt and more borrowing .
That is why angry Greek workers have taken to the streets and squares , fighting to get austerity policies overturned , to defend their income and to defend their labour and social rights , real growth and a better future for Greece and Europe .
( ES ) Mr President , we aspire to the creation of an economic government area subject to the principles of federalism , albeit adapted to the process of European integration .
We can no longer close our eyes to the situation .
There is an inconsistency in having a common currency but lacking the fiscal and financial instruments needed alongside it .
Specifically , we need : the issuance of common European bonds , the outright rejection of competition between the bonds issued by the different Member States , the establishment of a genuinely European treasury and the harmonisation of fiscal policies to ensure equality , combat tax fraud and help to define a progressive European social policy based on efficient public services .
Some may say these ideas are elementary .
They must nonetheless be repeated time and again because nobody listens to them .
It is for this very reason , that is to say not listening , that we are living in dark times , as anticipated by the poet Bertolt Brecht .
( ES ) Mr President , when I first entered this House 20 years ago , this debate would not have taken place , because this House was a consultative parliament at the time , and many of us have battled over the last 20 years to make it what it is today , a co-legislator parliament .
However , when one co-legislates , one must be responsible .
It is an exercise in responsibility that is now in need .
A part of this House has adopted the old May 1968 slogan , according to which it is realistic to demand the impossible .
Obviously , if one demands the impossible , it ultimately becomes impossible to agree on anything .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has not negotiated with any individual groups . We have negotiated with all the groups .
However , we have only reached agreements with those that were ready to do so .
Mr President , it is my belief that much progress has undeniably been made with the Commission 's proposal , the Council 's position and what is now on the table - which will be put to the vote tomorrow - if they are examined objectively .
This is the real controversy or dilemma that we will have to resolve tomorrow .
At the end of his fruitful existence , Miguel de Cervantes said that there were moments in life when one must choose whether to be a road or an inn .
By being an inn , Cervantes meant lying still , complaining that one is ignored and remaining static .
Being a road means moving forward , overcoming obstacles , knowing that not all has been achieved , that the road is probably not the one we would like to be walking on , but going on walking all the same .
This is what I believe this House should do tomorrow : walk on , resolve the differences we still have with the Council , but look towards a time when the crisis is hitting all Europeans .
It is not responsible at this juncture to say ' I am not happy with this , goodbye , have a nice day ' .
Responsibility means walking .
Therefore , Mr President , I think that in tomorrow 's vote we will convene another meeting with the Council to be held in July .
As another poet used to say - Mr Sosa Wagner has quoted a German poet , I will quote a French one , Paul Valéry - poems are never finished , they are simply abandoned .
We will abandon the end result until July , and I hope that the Hungarian Presidency , which has proved so successful , will also be able to reach an agreement that satisfies everyone .
Thank you , Mr President , and may I point out that this is the first time in 20 years that the clock has erred in my favour , giving me more time .
( MT ) The six reports on economic governance amount to a complex package for the European Union , especially for the eurozone .
Those who put the package together find it hard enough to explain and it is even harder for people on the outside to understand it .
It is understandable that people are perplexed , both by the crisis that is unravelling before them , and by our unclear and timid reaction to it .
This is why the responsibility lies with us to explain our voting choices to our constituents ; to say whether we are for or against each and every one of these reports .
Briefly , the package which the Commission presented us with was intended to cover the three phases of how one should react to the crisis .
Primarily , this package focuses on crisis prevention , mitigation and solution .
The Wortmann-Kool , Feio and Goulard report discuss the use of sanctions at length as the main tools required to prevent a country from reaching dangerous deficit and debt levels , and the scenarios that arise when these countries ignore the various warnings issued to them on their dire fiscal situation .
Originally , the reports squabbled over the severity of the fines that should be imposed , although later on more moderate suggestions were accepted .
The hardest and more creative way of mitigating the crisis , by avoiding macroeconomic imbalances through the use of scoreboards that determine the targets to be reached , was left to the Ferreira report .
Despite technical restrictions and other pressures , this report managed at least to attain a minimum set of desired objectives .
Anyone hoping to find a solution to the current crisis within this package will be doing so in vain .
This package lacks well thought out , sensible ideas by European and foreign economists on how the affected countries can overcome this crisis .
One report that made an effort to build a consensus on securities for the euro was side-lined at the last minute by the Council and has now simply been shelved by the Commission , accompanied by a promise to carry out further studies on the subject .
We have nothing in hand that is concrete ; we have merely ended up with a promise unto a promise .
We must keep in mind that the whole point of this exercise was to help Europe get back to its feet , to pull it out of the mire and to ensure that it can move forward and become globally competitive .
For this reason , we should not oppose the idea that eurozone countries need to reduce their excess fiscal burdens .
We agree that nobody should compete while carrying around such a heavy burden .
However , one cannot accept the imposition of a crash diet that would only serve to further sicken and weaken .
Europe needs to build some economic muscle ; it needs creative schemes in order to strengthen economic growth and create jobs .
It is greatly disappointing that after all these months , not one of the intelligent proposals that were on the cards ended up in this package .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for a long time we believed that the internal market and the introduction of a common currency would automatically result in economic convergence and convergence of the Member States , and that the Maastricht criteria were sufficient to ensure discipline .
Reality has now caught up with us .
The management instruments have proved to be inadequate and in the past they have been grossly transgressed .
A single currency and a single monetary policy are not feasible in the long term unless the rules have teeth in the area of fiscal , budgetary , economic and social policy .
The EU is now trying a new approach .
To speak metaphorically , it has one last shot .
If this last shot fails to hit the target , the damage could be severe .
The EU could find itself in a regressive phase , we could see the return of renationalisation and protectionism , and the first signs of disintegration in the euro area .
The new package attempts to prevent this and to lay a new foundation .
I am in favour of this package , even though I consider it rather half-hearted in view of the problems that I have just outlined .
There is a risk that the European semester will turn out to be a centralist , bureaucratic exercise .
The pact for the euro may possibly be toothless .
What we need are binding recommendations from the Commission .
What we need are automatic initiatives and sanctions which the Council can only stop by means of reversed qualified majority voting .
This is undoubtedly necessary if the disgraceful , opaque wrangles by Council members in back rooms are finally to be brought to an end .
What we urgently need is a clear resolution mechanism for the financial sector so that it can work again .
( NL ) Mr President , it has become clear that a monetary union requires a budgetary union , as well as compliance with the rules .
That is the lesson to be learned from the euro crisis .
I find the package we agreed last Wednesday to be very well balanced and I therefore have the honour to inform you , Commissioner , that the Belgian delegation within the European Conservatives and Reformists will be endorsing this package .
I do have some points of criticism , however .
On the whole , I think that Eurobonds are not a miracle solution .
Yesterday , Gideon Rachman wrote in the Financial Times that you cannot cure alcohol poisoning with a bottle of vodka .
I have had theological debates on this issue with Mrs Goulard .
We could not agree , but I admire her as an opponent .
I also think that the theory of economic imbalances is rather vague and unclear .
It is not true that Germany has a trade surplus because Portugal has a trade deficit .
That really would read like ' EU economics for dummies ' .
Therefore , Mr President , we have before us the best text achievable .
I will vote in favour of it and I think that , at this moment and in this period of crisis in the euro area , we and this Parliament are being called upon to deliver and that is what I would like to do .
( EL ) Mr President , the package of economic governance measures creates an strong tool for imposing capitalist restructurings in a uniform manner and a uniform strategy in all the Member States , in order to strengthen the competitiveness , profitability and power of capital .
This is a permanent memorandum for the working classes in all the Member States of the European Union .
The vulgar propaganda about Greece 's , Ireland 's , Portugal 's and other countries ' debts and deficits is designed to blame the rights acquired by the working classes and to conceal the real culprit , which is capitalism and its monopolies .
The ideological terrorism of the bourgeois class being promoted is that the only way out is to slaughter the workers so as to keep the profitability of capital intact .
Between 1985 and 2011 alone , apart from the immeasurable wealth appropriated by capital from exploiting the working class in Greece , monopoly capital at home and abroad plundered EUR 628 billion in interest and repayments , either as lender or borrower .
The working class owes nothing to those who have robbed them of what they earned by the sweat of their brow .
On the contrary , they are owed all the wealth plundered by capital .
The message sent out by the Greek Communist Party from the rock of the Acropolis echoes more topically than ever today : ' Nations of Europe arise . Overturn the capitalist barbarity and the sovereignty of the monopolies . '
( DE ) Mr President , the more we guarantee in the future European stabilisation mechanism , the more dependent the sound states become on the overindebted periphery of the EU .
Centralisation and a single currency , which could never be a hard currency in the long term , have contributed to the current problems , yet a continuation along this wrong path is precisely what is now being proposed to us as a solution to rescue us .
Economically strong and weak economies are first arbitrarily thrown together in the same pot .
Then we make recourse to various rescue measures - all in vain - and now the whole thing is to culminate in European economic governance .
In my opinion , if overindebted economies want to remain in the euro area then they must be subjected to strict budgetary control instead .
The sort of centralisation which takes the form of Brussels exerting budgetary authority over all the Member States represents improper intervention in the sovereignty of the Member States , however , and would moreover reduce the sound countries of Europe to mere playthings of EU bureaucracy .
In my opinion , we should be bolting the door against Brussels ' creeping desire for ever more centralisation .
Mr President , our task and responsibility here is to ensure that both Member States and the Union as a whole emerge stronger from the crisis , and the economic governance package takes us in this direction .
The package - politically unthinkable prior to the crisis and certainly not yet perfect - is indeed a major step forward .
It is obvious , however , that to get an agreement is one thing - and it is our duty here - but to see its practical implementation and then to benefit from new rules will be yet another challenge .
This reform , introducing a greater amount of automaticity over political bargaining and discretion , will have to pass the test of real life and this will require a strong political will and an attitude of accountability .
It is unclear how long it will take before all the institutional arrangements are in place and new rules start bearing their fruit .
This uncertainty creates risks and we must not create additional space for these risks .
It also remains unclear how the interplay between the European Semester and the new economic governance infrastructure will function , and I also have concerns about the permanent European Stability Mechanism emerging as an intergovernmental tool .
I hope that our agreement on the six-pack will pave the way for these instruments to be eventually converted into the Community-based ones .
To conclude , let me say that the economic governance package gives us a chance that the winner / loser attitude will disappear from our European reality and that Europe will not become a zero sum game .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our fellow citizens are questioning the merits of austerity policies that are reducing their public services and squeezing their social security .
Wherever these policies are rife , they are not succeeding in reducing public debt and bringing down unemployment .
The contents of this ' governance ' package - and I call them ' contents ' deliberately - that we are discussing today are so ridiculous that even the economists are stunned , because they will prevent budgetary policy from adjusting to economic cycles .
During the trialogue , the Commission representatives admitted to us themselves that they have not used any theoretical or econometric model as a basis for making sound predictions and recommendations .
They admit that they are working on a purely intuitive basis .
In the light of this , it is difficult to understand why the conservative , liberal and eurosceptic Members of this House have blindly attempted to toughen up the text proposed by the Commission .
They are even less in a position to preach to us , considering that the governments led by friends of theirs have created these deficits through tax reductions that are as unfair as they are ineffective : is that not right , Mr Gauzès ?
They make grand statements about the Europe 2020 strategy , but they refuse to allow spending to prepare for the future , such as spending on investment , to be excluded from the calculation of the deficits .
Yes , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , that is the crux of the debate as far as we are concerned !
Let us reduce the deficits , yes , for example by going back on the tax gifts that have benefited the State 's creditors above all , but let us do it without sacrificing investment , training and jobs , because today 's investments are tomorrow 's jobs and the tax income that will follow , and this will allow us to reduce our deficits .
This is the theorem that should appear on the frontispiece of the ' governance ' package .
My fellow conservative and liberal Members , some of you want to punish automatically States that are heretics to your dogma to the tune of billions of euros .
They also want to punish countries that will not lower wages in order to regain their external balance .
They believe that the deficits are primarily the product of bad intentions on the part of those States , as though the neoliberal model that you never question had not just been through its worst crisis since 1929 , and as if it were not already leading to pressure on the buying power of ordinary people and causing a massive contraction in tax income : two problems that were at the root of the rise in private and public indebtedness in the first place .
When it comes to the votes , socialists and democrats will send out a clear signal against this austerity package , which can only heighten the indignation that is rising throughout Europe .
This clear signal is aimed at all workers in Europe and especially at our fellow citizens in France and Germany as they approach elections that will have a decisive impact on Europe 's future .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for the great job they have done , especially my colleagues and friends Sylvie Goulard and Carl Haglund .
Our vote on the economic governance package could be one of those historical turning points for this Parliament .
Not only through its direct consequences , but also by the moral stand that we show our citizens .
It is time for politics and governments to take a more robust stand on what is wrong and what is right in the values that we want to defend , including in the economic field .
Do we want governments that lie about their budgets or their deficits ?
We do not , because even though you can deny reality for a while , it always strikes back in the end .
Moreover , do we want governments that comply with the Stability and Growth Pact ?
I think we do .
Thus , managing sanctions is necessary .
We know that if Member States have to sanction each other , nothing will happen .
That is why I fully support the reversed qualified majority , also in the name of my party , the Catalan Liberal coalition , which is now running the Government of Catalonia and also the government of the city of Barcelona .
Automaticity is much needed if we want to be sure that red lines are not freely trespassed .
Furthermore , there is the call for the Commission to make a proposal on euro securities .
I would like to publicly support this as a proposal that takes into account the feature of fiscal discipline .
( NL ) Mr President , the Greek crisis is one of the factors forming the basis of this debate .
Lending more money to the Greeks and demanding they implement more cuts is unwise .
The Greeks will never be able to repay the loans and an economy which is as good as dead cannot make cuts .
You cannot ask a skeleton to tighten its belt .
What do we need , then ?
First of all , those in this House who brought Greece into the euro area should confess their guilt , as should the Belgian Finance Minister , Mr Reynders .
Obviously , this should never have been allowed to happen .
Secondly , part of the Greek debt must be written off and , in order to ensure that the residual debt is indeed repaid , a multi-year recovery plan for the Greek economy should be drawn up .
Thirdly , the Stability and Growth Pact should include automatic sanctions against those who break the terms of euro membership , as we should never again allow ourselves to slide into this misery .
On this point , I think that the Wortmann-Kool report could have been more stringent .
Mr President , I support the ' six-pack ' , but because of this point I will abstain from voting on the Wortmann-Kool report .
( PT ) Mr President , this legislative package is not an answer to the severe economic and social problems being experienced in many countries , which are affecting workers and people in general .
They originate basically in increasingly neoliberal EU policies that concentrate financial and political power in the hands of the few .
In expanding the demands of the Stability and Growth Pact and making penalties tougher , the outcome of the negotiations reveals the political consensus that exists between the three institutions on the course and main alignments of the European Union .
It forms part of an unprecedented attack on the rights of the national parliaments , which are constrained by the EU 's neoliberal guidelines for their countries ' budgets , the aim being to impose austerity measures on workers and people , privatisations and public investment cuts in essential sectors and services .
Since the workers ' struggles in Greece , Ireland and Portugal have been in vain , as we know , it is time to do a U-turn and to stop insisting on benefiting only economic and financial business groups , above all in the major European powers .
What these legislative documents propose is to perpetuate these intervention measures , which subjugate peoples and countries and transform them into veritable protectorates or colonies .
They propose going further down a path that can only lead to economic and social disaster and the actual implosion of the European Union .
We are therefore against them .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , many comments have already been made on the different reports that make up this governance package .
What are the most important points , at this stage , to help us appraise the work that has been done ?
The fact that we have this package today , which is the result of negotiations between the Council and Parliament , already constitutes considerable progress .
It fills an obvious gap in the development of the euro , and sadly it took the debt crisis to prompt us to do this .
In this respect , we should stress the commendable work done by the Hungarian Presidency and the quality of the negotiators from this Parliament .
I would also like to emphasise the results that Parliament obtained in the discussions with the Council , as the latter demonstrated genuine openness .
We must remember how the situation used to be and measure the improvements objectively .
Having said this , are these provisions satisfactory , and are they enough ?
There is always room for improvement , of course , but this package already provides real solutions to strengthen the euro area and to create the concerted economic approach that is needed .
Can we seriously argue , as the opponents of this package do , that we can build growth on top of a mountain of debt that is continuously put off further and further into the future ?
To those who blame us for supporting a governance package that is not based on any theoretical or econometric model , I will simply say this : did the models you are talking about foresee or prevent the crisis we are going through and that has not ended yet ; or did they lead , instead , to high-risk behaviours under the cover of mathematical truth ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow Parliament will have to make its decision , and I hope it will send out a signal loud and clear , both to our citizens , to restore their confidence in Europe , and to the markets , to stabilise our currency .
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances - Implementation of excessive deficit procedure - Requirements for budgetary frameworks of Member States - Budgetary surveillance in euro area - Surveillance of budgetary positions and surveillance and coordination of economic policies - Enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in euro area ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the debate on prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances ; excessive deficit procedure ; requirements for budgetary frameworks of Member States ; budgetary surveillance in the euro area ; surveillance of budgetary positions and surveillance and coordination of economic policies ; and enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our citizens want a strong and effective European Union .
Sluggishness , inadequacy and a purely intergovernmental vision are worsening the impact of the crisis and weakening the credibility of the European project .
We are not facing problems that are purely national , or a crisis that is only economic ; we are facing a political crisis that requires a swift , full , Europeanist response .
The basic concepts of ' economy ' and ' union ' in the Economic and Monetary Union must be strengthened .
The proposal presented today on economic governance must be considerably improved if we are going to achieve that .
We are in favour of creating national budgetary frameworks that guarantee transparency , economic coordination and verification of compliance with European commitments .
We believe it is necessary to correct macroeconomic imbalances and move toward convergence , and we find that the Ferreira report makes particular progress in that area .
However , the proposals to reform the Stability and Growth Pact are incomplete : they confuse stability with adjustment , and they entrust growth policies to the market and the national sphere .
Avoiding Europe 's commitment to investment and employment is not acceptable .
We will not be complicit in this attempt to make Europe turn its back on its citizens and its own interests ; we are not resigned to impassively pondering the way in which our problems are getting worse ; and we do not accept double standards .
We need unanimity to provide resources and qualified majority decisions to avoid penalties .
We must pledge our commitment to Europe and do it quickly .
The European Parliament should work hard to make an ambitious , Europeanist response worthy of our citizens .
We need to move forwards , not backwards like crabs .
Europe must not hide when it is needed most .
Mr President , although the United Kingdom is not a member of the euro zone - and I hope it never will be - we have a vested interest in its success .
I wish the euro zone well and I regret that I am unable to support the proposals on economic governance we are debating tonight .
The proposals before us grant the Commission sweeping new powers .
Had these powers been limited to euro zone countries alone , I would not have objected , but instead we see the Commission and many Members in this Parliament - including Ms Wortmann-Kool , for whom I have the utmost respect - using the crisis in the euro zone as an excuse to extend the power of the EU into the economic governance of the United Kingdom and other countries who do not use the euro .
I was not elected to grant the EU more powers over the way the United Kingdom governs its affairs and I shall therefore vote against these proposals .
( DE ) Mr President , the debate reflects the unresolved issues of economic policy in Europe .
Whilst we have a central monetary policy , there is local responsibility for budgetary and finance policies .
The attempts by some Greek Members to shift the responsibility for Greece 's internal political competence onto Europe , or to third parties , to capitalist banks , or to whomever , can only be a mistake .
( Heckling )
It was the Greek communists .
Fortunately , the euro is stable both internally and externally .
What we are dealing with is not a crisis of the euro , but rather a sovereign debt crisis .
That is where we must start .
It is pointless - even the state cannot live beyond its means indefinitely .
It is pointless adding further debt to existing debts without accepting the consequences of necessary reforms .
That is why I say it is high time that we acted .
Parliament has been calling for measures for a long time .
The Commission has now proposed that the Stability and Growth Pact be tightened up .
The Hungarian Presidency has negotiated well , as has our side .
I actually think it a pity , Mr Bullmann - for on many aspects of regulation of the financial markets we are very much in agreement - that the socialists still want to distinguish between good and bad debt .
That is the wrong way to go .
When we draw up the balance sheets to see which countries of Europe have got into difficulties there is no need to defame anyone ; it is easy to see .
There were socialist governments everywhere that these budgetary and financial problems have arisen .
Hungary , Latvia , Romania , outside the euro area , Ireland , Spain , Portugal , the United Kingdom and Greece too , apart from a break of four years , when our lot were in .
In other words , your economic model does not work .
( Heckling )
Really , Mr Bütikofer , you should know better by now .
We cannot absolve the Greeks of responsibility here and I will say quite frankly that the Greeks were not the first to contravene the Stability and Growth Pact ; rather it was the two big ones , Germany and France .
We also objected to that and changed it .
You were in the government at the time , Mr Bütikofer .
You dug the grave - it was your party that dug the grave of the Stability and Growth Pact , not the Greeks .
Now , however , it is for the Greeks to ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( The speaker agreed to take two blue-card questions under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Langen , I just want to make sure that you are familiar with our ideas .
I am therefore asking you whether you are aware of what we proposed to your colleague , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , which was firstly that we strengthen the pact by including closer monitoring of selected objectives proposed by Mr Rehn from the EU2020 package , such as research and development and the fight against poverty .
This would also include investment in modernising energy supply systems .
( FR ) Mr President , I have two points .
First , Greece : let us not try to re-write history .
This was a right-wing government which for two terms of office disguised the figures with the help of Goldman Sachs Bank .
Today , a left-wing government is trying to get things back into shape .
Is it the people who should be paying for the mistakes made on the advice of banking corporations ?
Second example : in my country , Belgium , under a government with left-wing participation led by our fellow Member Mr Dehaene , in 12 years we reduced our debt from 130 % of GDP to 80 % .
Mistakes by the banking community , and by Fortis in particular , meant that we had to help out the banks in order to prevent the system ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , I am very familiar with the proposals made by Mr Bullmann and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
The only problem with them was that they primarily want more money .
The problem cannot be solved by throwing more money at it .
As Mr Tarabella has just confirmed , there are opportunities for debt reduction even with socialist involvement .
I want to spell it out that the reforms that have taken place in Greece have done nothing to result in the large amount of private Greek wealth genuinely sharing the burden of the costs of the state .
On the contrary : since 1 January EUR 59 billion has been withdrawn from Greek bank deposits by Greek citizens , and since 1 January EUR 12 billion of Greek government bonds have been sold .
I am demanding that the many wealthy parties in Greece participate actively , and this must be regulated by policy .
If they can accept responsibility , then they will be able to benefit from our solidarity .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by paying tribute to all those who have been working hard on this package of late , but I also support the previous speakers from my group .
To us , this package is not sufficient and it is not balanced .
This is not so much a matter of technical detail , but of essence : what are we putting the emphasis upon ?
What should be the objectives for a more integrated economic policy ?
It is therefore not true that we do not want European economic governance , but we do need to ask ourselves how we should define it , what the essence of European economic governance is .
Obviously , the current crisis has made it clear that a monetary union also requires economic cooperation .
It seems that some sort of design error has crept into our financial blueprint and we need to rectify that .
For us , this is about much more than just agreeing to cuts and achieving budgetary objectives .
Yes , Mr Langen and ladies and gentlemen , we are indeed in favour of sound public finances , but what is key for us is how we can all move forward , how we can crawl out of this morass .
How we can prepare for the future and , therefore , how we can create growth and employment through a common economic policy .
In other words , by integrating an ambitious investment strategy into the system , by forging a link with the 2020 objectives , or to put it another way , by making joint arrangements , for example , to improve our education system , fight poverty and become more competitive and take on the competition from third countries through investment in research and development .
By the way , it amazes me that some members , as was the case with Mr Verhofstadt just yesterday , are advocating an investment strategy while being content with this package .
For me , personally , that is not consistent .
We therefore consider the ' six-pack ' to be a missed opportunity to put genuine economic governance in place .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in a very deep crisis , and not only one from which we have to ensure that we extricate ourselves , but also one which we must prevent ourselves from ever landing in again .
It is for that very reason that we need a strong legislative framework and for that very reason that we , as a co-legislator , as Parliament , also have to shoulder our responsibilities .
After all , we are the generation that is currently deciding the future of our children .
We , in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have the courage to push through such a set of rules .
We must now have the courage to decide what action is needed .
We must also have the courage to choose to push such decisions through , to ensure they are complied with , even if that means we have to swim against the tide .
We understand the people who are taking to the streets to protest and , what is more , what we are doing is giving a precise structural answer to those people 's concerns : good jobs , sustainable growth and room in the future for an adequate social policy .
If we want to remain a relevant player in a globalised economy , then we have to ensure greater coordination between economic and budgetary policies , as well as greater coordination between the economic policy and the policy on the competitiveness of Member States .
To that end , we obviously need investment in the economy but what we need , first of all , is to ensure that no one is allowed the liberty to depart from agreed rules without a valid reason , because that means dragging others into the quagmire as well .
The package that eventually came out of the negotiations provides a strong answer to those requirements , and it also provides an answer to the mistakes of the past .
The only thing is - and this is prompted by our behaviour in the past - that we must further strengthen the preventive aspect of the Stability Pact , because if a Member State goes down the wrong road , then we cannot allow it to become subject to political bargaining in the Council , which is ultimately what the response from Europe will be .
I therefore hope that we here will be casting a vote in favour , that we will support this package , but also that we will give ourselves the opportunity to start a final round of negotiations with the Council in order to strengthen this point further .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we are witnessing a paradox .
The package that should correct and prevent imbalances and asymmetries is based on an imbalance and a lack of symmetry .
It is like a body that stands on two legs , but one is much longer and more developed than the other .
The leg that controls fiscal policy is muscular and articulated , while the one that controls development policy , which should provide impetus and long-term drive , appears spindly and lacking in strength .
I think that this inharmonious result in the final structure of the package is down to a difference of opinion about the origins and nature of the crisis .
The difference between those who believe that disorder and imbalances in public finances are at the root of the crisis and those who think that the underlying problem has to do instead with the lack of rules and transparency in the markets , economic and trade imbalances and social inequality .
We risk confusing cause and effect .
We all want public finances to be controlled responsibly , but the goal of reducing debt is not sufficient to kick-start growth and competitiveness .
The main thrust of these measures lies in procedures and sanctions .
Far less emphasis - too little emphasis - has been placed on investment and sustainable growth strategy , which Europe should promote and implement .
We know that our actions can lead to widely differing results , even without our intending it , and can even have the opposite effect to the one we are seeking to achieve .
This is the heterogenesis of purpose .
I fear that this problem lies at the heart of this package .
( ES ) Mr President , we are clearly in a serious situation that calls for all of us to be responsible .
All of us , including the Council .
The difference that separates us today from the Council is the issue of reverse qualified majority voting .
We all know that the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) has not worked because the Member States have decided not to punish each other for any violation of budgetary discipline .
Perhaps this is because they have read in the Gospel the quote that says , ' Let he who is without sin cast the first stone ' .
What this Parliament wants - and this is what distinguishes it from the Council - is to put an end to this joyous camaraderie between governments , and replace a biased referee with an impartial one .
The package is good and deserves to be voted through .
When times are hardest , no one would ever consider saying that we have to spend more .
What we are now doing is restoring budgetary discipline .
However , when something is good it is not necessarily enough .
The speeches we have heard today have shown several things .
We all knew that the eurozone was not an optimum currency area .
Everyone thought that the current institutional framework - a centralised monetary policy , a Stability and Growth Pact , and the coordination of the other economic policies - would enable the differences between Member States to be overcome , or at least reduced .
That has not been the case .
In the good times , their differences only increased ; in the bad times , the pillars on which the monetary union was established were left in ruins .
The ' no-bailout ' principle , the ' no-default ' principle , and now the ' no-exit ' principle could also be out the window .
We now find ourselves in Lenin 's ' What is to be done ? ' situation .
The only solution is to move forward on the issue of political union .
I welcome the issue of Eurobonds .
It is a positive step in that direction , but more needs to be done .
If establishing a political union requires reforming the Treaties by convening a convention , so be it .
There is a Greek proverb that says , ' rules are made for man , and not man for rules ' .
It is not a question of continuing trialogues until three o 'clock in the morning or holding ministerial meetings at six o 'clock in the morning .
From now on let us think about what can be done to remedy this situation .
The first step , however , is to vote in favour of this package , which is a good step in the right direction .
Otherwise we will be making a futile effort and , as Mr Ortega y Gasset was just saying , futile effort leads to melancholy and - in politics - to opposition .
It leads to melancholy and also to speaking for longer than the time one is allocated , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , through the President 's indulgence .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate offers the opportunity to address the issue of a new agreement on governance in the European Union , to send a strong and unified message , to restore solidarity to the EU and to dispel speculation .
It is a fact that in years gone by we have weakened the Stability and Growth Pact .
An equally incontrovertible fact is that this was a mistake and we are paying the consequences .
We must go back to rules of fiscal discipline , and this is the real issue , the real debate that we must have among ourselves .
Procedures should be automatic so that we do not have the same experiences that we had with the old Stability and Growth Pact .
I think that there is only one way to get out of the crisis ; there are no shortcuts .
The answer lies in national policies , in carrying out planned and agreed commitments .
Solidarity between EU Member States must be accompanied by a sense of responsibility and must respect rules that Member States cannot and must not knowingly violate .
Clearly in all this we cannot forget the importance of growth , which brings in internal revenue , and structural reforms to get struggling countries back on their feet .
Structural reforms aimed at boosting the competitiveness of economies and the potential for growth must be the priority on the political agenda .
I disagree with those who argue that the new Stability and Growth Pact will prevent States from developing .
Rather , it will prompt them to clear out the dead wood , to modernise , to undertake those structural reforms that are the trigger for kick-starting the economy .
Thanks to these and strict adherence to the rules established by the new Stability and Growth Pact , I am sure that the EU will gain in strength and will be able to face new challenges without assistance policies and , worse still , outdated slogans that lead nowhere and do only damage , especially among the weakest members of society .
( FR ) Mr President , the more Parliament boasts of the wonderful progress made on economic governance , the more I want to call on my fellow Members to show some humility , because we are teetering on the edge of the abyss .
There are two things to which we need to open our eyes .
The first is that the European Parliament has fallen silent during the Greek crisis .
We are usually so quick to react to all sorts of events all over the world , with one resolution after another , and yet this fundamental crisis seems to have left us speechless .
I deplore the fact that we have been incapable of sending a strong , simple , practical message to the Greek people , to the Member State governments and to Europe 's citizens .
The second item relates to the scope of this package .
In voting for these six directives and / or regulations , as I hope we will , we will certainly be taking the euro area a step further , and I mean a step , nothing more , towards the kind of discipline that has been so lacking , and its value will be proven in the future .
However , we only need to look at the heated discussions around the reversed qualified majority voting system to see how far we still have to go , when it is rules and automatic sanctions we should be talking about .
Some people still see the reversed qualified majority system as something to be scared of .
However , we must remain firm on this principle .
From a strictly political point of view , I am disappointed that the left-wing Members continue to reject the principles of good budget management , against all the evidence .
Deficits and sustainable growth cannot go hand in hand .
States do need to manage their budgets according to good housekeeping rules , not by revitalisation through public expenditure , which is a short-term sweetener but never a lasting solution .
As we approach these next few crucial weeks , our task is now to build new economic union ...
( The President cut off Mrs Lulling )
( Mrs Lulling agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Mr President , since I have no speaking time left , I would ask Mrs Lulling the following question : would you be prepared , Mrs Lulling , to tell Parliament on my behalf that I did not mean all the Greek Members just now , but only the two communist Members who spoke immediately before me , Mr Chountis and Mr Toussas ?

Would you be prepared to confirm this to Parliament ?
( DE ) Mr President , I am of course happy to say that and to confirm that .
However , I should also like to say this : we are also addressing the Greeks .
In Greece there are only 10 tax exiles who say that they earn more than EUR 1 million per year .
I am addressing them too , just as Mr Langen addressed the communists .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , time is running out .
Therefore , I would like to call for an end to the soapbox speeches , the finger-pointing and the party political game-playing , regardless of where these things are taking place .
We need to do the job properly and to respond to the crisis on a step-by-step basis .
What are the causes of the crisis ?
We have constantly been emphasising the fact that the causes include a failure to comply with the rules , the blocking of sanctions and the lack of progress on taking the monetary union to the next stage .
With our plans for economic governance , we are now calling for the Stability and Growth Pact to be strengthened , both in terms of preventive and corrective measures , for a majority in favour of the implementation of sanctions and for the Commission to have the right to intervene , when necessary , so that the citizens of Europe can rely on the rules being followed .
My second point is that we want the monetary union to be taken to the next stage .
This means establishing the economic union and not losing sight of the goal of political union .
I have to say that I am disappointed by the results of the trialogue .
It is not functioning properly at the moment .
However , the fact that we do not have the Council 's agreement in the dialogue on economic policy and that the European Parliament and the two sides of industry are involved in this is reducing our ability to become more integrated .
We want to increase our levels of integration .
Because the Council is not able to address the current imbalance in our society and to give Parliament the opportunity of making the ministers from the Member States directly accountable to us , the results of the trialogue are being weakened .
We stand by these results .
We want to resolve the open issues and bring about integration .
If we allow our position to be weakened because of the weakness of the Council , we have not learned any lessons from the crisis .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Karas a question .
We are in the midst of a crisis in the single currency .
We have discovered that we have fundamental problems , such as the lack of a common fiscal and economic policy .
These findings by the economists and the academics are quite surprising to me .
Do you really believe , Mr Karas , that no one was aware before the introduction of the single currency of the truism that common governance and political union are also needed ?
Perhaps no one was quite brave or honest enough to tell the citizens of Europe this .
( DE ) Mr President , of course , everyone knew that and they said so .
They said that monetary union is a political project , that the integration involved in monetary union is irreversible and that monetary union must be followed by the next steps towards integration .
We have been heavily committed to this for years .
Political groups like yours have stirred up feelings against the European Union , have said very little about the importance of the currency and the opportunity , the political will ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , I am going to vote tomorrow on the legislative package on European economic governance .
I would also like to thank in particular the rapporteurs , the Hungarian Presidency and the Commission for their really exceptional efforts , culminating in the clarification of this legislative package .
This European economic governance package must be viewed in connection with the other legislative package on the financial sector , including Europe 's financial supervision structure , which has already been adopted .
I firmly believe that effective implementation of this legislation will ensure that no other Member State will ever again be exposed when faced with a future crisis .
We will be able to prevent and adjust fiscal and economic imbalances , which is one of the best guarantees of economic growth and jobs .
However , I must express my concern that European institutions are unwilling to acknowledge the economic reality with which we are currently faced .
By this I mean that a Member State that has a debt which it can no longer pay cannot receive assistance , thereby adding a new debt to the existing one , with higher costs as well .
We have learnt from experience and common sense that the solution lies in the debtor country putting its house in order , with the creditors realising that the debt to be paid needs to be arranged to match the relevant country 's real ability to pay .
If we are not going to proceed in this manner , far from saving time , we will waste time and the problem will get worse .
( PL ) Mr President , after listening attentively to today 's debate , I should like to make a few comments , if I may .
Firstly , reference has been made very frequently in this Chamber to stimulation of the economy by means of additional budgetary expenditure .
I think that the Members concerned are forgetting that there are countries in the European Union - and not just one or two , and not only Greece - which have domestic debt of over 100 % , the sole cause of which is stimulation of the economy .
As a result , we have achieved a certain level of economic growth , albeit somewhat artificial growth , but we have been left with the bills to pay , and we have to pay them now .
There was talk of restrictive solutions in respect of limiting the deficit .
Yet the proposed solutions state that each country is to reduce debt to 60 % within 20 years .
If 20 years to halve debt is the long-term perspective , what is the short-term perspective ?
I cannot imagine a longer-term perspective in this situation .
Is it possible to abandon penalties , or is the penalty system a restrictive system ?
Fifteen years ago , when I was still a student , I learnt about the convergence criteria , and their mandatory nature .
Yet they were only mandatory criteria on paper .
If they were mandatory for anyone , it was only for those who aspired to join the euro area , and they were not mandatory for anyone in the euro area .
In view of the above , such a system cannot be successfully introduced without penalties , and without restrictive penalties , as some have said .
These sanctions existed on paper , but , as we remember and as we know , there have been no real sanctions to date .
My last comment relates to the fact that members of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have said that we should implement the 2020 strategy , and not merely cut spending .
Yet these very documents talk about a European semester , among other things .
They also introduce a new procedure for excessive imbalances .
One of the features of this instrument is that it gives the European Commission influence over whether the Member States are implementing the 2020 strategy or not , and so it is worth telling the truth .
I would urge you to adopt this package , for a lack of agreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament on this issue will ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , compromise is wise .
Certainly the Parliament in its negotiations has gone more than halfway towards a compromise , but I think we have reached the limit .
Postponing decision-making on the package does not solve the problem .
The problem will not go away .
The same problems will face us again and will threaten the whole future of the euro and the EU if we do not have better coordination and more Community method .
In the long run the EU is an economic union .
We need to get to the core reasons for the problems .
We are closer with this package , but we are still not close enough .
I think that the reverse qualified majority is one of the issues at the core of the problem .
This is not a time for populism and short-sighted policy-making , which , in my view , the Council has been doing to some extent sometimes .
The Council , like Parliament , is responsible for Europeans .
I hope that the Council , with the Commission and Parliament , will share their responsibility and take the necessary steps on this economic governance package and future actions .
If the pieces are not right and not in order , plans for the future and the EU2020 are only futile and nice words , on which basis we really cannot build the future .
( DE ) Mr President , the European economic governance package sends out a clear signal that we must avoid debt crises wherever possible in future .
We must take effective measures to prevent the euro from being destabilised .
That is the basic message of this excellent report produced by Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
In order to achieve this , we need greater political coordination between the Member States and strong supervision at an EU level .
This supervision is an essential element of the Europe 2020 strategy .
We must finally make consistent use of the Stability and Growth Pact , which forms the basis for the strong euro , in order to show the Member States with high budget deficits where the limits are .
This is what the citizens of Europe are justifiably calling for and not only in the countries which are supposed to be showing solidarity in the form of constantly growing rescue packages .
We must not allow any more excuses or uneasy compromises to be made when the Member States disclose their convergence programmes and budget policies to one another .
The citizens will only be prepared to accept painful reforms if they are shown a clear picture of the situation , so that they can give their support to the necessary measures .
In contrast to the widely held belief in nationalism , we do not need less Europe , but more .
For example , we should strengthen our Community method which is based on the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Commission must and will accept its responsibilities , identify trends in financial and economic policy at an early stage and ensure that the dialogue between the financial institutions and the policymakers is much more effective than it has been .
Mr President , the measures we are discussing here this evening are to be welcomed .
I think they show that the European Union has the capacity , the will and the intelligence to take measures arising out of the lessons we have learned from the economic crisis .
And , particularly , I think that some have said that this is a transfer of powers from Member States to the European Union .
This is the old hoary chestnut that is brought forward to object to every proposal .
If you are part of the European Union it has to have some powers , and certainly we are sending out a message to the markets and the citizens that we can deal with crucial issues when they occur .
Certainly , I agree completely with what we are doing and I also would love to see us adopting automatic , binding sanctions and also the reverse qualified majority voting system .
That would ensure that we would stay out of crisis in the future .
Prevention is better than cure and this is all about prevention .
Learning from what we have learned already .
( FR ) Mr President , we need to establish economic governance in order to get the European Union out of this continuing crisis .
We need to coordinate our policies ; we need to be transparent in how we manage our national budgets and , above all , we need to bring down our deficits .
However , do you really think you are on the right track ?
The European right-wing is getting ready simply to abolish the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It refuses to implement the financial transaction tax and Eurobonds and its eyes are glued on the rating agencies , which did not see the subprime crisis coming , which shows just how reliable they are .
Let us be clear about this : we are in a crisis that was brought about by neoliberalism and by the blind trust that governments and the EU placed in deregulated markets .
And how do we intend to get out of it ?
Through more neoliberalism and austerity .
We need growth ; we need to boost demand , and it is not by bringing our fellow citizens to their knees that we will achieve this .
You are on the wrong track .
( EL ) Mr President , as a Greek , I wish to thank all my fellow members who spoke positively about Greece and to stress that I think that the survival of a State transcends party political divisions and positions .
We are talking about a Europe of the future .
We have still not understood and we are still trying to understand the Europe of the past , to understand how we got where we are today .
I am sorry to say that some people have demonstrated senseless greed , especially in Greece ; however , many others have demonstrated culpable greed .
We say that private investment is the solution to the problem .
The private investors have gone elsewhere .
We tend to forget that .
They have gone to other areas of the planet .
There is no competitiveness in Europe ; Europe is getting old ; it is no longer competitive and has nothing to offer .
What we .....
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Mr President , I am grateful for the hard work of the rapporteurs , advisors , the Hungarian Presidency and everyone who made it possible for us to have the ' six-pack ' of economic governance here in this form today .
It would be good to think that this package is no longer necessary and Europe 's economic problems will be solved overnight .
Unfortunately , this is not the case .
Europe is not over the crisis yet , and if we do not act responsibly , we will have to face further crises in the future .
I agree with those responsible thinkers who say that we have to adopt a more stringent budget and have to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact .
We have to say it out loud that the European Union has been taking an overly relaxed approach so far , it did not have mechanisms to react to crisis situations , and was therefore unable to respond adequately to the serious consequences of the crisis which caused economic , financial and social disturbances .
We cannot let this happen again , and at the same time we have to learn from the failures of the past .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteur , good economic governance in Europe is necessary ; of course it is .
However , if we vote for these six texts , we will be leaving Member States no freedom to follow investment policies for stimulating growth .
At a time when citizens are increasingly losing faith in the EU , when Greece is on its knees and the rating agencies are dictating to States , Parliament should stop this dogmatic insistence on austerity at all costs .
The Union now wants to respond to a crisis of the neoliberal model with neoliberal formulas and systematic expenditure cuts , especially in social security , even though this expenditure is known to be a defence against economic crises .
Without adding the elements advocated by the progressive groups in this Parliament , I do not see how we can agree to vote in favour of these texts .
We would actually be creating a split personality for ourselves , considering that we have adopted resolutions on the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy and that we are drafting reports , as I am doing myself , on implementing the platform to combat poverty .
The economic governance that is being proposed ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , the tightening of the Stability and Growth Pact is urgently needed .
The experiences of recent years make that clear .
I am also pleased that the outcome of the negotiations is a step in the right direction .
Ministers will never again be permitted to cover each other 's backs when a Member State allows its public finances to derail .
It would therefore be a good thing if we were to improve the prevention of major deficits by moving decision-making further away from politics .
Rapporteur Wortmann-Kool is therefore right to insist on the idea that ministers should be able to block decisions by qualified majority only .
However , a sticking point for me is Commissioner Rehn 's statement , which is related to this legislative package .
This is a step towards the introduction of Eurobonds .
The President of the ECB has indicated that it would be undesirable to have Eurobonds introduced in a situation where budgetary discipline is lacking .
Introducing new debts will exacerbate the European debt problem .
Moreover , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance want to exempt public investment from the standard of a maximum ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( SK ) Mr President , the package of measures on economic governance is a businesslike response to the obvious problems of an economic and financial nature that have long plagued the European Union .
The economic crisis has led many eurozone countries into serious debt problems , and it is clear that the rules of the stability pact did not protect the currency union from the results of amateurish and irresponsible management by the governments of some countries .
Even though I do not think the European Commission should have more powers than it had previously , I agree that the European currency union must establish a more precise mutual control mechanism for budgetary policy .
Some members of the currency union are paying for the irresponsibility or adventurism of others , and a move towards greater transparency and clearer budgetary rules leading to the avoidance of long-term problems in our countries has therefore become essential .
It will be important , however , for us also to apply the rules we adopt consistently , and not to produce all kinds of exemptions from them ( The President cut off the Speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , a unified , EU-level strategy is required to ensure a high level of competitiveness , sustainable economic growth and job creation .
A strong , effective Stability and Growth Pact is the key instrument in this .
Indeed , additional efforts should be made to prevent unsustainable budgetary policies from being adopted .
The enhanced economic governance framework will be underpinned by different interconnected policies .
This package of proposals will help encourage Member States to apply a prudent budgetary policy and , if appropriate , to adopt corrective measures in good time to restrict penalties from being imposed .
Prevention is easier than cure .
( DE ) Mr President , the line being taken by the governments of the core Member States of the EU , the European Commission and the European Central Bank can be clearly identified .
New rescue packages are being put together for Greece , billions of euros of taxpayers ' money is being put at risk and plans are being drawn up for economic governance for the whole of Europe , as we have just heard .
The main aim of the Commission 's proposals is to tighten up the regulations of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In future , compliance with the Maastricht criteria will be enforced by imposing much tougher penalties .
However , this pact has not worked in the past and I am assuming that it will not work in the future either .
At the same time , one mechanism after another is being put in place to support the countries with budget deficits , once again involving taxpayers ' money .
We are treating the symptoms rather than eliminating the causes .
This highly risky strategy will come back to haunt Europe in the short or the long term .
It is unreasonable to expect the same hard-working countries always to pay for the mistakes of others .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I am not sure if I can respond to all of the Members .
We would not have time for that , but I will try to provide some insights as regards the points made this evening .
I want to , first of all , thank you all for a very substantial and substantive debate which reflects an overall sense of responsibility for Europe 's economic future , for growth and stability , and for our citizens ' welfare .
I believe we all broadly share the view that balanced and healthy public finances are a necessary condition for sustainable growth and improving employment , which is the goal of the current legislative package .
That is why it deserves your support .
As many of you have underlined , it is an essential building block in our comprehensive policy response to the current and still ongoing financial and sovereign crisis .
Why is it so important to adopt this package at the current juncture ?
Because we must be able to show our citizens , economic actors and the international partners that the European Union really can in future prevent a fiscal crisis such as the one we have recently experienced , in the case of Greece for instance .
Never again .
That is the first building block of this legislative package .
That is why we need preventive budgetary surveillance and effective enforcement as proposed in the package and indeed by your rapporteurs and your committee .
That is also why we need a genuinely and effectively functioning mechanism to identify and correct macroeconomic imbalances , in order to prevent the kind of crises we have seen , for instance in Ireland or the credit boom we have seen in Spain .
That is why we need the second building block in this package : an effective mechanism to identify and address macroeconomic imbalances .
Some of you , like Udo Bullmann , Sven Giegold and Philippe Lamberts , have asked whether we consider that the issue of symmetry / asymmetry has been settled .
I can provide you with my interpretation and the Commission 's interpretation of this issue which in fact , if you look at the texts , is extremely complicated .
I hope that nobody would block this package for the sake of that because it would be impossible simply to explain it to our citizens .
The drafts of both the Council and Parliament cover both the deficit and surplus countries .
That is very clear .
The differences in drafting would have no substantive impact on the scope or emphasis concerning the economic surveillance to be carried out .
I hope that Parliament and the Council can work together and find an agreement that is based on the substance and not the semantics .
There is practically no difference , so let us tick the box and conclude this important issue of symmetry / asymmetry so that we can start working in order to identify and also correct the macroeconomic imbalances and competitiveness divergences .
So , all in all , your vote tomorrow will be a very important one , a very crucial one for the European Union and its capacity to convince our general public , economic actors and international partners of our capacity to overcome the crisis and facilitate sustainable growth .
Therefore your vote tomorrow will be a great opportunity to achieve a historic milestone of complementing the monetary union finally with a true and genuinely functioning economic union - which we definitely need - and thus enabling the European Union to come out of the current serious crisis with lessons learnt , hopefully also stronger for the future and , in any case , with new appropriate policy tools for sustainable growth , employment and for our citizens ' benefit .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am glad most of the contributions indicate that the job which was assigned to us - and by ' us ' I mean Parliament and the Council - to agree on a very ambitious and new economic governance package , is 99 % completed .
I am also in agreement with many of the honourable Members that , after the hard work of negotiations , we have to get the deal done .
I am optimistic because , here in this House , I feel a commitment and a real sense of ownership towards the future of Europe .
Let me make a few comments on the particular issue - which is still open -of the extension of reverse qualified majority voting .
During the last six or seven weeks , the Council has discussed Parliament 's proposals at least on a weekly basis .
In the last four weeks the Finance Ministers of the 27 Member States discussed the package three times , and each time they made major concessions to Parliament on various points of the text in order to pave the way for a timely agreement .
We discussed all aspects of all the proposals at various levels .
Originally , you proposed that the reverse qualified majority voting rule be applied in more than 15 instances .
In some cases it was not legally feasible to do so , and we identified where that was the case very quickly .
Some of the other points in question were already included in the Council 's general approach to the decision on imposing financial sanctions .
In May , the Council agreed to reverse qualified majority voting in two places in addition to the general approach .
On Monday the Council made large concessions , in the last case on the preventive arm of the Pact , including a review clause in three years ' time and the ' comply or explain ' procedure , which was strengthened in comparison with the previous agreement in the March Ecofin Council .
These safeguards can give Parliament the necessary reassurance that deviation from the Commission 's proposals and recommendations will be kept to a minimum and that cases of non-compliance with the rules , and thus the need for explanations , will be very rare exceptions .
It is definitely time for Parliament to reconsider its initial position and to make a move towards the Council .
The markets and investors are vigilant , and they would like to see whether we can deliver the agreement in the coming days or not .
I believe it is essential for us to do so .
In addition , this package could demonstrate how European institutions can cooperate in a responsible , efficient and constructive manner in such an important field .
Several times during the trilogues , I heard serious criticisms from Members of Parliament about intergovernmental procedures .
The swift and timely adoption of the package could prove that the Community method is the right approach to use in going forward .
Mr President , I am grateful for everyone 's contributions to this debate , and particularly the summaries given by Commissioner Rehn and the President-in-Office of the Council , András Kármán .
I would just like to stress one point : concessions have in fact been made on both sides , and I think we are very close to agreement , but I would not like them to fail to note the question of symmetry and asymmetry as an important issue that needs addressing .
That and reverse qualified majority voting are points on which adjustments are still being made , and there is no conclusion on them yet .
I am particularly grateful for Commissioner Rehn 's positive contribution but , if there is to be an agreement , it will have to be based on the legal text - on the articles section - including of course Article 32 , Article 42 and recital 11-A , as has been widely debated .
I would therefore be grateful if you would bear this issue in mind , because it is one that cuts across the interests of several Members of this House and several political groups , as you have seen .
Having said that , I think the new factor of the analysis of macroeconomic imbalances can be useful .
I apologise , Commissioner , not only for detecting problems of bubbles in the property or financial markets , but also for pointing out the importance of Europe 's major problem : the tensions generated by the completely divergent ways in which the economies that make up the euro area evolve .
Right now these tensions are seriously threatening the existence of a common currency with a non-optimal monetary area , as was very well highlighted today by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil .
The fact is that the European Union is imperfect and incomplete .
What we are doing is not enough to make up for the faults that the European economy has at the moment , and I think that the caricature of blaming everything on the mistakes of the lazy , the lying and the wrong - compared with the virtuous who have no problems - is an extremely dangerous caricature that we must all avoid .
After all , the history of Europe proves that simple explanations for complex problems never give good results .
That , then , is the appeal that I am making here .
Mr President , I am grateful for all the contributions that have been made to this debate , and I would like to express my very special thanks - because I did not do so just now - for the crucial role played in all this by Mrs Bowles , the Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I want to point out that this economic governance package brings greater transparency for the institutions and a better and larger role for Parliament .
The package also forms part of the euro 's defences .
Anyone who believes that the very best solutions for growth are not here must also admit that they do not know of any country that fails to grow if its public accounts are in order .
Countries that show budgetary discipline are countries with economies that grow , and we must not forget that .
That is the example that we must set here .
That is the example that is being followed right now , for instance , in my country .
I also want to put a question to all the Members of this Parliament : can you say that this economic governance package is worse today than when it arrived here ?
Can you say that no improvements have been made to it by this House ?
You cannot say that , because it is not true .
This economic governance package today is better than the Commission 's initial proposal , and it is better because of the many contributions made by the Members of this House .
That is why we have to give our citizens a very clear answer .
We want a growing European economy .
We want stability .
We certainly want transparency .
To achieve all that , however , we must show a sense of responsibility at voting time tomorrow ; we must necessarily vote responsibly and choose our partners very well .
For my part , my choice is very clear : I will be voting for a better Europe and a better European economy .
Madam President , my thanks to everyone for this debate , to the Commissioner and to the Minister , Mr Kármán .

First of all , I wanted to say to the Minister that I think we have already proved that the Community method works well .
As Diogo Feio just said , I think the text has actually been improved , and I think that when there is public debate we are doing our job and citizens can be informed about what is going on in Brussels , as they say .
Why is it , therefore , that we are still talking about the reversed qualified majority ?
I want to make a simple point .
In this Parliament , there are countries for example with a larger population , who have more Members .
When it comes to the votes , each country has a vote that matches its size .
However , what democracy has a system whereby when it comes to applying the rule , we treat the people covered by the rule differently ?
When it comes to putting into practice rules that we have agreed on together , we cannot start making exceptions .
Citizens expect the law to be applied equally to everyone .
At the European level also , all Member States , whether big or small , should be in the same boat .
This is why we are fighting : it is not an ideological battle , it is a matter of the general interest .
My second point is about symmetry , and I am addressing Mrs Ferreira in particular .
This is an important issue : it is part of the agreement .
We must be aware that it has been very expensive for some of us , and to ensure we see it through until the end , we need as wide a unity as possible in this Parliament on all the aspects of the deal .
We need to be united .
As the Commissioner said , I think there are no differences between us so great that we cannot overcome them .
I am appealing for unity , therefore .
We cannot ask for support and at the same time leave others in hardship .
As for my last point , I wanted to thank Mr Kármán very specifically on the small point of ' comply or explain ' .
I have asked you so many times during our discussions : what does that mean , ' comply or explain ' , and explain to whom ?
You have been a good lawyer ; you have moved the Council along .
They are ready to do it in public . They are planning ahead for economic dialogue .
Thank you .
Ask them to go a bit further still : this is all we ask .
You have done so very successfully , so I am sure we will get there .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , I , too , would also like to thank everybody who has participated in the debate and everybody who has supported us with such clear arguments .
I would also like to thank Sharon Bowles , Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , because the situation was very complicated and it will certainly be thanks to her if we get a positive outcome to the vote tomorrow .
We have had quite an ideological debate today and it is clear that everyone in this House would like to have sustainable public finances and budgetary discipline , but history shows that you cannot achieve that by just spending more money .
We now have a package before us .
We have achieved a great deal .
Commissioner Rehn has 15 points on his list and it could be that there are some Members who have problems with the detail in this package , but if you look at the alternative offered by the Left , it leaves us even worse off .
I therefore hope that , tomorrow , Members will be prepared to rise to the challenge of this very important legislative package for this Parliament , which for the first time in its history is exercising co-legislative powers , just as the Council does .
We will have to clear a few more hurdles next week , but hopefully we will have a positive outcome to the vote tomorrow .
We therefore have one more week to go and I hope that we will ultimately be able to take a decision on first reading in July , because we are 98 % there .
On behalf of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would also like to emphasise what Mrs Goulard said about symmetry and asymmetry .
There is indeed a give and take in this House and everyone has their priorities .
However , that principle of give and take should also be applied , in terms of symmetry , to this Parliament eventually adopting a position on this package .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 23 June 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At a time when the impact of the recession and public debt crisis is being strongly felt , we need robust economic governance at EU level .
However , the economic governance legislative package would not , in its present form , help the European Union 's economy to recover , but would bring about a situation where high unemployment and poverty would be permanent fixtures .
I think that the proposals in this package are not ambitious enough , as they are only geared towards austerity and curtailing citizens ' social rights .
There is no mention of elements which could underpin a European economic recovery , such as making investments in the key areas of infrastructure , education , research and innovation .
We are able to propose an alternative to this austerity model which , as we can see from Greece , is proving to be extremely limited .
The creation of bonds to be issued jointly for part of Europe 's public debt would automatically reduce the cost of financing in the European Union and would allow the resumption of investment .
Following the New Deal policy model from the United States , the solution to the current economic and financial crisis will involve restoring economic growth based on investments and creating new jobs .
It is important that the EU does not just respond to the crisis by eliminating the most acute problems , but that it also prepares more fundamental reform of economic governance .
Many points in the submitted reports go in the right direction , but at the same time they have a number of deficiencies .
The proposals talk about tougher sanctions , about fines for the non-fulfilment of recommendations and about these being applied automatically , in order to avoid succumbing to political horse-trading .
This is all very well .
I cannot rid myself of the feeling that the sanctions are tailored to those states that are currently in a difficult situation .
They seem to be based on the idea that these states can deal with the difficult situation themselves , and that they are capable of improving their situation by themselves through a ' disciplined ' approach .
That is a mistake , however .
Even before the crisis , a dynamic developed in Europe whereby the strong states of the eurozone cemented their competitive advantage .
Thanks , among other things , to wage dumping in Germany , for example , the core countries strengthened their export position , and the peripheral countries became uncompetitive outlets for their products and capital .
For these countries , the crisis was the last nail in the coffin .
It is not possible to escape from this situation by willpower alone , or through one 's own decisions .
The situation regarding macroeconomic imbalances , particularly in countries with the single currency , can be resolved only through a consensual reassessment of the current model of economic development .
It is not just cuts and budgetary discipline that will bring a solution , but a policy of targeted development and support for the competitiveness of Europe 's periphery .
As usual , on the pretext of sorting out problems that you have caused yourselves , you are imposing on us more Europe and more Commission power : this Commission that is little more than a handful of civil servants appointed with no democratic oversight , but that has been set up as a censor and slave-driver that will have the right to impose sanctions on Member States .
Your pseudo economic governance goes far beyond budgetary oversight .
It is nothing short of imposing oversight on our peoples and nations .
This is an application of the doctrine of limited sovereignty that was so close to the heart of that great democrat Brezhnev , except instead of tanks we have financial penalties .
I am not exaggerating : one of these reports feels it necessary to state that in the event of a change in majority after an election , the new government must obtain authorisation before altering its predecessor 's budget priorities , and even then can only do so around the edges .
As for the priorities themselves , they are those imposed by the European Union : repaying private creditors , reassuring the markets , dismantling social security and accelerating liberalisation at every turn , in keeping with the EU 2020 strategy .
This is not correcting mistakes , improving public management or preventing another Greek situation : this is democracy held at gunpoint .
The crisis may provide us with an opportunity to change our rules and institutions , or to create new ones .
The economist Joseph Schumpeter talked about ' creative destruction ' .
At present , the EU therefore has a unique opportunity to establish a new mechanism that should lead to greater macroeconomic , fiscal and currency stability for the Member States in the long term , and help increase their competitiveness .
The experience we have gained from the past operation of the Economic and Monetary Union has shown that such rules need to be enshrined in legislation , and that we cannot rely on the good will of individual Member States .
For this reason , the submitted legislative package containing six proposals for establishing an improved framework for economic management is a step in the right direction .
Four proposals relate to fiscal matters , including a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact , while the two new regulations try to identify and resolve macroeconomic imbalances emerging within the EU and the euro area .
In order to enforce these new rules effectively , however , it is and it will continue to be advisable for both the national parliaments and the European Parliament to be involved in the whole process more closely and at an earlier point in time .
Overall , I believe that the legislative package which has been presented is an appropriate response to the global crisis and the EU 's current economic situation , building on the relevant legislation and complying with the Europe 2020 strategy and other strategic EU documents , and therefore I recommend adopting it in the amended version .
in writing . - ( BG ) The lack of suitable instruments for diagnosing public finance problems early , along with the poorly operating mechanisms of the Stability and Growth Pact , are among the basic causes of the long-running crisis which the euro area and EU are going through .
This legislative package allows us to take appropriate measures to rectify the imbalances before they have an adverse impact on public finances .
They will allow the European Commission to monitor , on an ongoing basis , the macroeconomic development of Member States and , if necessary , an in-depth analysis of national economies will be carried out .
This is why the indicators for monitoring macroeconomic development and their thresholds must not be adopted automatically by the Commission , but must be analysed from an economic perspective .
When the scoreboard is being produced , it is important that the different initial positions of the Member States are taken into consideration , along with their macroeconomic features , which differ for the countries in the euro area and the remaining countries in the EU .
When analysing the indicators ' thresholds , consideration must be given to the catching-up process which new Member States are involved in .
This is the only possible way of ensuring that an appropriate analysis of their macroeconomic development is carried out .
in writing . - The economic integration of the European Union and in particular the euro has reached a juncture at which one can no longer turn a blind eye to unequivocal deviations from the criteria that have been set in order to safeguard economic stability in the Union .
Therefore , I would call for enhancing the role of the Commission with regard to the economic governance of the EU .
Ultimately , automatic mechanisms ought to be established and executed when certain Member States consistently breach the Stability and Growth Pact .
The economic crisis has exposed the irresponsible financial and economic decisions of several governments , but it is the conscientious Member States that are paying the price .
The crisis has taught us a painful , but all the more valuable lesson for the future .
The Commission ought to be mandated to intervene without prejudice whenever it receives alarming signals from any Member State and the Council should not back the culprits .
Much talked about solidarity will not be infinite and , unless we call the malefactors to order , the citizens of countries such as Estonia might lose their patience .
Adoption of the economic governance package proves yet again that the European project is still alive and that it is on the basis of conciliation among the 27 that the Member States will overcome their difficulties and , at the same time , confront the challenges of the future .
The sovereign public debt crisis shows that the current supervisory and remedial mechanisms are inadequate .
The measures put to the vote today seek to strengthen the instruments that are not working , and therefore it is essential that they are put into practice .
The debt criterion , as approved in the Treaty of Maastricht , is at last made operational in this new package and will now actually be applied .
The institutionalisation of the European semester , the enhancement of the dialogue between the European institutions and national bodies , the role of Parliament and the Commission throughout the monitoring process , as well as greater and more effective supervision are all ways of achieving intelligent , sustainable and inclusive growth in Europe .
However , I must stress that the success of Europe 's economic policy must also depend on other , complementary measures to support investment and growth in the Member States .
Europe must focus on a common strategy , but it must not forget the specific features of each country .
As the past year has shown , the so-called Stability and Growth Pact , which was intended to provide an effective deterrent against violations of the macroeconomic principles of the euro area by the Member States , has not been terribly effective , to put it mildly .
This is due to a large extent to the fact that the Member States believed they could act with impunity , since the sanctions provided for by the system were not automatic .
We are in agreement as to the form of sanctions which would be imposed on countries in the euro area which exceeded the permitted level of deficit and public debt .
However , it is equally important to take preventive measures , and therefore we in the European Parliament are in favour of introducing an automatic mechanism in the preventive arm of the Pact as well .
The entire process also requires greater transparency , and this can only be ensured by greater involvement of the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
In March and June 2010 , the European Council adopted the Europe 2020 strategy , the main priority of which is enhanced coordination of economic policy strategies in the Member States and , as a long-term goal , sustainable and inclusive growth and sustainable employment .
Since economic governance regards public debt as equivalent to a deficit , we should make every effort to ensure that the medium-term budgetary framework which is put in place helps to reduce the burden on future generations .
In doing so , we must use the experience gained during the first decade of functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union .
Requirements pertaining to the rules and procedures that form the budgetary framework urgently need to be standardised , in order to ensure similar social protection benefits and to fight social exclusion .
In view of the high level of interdependence between the budgets of the Member States and the EU budget , budgetary forecasts at both levels should be characterised by the same degree of transparency .
This is why it is so important for an agreement to be in place between the Commission and each Member State as regards the scope of forecasts and forecasting methods .
Cooperation of this kind would make it possible to avoid contradictory macrobudgetary scenarios and to increase the credibility of forecasts using for planning .
The economic crisis and its repercussions have shown us that the EU 's future needs to be built on European rather than domestic solutions .
Coming up with a viable solution to the sovereign debt crisis and the need to strengthen the euro , return to a path of sustainable growth and create new jobs depend on efficient coordination between Member States and strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact .
In a nutshell , this depends on a strong Europe , a goal also expressed in the motto of the European Council 's Hungarian Presidency .
The European economic governance package on the European Parliament 's agenda can create the mechanisms the EU needs for its future , in the way that its architects imagined it .
Adopting the economic governance package will entail close coordination , fiscal discipline , economic supervision , effective decision-making rules , powerful European institutions , thereby underpinning the EU 's resurgence .
The economic crisis has changed the world irreversibly and there is clearly an increasingly urgent need for a new financial structure in the EU .
We are at a turning point .
Any weakening of Member States ' ambition to complete the reforms which have been initiated under the strain of the crisis , excessive indulgence , too many exceptions to the commonly accepted rules and a return to a new round of internal protectionism will deal fatal blows .
in writing . - ( SK ) I do not believe that governments or officials can manage the economy .
At the same time , I understand that we must seek the causes of the financial problems of Greece and other EU states , and find a way to avert these in the future .
Democracy meanwhile hangs in the balance , as we restrict the right of citizens to decide on the budget of their own state , and thus the priorities of state policy .
Solidarity is possible , however , only if responsible governance is the rule for all .
We are thus approaching a crossroads .
One road leads to a slowdown in European integration , and possibly a break-up .
The other road leads to tax harmonisation , the end of national budgets and a federal superstate .
In a case such as that , however , we are also talking about a unified system of health insurance contributions , social insurance and pensions throughout the EU .
It is these arguments , and not the empty phrases about unity , that make up the debate on a federal Europe .
Spent fuel and radioactive waste ( debate )
Τhe next item is the report by Romana Jordan Cizelj , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste - C7-0387 / 2010 - 2010 / 0306 ( NLE ) ) .
Madam President , we are dealing with a legislative proposal with which we will , for the first time , be introducing European standards for the handling of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel .
Two years have passed since we adopted a directive on nuclear safety and since then increased attention has been paid to the safe operation of nuclear power plants .
The European Parliament has also several times called for a directive on the management of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel .
The events in Fukushima have shown that we were right to do so because spent nuclear fuel stored in a temporary pool may also present a risk which can be forestalled with appropriate measures .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) is very much in favour of the idea of a European directive , but we want it to be more rigorous in certain places .
In our report , we have paid attention to the technological aspects , the provision of financial and human resources and independent , strong and competent regulatory bodies .
Let me give you a little more detail on our positions .
Even the best ideas , much as they may be desirable , will not become reality if there is not enough finance .
In the ITRE , we have essentially reinforced the finance requirements .
For us , it is not enough for these resources to just be adequate and available .
At the political level , we have to ensure that these two requirements are implemented and we therefore support greater transparency and supervision of financial resources .
We are also introducing a requirement that the monies should be used for a specific purpose .
We have also upheld the implementation of the polluter pays principle , and that I consider to be one of the key demands of the European Parliament .
We have also responded to public concerns concerning the safety of disposed-of nuclear fuel and supported the principle of reversibility .
We have taken the position that spent nuclear fuel must be controlled .
However , for technical reasons or in case of new technological solutions , such fuel could be extracted , processed or recycled and reused .
We have significantly tightened the transparency requirements and set out the details concerning public participation , the information which is to be given to the public and the method of communication and participation in procedures .
In this context , we have referred to the Aarhus Convention .
Our Committee is in favour of regional cooperation .
However , in order to ensure regional cooperation does not serve merely as an excuse to delay decisions , we have added a whole raft of requirements which such cooperation should meet .
We have paid particular attention to the protection of workers who handle spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste , compliance with the ALARA ( as low as reasonably achievable ) principle which is established in practice , the need for education and training as well as the need for the development of scientific and technological skills .
I would particularly like to emphasise our position on the export of radioactive waste .
I dare say that not a single member of the Committee is a nimby ( ' not in my backyard ' ) .
We are not in favour of irresponsible management and we want radioactive waste to be disposed of safely .
On the other hand , we know that there are exceptions where export is allowed .
We have therefore supported the amendment which allows exports to countries which operate the same standards that we will be introducing in the EU with this directive .
For example , we should not be exporting radioactive waste to countries that have no final disposal facilities .
We have also tabled an amendment in which we are demanding that the European Commission , once the peer reviews have been completed , evaluate the concept of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel management .
Particular emphasis should be placed on the reversibility principle and the export requirements .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has only an advisory role under the Euratom Treaty .
We have worked hard and I would like to think that our work will not be in vain .
I therefore expect the European Commission and the Council to respect our positions and I ask that , during this debate , you support the positions adopted by ITRE .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , today we are discussing a Commission proposal on a subject that concerns Europe and that is on Parliament 's agenda for the second time .
The Commission 's first proposal was not adopted in 2003 and 2004 .
We believe that it is sensible and advisable at a European level to apply the highest safety standards to the use of nuclear energy , regardless of the purpose for which it is being used , and to the management of nuclear waste .
I would like to thank Mrs Jordan Cizelj for her comprehensive report and for her work over the last few weeks .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and from the other committees .
My officials tell me that you have produced a highly factual and competent report .
We are pleased that it supports the essential aspects of the Commission proposal , which is intended to be an important building block in the development of a comprehensive European legal and regulatory safety system at the highest possible level .
I am pleased that you fundamentally agree with the concept of the European legal framework and that you support our proposals on the responsibility for the national programmes , on clear working , timing and financial requirements , on information and on the full involvement of the general public at an early stage in every national implementation process .
We want to work jointly to ensure that we have detailed and reliable proof of the waste management routes and their safety , particularly as the storage periods will be very long .
We believe that many of the proposals that you have drawn up are well-informed .
They support and strengthen the Commission 's approach .
I would like to make some additional remarks about four specific areas .
Firstly , the basic principle is that we do not want to regulate every detail of the fundamental concept of subsidiarity .
The starting position of all the Member States is different .
We want to put in place a European legal framework .
The essential points that are important for safety and for standards are included in the draft document .
For example , we have left room for manoeuvre with regard to the type of public participation , the education and training of employees and managers and the details of the financial models - not the quality of the financing - and we are deliberately leaving open the regulation of the final storage facilities built and / or operated jointly by several Member States .
Where necessary , we can make recommendations in this area , if we need to be more specific later in the process .
However , I am sure that this proposal will not be the last to be submitted over the next 20 years .
I expect that we will need to add to or amend the contents during the implementation process over the next two to five years .
This is why the Commission is explicitly offering all of you the opportunity to revise the directive at the right time , so that we can learn from our experiences and improve the directive even further .
Secondly , if we look at the issue of the reversibility of the stored fuel elements and waste , the principle is that every storage facility must be suitable and safe for permanent final storage , from a geological and a technical perspective and as far as its construction is concerned .
However , we are aware that there will be developments in the fields of research and science .
At the moment , there are growing expectations that in the foreseeable future , over the next few decades , developments during the next or next-but-one generation of science will enable us to recycle or store waste more effectively than we can today .
Therefore , we believe the option of reversibility and , in the meantime , of constant access and security to be equally important and we want to be able to incorporate this into national legislation and perhaps to make it clearer in the preamble .
Thirdly , we specifically support the rapporteur 's views on the importance of adequate financing for national waste management programmes .
For this reason , the Commission proposal includes important requirements concerning financing which aim to ensure that we do not impose an excessive burden on future generations .
Therefore , we want to guarantee that appropriate funding is made available at the right time and in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle , that the national programmes include detailed and reliable cost forecasts and that the employees and the population as a whole are given information about all the issues relating to waste management .
It is important that the financing is also transparent .
We also support the proposals that the financing of waste management must be guaranteed over suitably long periods .
We will submit these proposals to the Council on your behalf .
My last point concerns exports .
The basic principle of our proposal is that every Member State , regardless of how many , if any , nuclear power stations it has and what volume of waste it usually has to process , because every Member State has nuclear waste from medical devices and from industrial research , even if it has no power stations , must take responsibility for its own tasks and also enter into bilateral agreements and develop solutions with other Member States .
In principle , exports to third countries are not in the interests of Europe .
In my home country of Germany in the 1970s and 1980s , large amounts of hazardous waste were exported to the former German Democratic Republic and to Eastern Europe and stored there in return for payment in facilities which did not even come close to meeting the standards of the time and which did not provide the best possible protection for the environment and for the population .
This is also a concern in this case .
For this reason , we in the Commission are prepared to adopt every possible restrictive solution , including export bans and export restrictions .
We want to call on Parliament not to support the opening up of this area , but to support a restrictive solution .
This will make it easier for us to ensure that the Council does not water down the export restrictions at the end of the procedure .
I would like to thank you very much for your constructive support today .
I am sure that in a few years we will be discussing this subject again in Parliament with the aim of extending and improving this first directive .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - Madam President , let us hope that , when we come to review this directive , we can do it on a different legal basis .
Our committee took the view that the legal basis should be Article 153 of the Treaty , as this matter directly concerns health and safety .
We also underlined the importance of providing information and genuine consultation with workers concerning the safety case and safety assessments , not only of sites dealing with spent fuel and radioactive waste , but also as regards how these should be transported , and the need for a rigorous and effective inspection regime with sanctions that are effective , dissuasive and proportionate .
We also want to see that all licence holders ensure thorough and ongoing training of all involved in dealing with these substances , including subcontractors - potentially a weak link in the safety chain - casual workers and all others working on site , whatever their job .
We also took the view that there was no easy divide between civil and military waste , given that civilians may well handle military waste these days .
Madam President , I would like to offer my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur on the outcome of her work .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I was given an opportunity to experience first-hand how the technical proposal became a highly political subject overnight , and therefore I would also like to thank all of my fellow Members who succeeded in maintaining an objective approach , even in the face of pressure following the disaster in Japan .
In particular , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for helping to ensure that the Committee 's opinion was of such high quality .
I believe that the Directive will establish a legal framework in the European Union for the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste , and will form an integral part of EU legislation , ensuring the safe use of nuclear energy in those Member States which retain it in their energy mix .
Among other things , I very much welcome the demand for Member States to secure sufficient funding for expenditure associated with the management of spent fuel .
I myself have visited several radioactive waste storage facilities , and I firmly believe that a shortage of funding might directly lead to them becoming less safe , which is something we must prevent in Europe .
Madam President , I welcome this report on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
It is the result of long debates , consultations and negotiations , and we will support it unanimously tomorrow .
We have been using nuclear technology for energy production , pharmaceuticals manufacturing , and for powering submarines and icebreakers for 60 years .
And over the past 60 years we have failed to find efficient solutions for the management and long-term storage of hazardous waste .
We support this directive , even if we do not agree with every element of it , because it reduces political obstacles and establishes the necessary financial conditions and independence .
Although we have different opinions about energy production , we all agree , based on the ' polluter pays ' principle , that the waste produced in the European Union has to be stored within the EU , even if reprocessing takes place in a third country .
We support the initiative to reduce waste to a minimum , and , if research and development results make it possible , to perform further recycling , because the principle of reversibility is very important for us .
We also consider it extremely important to keep in mind the human factor .
It is imperative that we guarantee the human factor , and the safety of employees is closely connected to this and has to be a priority during waste storage .
However , we also consider it important to mention that the current legal basis does not provide sufficient European solutions , because we do not have co-decision rights .
This is why we believe it is important to find a new legal basis in the future .
Finally , Europe has to be a leader as regards both regulations and the construction of storage facilities .
Only this way can we set an example to the rest of the world .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , nuclear waste is a problem we just have to deal with .
Even if all nuclear reactors were shut down tomorrow , there would still be a legacy of waste from half a century of nuclear generation and from a variety of other activities .
Since we cannot just wish it out of existence , we need to deal with nuclear waste in the most responsible way possible .
That means making sure that radioactive waste remains under EU control and scrutiny .
Once nuclear waste is outside European borders , we cannot guarantee how it is managed .
For that reason , the ALDE Group strongly supports the Commissioner 's position and insists on maintaining the status quo .
The export of radioactive waste to third countries must be banned .
A particular problem with nuclear waste is the sheer timescale of the danger that it poses .
Ten thousand years ago we were living in caves .
How can we possibly know what human society and Planet Earth will look like ten thousand years from now ?
For that reason we have to future-proof the decisions that we take today .
At the moment the geological storage of nuclear waste may very generally seem to be the least worst option , but advances in science could potentially turn that conclusion on its head .
I therefore welcome the Commissioner 's remarks on this .
For that reason , including the revision clause in this directive is common sense .
Finally , I have to point out , as a number of colleagues before me have done , just how absurd it is that the European Parliament is merely consulted and has no real say on this directive , upon which the safety of so many future generations depends .
Madam President , as shadow rapporteur for the European Conservatives and Reformists , I would like to applaud the Jordan Cizelj report .
This report was drafted at a time of very complex and even hysterical debates following the natural disaster in Japan and the impact of this disaster on nuclear power stations .
After many debates , we have succeeded in maintaining a rational approach to our management of radioactive waste .
It goes without saying that we should endeavour to ensure maximum safety in the management of radioactive waste , and the report therefore emphasises the duty to inform and to be open about these activities , in such a way as to increase public confidence .
All of these activities must be subject to strict controls in compliance with international standards .
It is important to provide storage in both interim storage facilities and long-term repositories in accordance with these standards .
These are extremely costly activities , involving facilities that will operate for decades , if not centuries .
Further technological developments in future decades should therefore be taken into consideration .
Repository technology must allow a certain amount of future flexibility .
In my opinion , it is unwise to attempt the absolute containment of nuclear waste in permanent repositories .
( HU ) Madam President , while the European Union is trying to find a solution for the storage and disposal of so-called spent fuel , in the United States and Russia these are considered as economically sound sources of energy .
Spent fuel generated by nuclear plants today can easily be used as fuel in fourth-generation molten-salt reactors .
The application of the proton accelerator method using a lead-bismuth target opens up even greater possibilities .
Long-lived high-level radioactive isotopes generated by nuclear plants are basically non-hazardous : they could be transmuted into short-lived low level isotopes , while enabling the facility to function as an electricity-producing power plant .
The fact that these reactors are also capable of being powered by thorium , and our stocks of this material are 10 times higher than those of uranium , is another advantage .
These reactors are powered by a fraction of the critical mass of fissile material , which means that the occurrence of a spontaneous nuclear chain reaction is impossible .
Unless we start to introduce and apply the new technology immediately , we will fall behind the leading edge of research and development and economy once more .
( PT ) Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work she has done .
The proposed framework aims to ensure that the Member States establish a regulatory framework and draw up national programmes for more responsible management of radioactive waste .
It is important for the national programmes to be clear on the decision-making process .
Decision making must be based on a clear distribution of duties and responsibilities among the various entities involved .
Core issues are oversight , control and information , which are vital for transparent management .
Public participation fosters agreement and involvement , leading to the social legitimisation of radioactive waste management strategies .
It is essential that the public is kept informed of the potential risks in all areas related to nuclear energy and the new technologies .
Information , knowledge and a great degree of transparency are necessary for public acceptance .
I must also stress the important role played by international cooperation and joint research and development programmes in disseminating and exchanging best practices in this field .
( SV ) Madam President , the nuclear power debate often separates us into different camps .
We are for or against , we want a quick decommissioning and phasing out or no phasing out at all .
However , when it comes to nuclear safety , the position that we are all starting from is quite different .
In this case , we agree that we want the highest possible level of safety , and that of course also applies to the nuclear waste that we will be responsible for , irrespective of how long we continue to use nuclear power - and so will many , many generations after us .
The waste must be dealt with in the absolutely best way possible and the EU directive must be structured so that it genuinely meets these objectives .
One issue that is particularly important is that of the export of nuclear waste that several speakers have already mentioned .
It must be possible for EU Member States to continue to enter into agreements among themselves regarding the waste , but we must not export it to countries outside the EU .
That is a moral imperative , and we must fulfil it .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , any country that is not in control of how to process its own waste should not be allowed to use the technology that has produced the waste .
No country should become another country 's dustbin .
This is why we must support the Commission 's position on exporting waste and the ban , and why we must be extremely strict on any bilateral agreements that may be entered into .
Secondly , nuclear waste should be governed by common law , but with stricter rules .
The definition that has been put to us is less than a minimum standard .
In reality , it does not actually define waste , since if we take it to its logical conclusion , there will never be nuclear waste because we will always be able to think up a new technological solution .
I find this irresponsible .
Lastly , the cost of dismantling and the cost of waste disposal should be properly incorporated into the price of nuclear energy , which unfortunately is not the case at present .
We cannot try to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle if we are not going to be completely strict and responsible in the way we control prices .
Madam President , the recent events in Japan certainly reminded us of the potential problems associated with harnessing nuclear energy and disposing of spent fuel .
However , in a world challenged by energy shortages , we need to remain open-minded .
We must try to encourage all forms of energy production - from renewable , sustainable energies to investing in safe nuclear plants .
When dealing with nuclear energy , safety and the transparency of procedures are two important issues which need to be constantly attended to .
The answer is not necessarily to shut down plants , as Germany is planning to do , but rather to ensure that we are following the strictest safety programmes when it comes to dealing with this form of energy and the waste it produces .
Nuclear energy has great potential to serve Europe , but we need to be realistic .
Let us be proactive in making nuclear energy work for us now and in the future , and work with this report .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to congratulate Mr Oettinger .
He is now the third commissioner who is responsible for the area of nuclear safety , waste and decommissioning .
Parliament has always supported the Commission and has always called for the authority in this area to be moved to a European level .
Unfortunately , the Council 's nuclear working group did not believe that these were issues which had a place on the agenda .
I am proud of the fact that we are slowly succeeding in having serious discussions with one another on these subjects and that the Council is making a genuine effort to highlight the European added value and , on the other hand , to adhere to the principle of subsidiarity .
However , I believe this is also simply about realising what we can achieve in this highly sensitive area in the Eighth Framework Programme for Research .
This is why the scientific side and the question of what we assume will come from harmonisation in future and of whether we want to see mutual recognition are particularly important in this area .
I believe that we should also think about the subjects that we want to focus on in the immediate future .
I remember well that Mrs Palacio once said that the issue would only appear on the agenda again when the next nuclear disaster happened .
Unfortunately , she was right .
It is rather late to be considering this , but it is high time that we thought about the measures that need to be taken at a European level .
However , that is not enough .
Europe must play a pioneering role , in particular in the international arena .
We should be establishing standards in this area together with the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) .
We need standards which quite simply guarantee the highest possible level of safety and which ultimately give us the opportunity to avoid putting the population at risk as far as possible .
Mr Oettinger , I would like to congratulate you .
You have taken the right approach and we can be sure that Parliament and the Commission will be highly successful .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to say on the subject of the export ban that I fully agree with Mr Oettinger .
As there seems to be a broad consensus on this issue , I hope that there will also be agreement when it comes to the vote tomorrow and that we can support the Commission .
It would certainly be very sensible for the Commission and the European Parliament to take a joint approach in this respect .
Secondly , on the issue of public participation , you said , Mr Oettinger , that we do not need detailed regulations in this area .
In principle , you are right . However , we will also need public participation across national borders .
As we have storage facilities which are close to borders , we cannot simply say that this is where the border is and the issue has nothing to do with the other citizens .
We will probably need common rules in this area , otherwise there may be disputes or people may be excluded and told that the matter does not concern them because they are citizens of another state .
However , we are all citizens of Europe .
As some countries are affected by storage sites of this kind which are close to their borders , it is important for us to establish certain principles and for the Commission to propose some fundamental regulations , so that public participation is taken seriously and is based on common principles .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have talked about three things for which I believe you will be able to count on the support of a large majority in this House .
You have talked about support for the export ban .
You will in any case receive support from a great many of us , because this concerns our own waste .
We have to take care of it ourselves and we should not be exporting waste to other countries outside the European Union .
You are calling for transparency .
Nobody is against transparency .
It seems like a very good idea , certainly given the fact that the issues of nuclear energy and radioactive waste get so many people stirred up .
You have also talked about the final solution for underground storage being reversible .
You said , ' This is not a permanent solution , we will always have access to the waste ' .
I approve .
In that regard , you have my unqualified support .
I do have one concern , however , and that is underground storage .
Are you definitely sure this is the safest method ?
To my mind , it is not .
Nor is it one that is used anywhere else .
In some countries , the landscape is not really suitable for the storage of radioactive waste , so I would argue that we should be given a realistic option for dealing with waste in another safe alternative above the ground .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , every Member State produces radioactive waste .
This is why we should not only take care of the spent fuel of the power plants with a view to protecting the environment and citizens ' health , but also ensure safe and efficient management of radioactive waste in general .
For that reason alone it is indeed appropriate to discuss this issue here , in the European Parliament today .
I agree that the utilisation of nuclear power belongs to national sovereignty .
However , the establishment of basic EU principles related to national waste management regulations is justified .
In the absence of such principles and as a result of divergent regulations , market players are interested in managing their radioactive waste in countries with the most permissive regulations .
This is why the initiative to make Member States establish binding waste management programmes is promising .
One of its prerequisites , however , is to appoint competent authorities who can provide a strict control of nuclear waste management activities and can penalise violations in an appropriate manner , if necessary .
I believe that national programmes must also clarify the competence of such authorities and the responsibility of market players .
I would like to conclude with one final remark : full-scale management of spent fuel and radioactive waste is a very costly activity .
This means that national programmes are useless unless financing issues are clarified .
Setting aside the financial resources required for nuclear waste management as early as in the course of nuclear waste production is an important basic principle .
I agree that those who produced the waste have to bear the costs of waste management . This will provide an appropriate incentive for market players to reduce radioactive waste quantities and manage them efficiently .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Fukushima disaster has reopened the issue of nuclear safety .
The problem of radioactive waste needs to be addressed and solved .
To be brief , there are two issues that I consider top priority .
The first is the ban on the transfer of waste .
Every country must be able to discharge its own obligations and , above all , the ' polluter pays ' principle is a fair one .
The second issue concerns safety , and the health and safety of workers in particular .
This is a point that I consider extremely important , and we have to give people peace of mind .
We have to give the people of Europe peace of mind by ensuring that this subject is managed with the utmost transparency and above all , I stress , the utmost safety .
( RO ) Madam President , the directive sets out the legal framework for the responsible management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste , which is an absolute must in terms of regulations .
There are currently three power stations in the European Union in the process of decommissioning , supported by European financial contributions .
Germany has already announced that it is going to halt operations at a number of power stations .
In the near future , there will be other power stations in other Member States which will need to be halted because they are reaching the end of their operational life .
The directive 's approach at national level will result in the creation of radioactive landfills across the whole of the European Union .
This is a waste of resources and a source of concern for the general public .
This is the case at the moment in Romania , even in the region I come from , with regard to the radioactive landfill from the Kozloduy power station .
I believe that a truly European , long-term approach is required , which will result in using shared technology , saving resources and European funding mechanisms . Adopting a global approach and providing relevant information will allow European citizens to gain trust and peace of mind .
( HU ) Madam President , the issue of spent fuel and radioactive waste management is an important and pressing area , which has received even greater attention since the disaster at Fukushima .
Despite technological innovations and solutions and waste management programmes , the problem represents a greater challenge every day .
The management and final disposal of radioactive waste is an existing problem , and will continue to exist in the future .
In Europe we aim for energy security and environmentally friendly , stable energy production .
However , we also need to pay increasing attention to several issues , for instance the processing , transmutation and final disposal of rapidly expanding quantities of radioactive waste .
Not only do we need to create the technical facilities for this , but also build a strict political , legal and social structure .
It would be worth considering , assessing and planning pan-European cooperation in this field .
All responsible participants should be involved in the building and development of this safe process .
We need to take measures that will also protect future generations .
- ( SK ) Madam President , the management of nuclear waste is quite rightly followed closely by the general public , and it is therefore good that the European Commission has decided to handle the issue through comprehensive legislation which clearly defines the duties and responsibility of all the entities participating in this procedure .
It is good that the submitted directive emphasises better quality supervision and controls , but especially the greater transparency of these processes and public participation .
In my opinion , securing sufficient earmarked funds to cover the inevitable costs for decommissioning nuclear reactors and managing the resulting radioactive waste remains an important open question .
The proposed system for monitoring the level of financial reserves through an independent body can , with the right organisation , create the conditions for a nuclear facility to accumulate during its operating life sufficient funds to finance environmentally-friendly decommissioning , and that should be our objective .
( RO ) Madam President , I welcome the drafting of this report against the background of the change in global nuclear policy and of the Commission 's proposal for a directive in this area .
I must insist on how important it is to apply fairly the ' polluter pays ' principle , as has also proved to be the case in the wake of the disaster in Japan .
Although its low cost makes nuclear energy attractive , the safety of employees and civilians must come first .
This is why I support cooperation between Member States aimed at the safe storage of nuclear waste .
Transparency in this process also involves the population in determining the storage site and other details .
Regional research programmes in this area have already proved their benefit .
I also think that EU Member States need to share the use as well of facilities for treating and storing waste from nuclear power stations .
- ( SK ) Madam President , I am delighted that we are making progress in the area of spent fuel and radioactive waste management , establishing specific requirements which will ensure that Member States manage the national regulatory and organisational framework , and draw up effective national programmes from the creation to the storage of the waste .
In the whole system , it is vital for the rules to include the principle of transparency , supervision and control .
I also welcome the option of deep geological storage , including the principle of reversibility .
Sufficient funding must be secured for national programmes , however , so that the polluter pays , and that is clearly strengthened in this directive , which I am pleased about , including adequate dissuasive sanctions , which must be ensured in every system .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , the speeches show that the Members of the European Parliament have read , digested and evaluated all the details of the proposals .
I do not think that there is a conflict .
I agree that we should include your suggestions in the procedure .
We believe that one point which Mr Swoboda mentioned , the subject of equal cross-border rights for public participation , is important .
It is often the case that final storage sites and nuclear power stations are situated in areas close to national borders for geological or other reasons , which means that the indivisible , equal participation of citizens , transparency and the appropriate rights are all needed from a European perspective .
Thank you very much for your cooperation .
I hope that we will have your support tomorrow in the vote here in Parliament .
rapporteur . - ( SL ) Madam President , I am very pleased that this debate , too , has shown that there are many points on which we have similar , almost identical , positions and that these are the points which are key to ensuring safe management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste .
I also have to say that at this time , in the wake of the Fukushima accident , our work has been extremely difficult and I am pleased that , despite these difficult times , the text adopted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) has been prepared to an adequate standard and that we did not get carried away with ideological debates .
In my view , where we do differ , the differences are such as not to endanger the report , and that is very positive .
I therefore would like this report , this directive , to be adopted as soon as possible and for us also to start to implement it .
Obviously , I agree with all the Members who have mentioned the fact that the European Parliament only has an advisory role when it comes to nuclear energy .
I think that we should have a very serious debate on this at some point in the future and that we should seek a common solution in this area , because this is a question of democracy .
Finally , I would like to thank everyone who has helped in the preparation of this report , namely the shadow rapporteurs , first of all in ITRE , and then the rapporteurs and their groups who have drafted their opinions .
I would like to thank all the members who have participated in debates and who have tabled amendments , the Council and the European Commission - we have worked well together and exchanged positions regularly and in good time .
Of course , I also need to thank my assistant , the advisor in my political group and the advisor of the ITRE Committee .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 23 June 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
As shadow rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and as I have therefore followed this subject particularly closely , I feel I must congratulate Mrs Jordan Cizelj on the invaluable work she has done .
Despite the difficulties encountered in the negotiations , due not least to the highly sensitive international context , the work that has resulted in the proposal for a directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste has succeeded in outlining a coherent , harmonised legislative framework to ensure that this kind of waste is managed safely , no matter what applications and consequences nuclear energy may have in the future .
I believe this is where the great strength of the proposal in question lies .
The proposal calls on the Member States to guarantee higher safety levels that also comply with international safety standards ; greater attention to technical and scientific advances , particularly to comply with the principle of reversibility ; increased emphasis on protection of the environment and people 's health ; and a commitment to identifying responsibility in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle , with transparency and with the role of licence holders .
in writing . - The European Union produces more that 40 000 m3 of radioactive waste each year , 80 % is short-lived low-level radioactive waste and about 5 % is long-lived low-level radioactive waste .
It is important that the Union will implement a Directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
Romania is among those Member States which are in favour of having the possibility to export radioactive waste to third countries .
Spent fuel from research reactors in Romania needs to be either repatriated to the country of origin , Russia or the United States or exported to third countries in special cases .
For this reason I cannot support the export ban proposal in this report .
As nuclear energy will remain part of the Member States ' energy mix in the future it is important that such a report is adopted successfully in the plenary session of this Parliament .
Spent fuels should be moved out of pools and into dry storage as soon as possible and high priority should be placed on the oldest radioactive wastes .
Furthermore , it is important that citizens have confidence in the principles governing the safety of repositories and in waste management programmes .
Radioactive waste is produced all over the European Union , including isotopes used for medical , industrial , agricultural , research or even educational purposes .
Still , spent fuel is most frequently produced in nuclear plants .
Two technologies are currently applied for the treatment of such waste : either recycling , or final disposal .
Waste is classified into three types based on its radioactivity : low-level , intermediate-level and high-4level waste .
This classification also determines whether it will undergo near-surface or deep geological disposal .
The final responsibility for spent fuel and radioactive waste lies with the Member States .
However , most Member States have still not taken their most important decisions concerning spent fuel .
Unfortunately , few places operate well-organised final disposal programmes for nuclear waste .
We need to make a continuous political commitment to long-term spent fuel and radioactive waste management in a way that enables it to be implemented under the highest level of safety regulations .
Member States must adopt high-level national regulations on nuclear safety for the protection of citizens .
Furthermore , they have to establish a system which determines the competence and responsibility of national authorities in respect of nuclear waste management .
Public information has to be provided as well , because it is very important that the public has appropriate knowledge of the events taking place around them .
In all the measures that we undertake we must ensure the safety of the general public and the environment .
I support the implementation of the ' safety culture ' , which entails the provision of safety standards , independent and strong regulators , suitable human and financial resources and sufficient information to the general public .
A transparent process must be used for informing the general public .
Enhancing transparency entails clearly defining what the authorities ' responsibilities are and providing a well-founded and coordinated system for informing the general public in order to gain and maintain their confidence in the management of radioactive waste resulting from the nuclear energy production process and from nuclear medicine .
The subject of the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste is highly topical .
Recent events in Japan have once again highlighted the immediate risks which affect workers and citizens who are exposed to radioactive material .
We have many tonnes of radioactive waste in Europe which people have to move about .
I am pleased that we can lay the foundations which will help to protect these people 's health throughout the whole of Europe .
We have produced a report in Parliament which is based on the Commission 's technical report and which puts the focus on people , including employees of transport companies and plants which work with radioactive waste and employees at the final storage sites .
Therefore , the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have focused on protecting the workers involved by putting in place safety measures , health protection measures and training for employees on the subject of radioactive waste . Economic interests must never be given a higher priority than the health of workers and citizens .
Therefore , we need comprehensive documentation of all the waste and its management , while it remains harmful to people and the environment .
I am pleased that so many of our requirements have been included in the final report by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Nuclear energy is a controversial topic that results in ferocious debates in Parliament and amongst our groups .
Fukushima has stirred up this debate and , as a result , many people have changed their views dramatically .
It is positive that this issue is being dealt with in a way that allows both supporters and opponents in Parliament to voice their opinions .
However , regardless of our position on this issue , the radioactive waste problem is a reality and we must deal with waste in the best and safest way possible .
That is why I welcome this report , which contributes to a stricter and safer waste policy , treats every Member State equally and highlights the responsibilities of waste producers .
I support the ' polluter pays ' principle and we should under no circumstances be shirking our responsibilities .
For that reason , I am also calling for a ban on exports of nuclear waste to third countries .
This is not only a question of ethics , but also a matter of safety and protecting people .
Indeed , we have no access to or control over the waste policies pursued by third countries .
That is an unacceptable risk .
We have to manage our waste on our own and demand through strict legislation and proposals that this takes place in the safest and most technically optimal way .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
Τhe next item is one-minute speeches .
- ( SK ) Madam President , free Sundays should become part of a European standard in the area of employment rights .
This was agreed on by representatives of trade unions , civic bodies and Christian groups and churches , which founded the European Sunday Alliance this week in Brussels .
A free Sunday is important from the perspective of decent employment conditions , but it also creates an opportunity to build up family relationships , particularly between parents and children .
I am pleased that I was present at the birth of this initiative , just like the two civic associations from Slovakia - the Large Families Club and the Alliance for Sunday .
The Commission , in its revision of the Working Time Directive , should take account of the view of the hundreds of organisations from across Europe federated in the newly established alliance , because such a large association cannot be ignored when creating laws .
( HU ) Madam President , in the last few weeks the founders of Szeklerland 's Representative Office in Brussels , and the Hungarian community in Romania in general , have had to endure a long chain of attacks and a hostile hysteria campaign from the Romanian political elite .
Meanwhile , attempts have been made to force a territorial and administrative reorganisation plan in Romania , which would create eight majority megaregions , forcing the Hungarian majority living in Szeklerland and Partium into absolute minority .
Pursuant to the explicit provisions set out in the European Charter of Local Self-Government and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , the Transylvanian Hungarian MEPs from Romania firmly reject this antidemocratic and discriminative method of regional reorganisation of their country .
We ask for your effective help in the name of the common democratic values of the governing Popular Parties of Romania and Hungary , and we ask for Parliament 's active support for the protection of the Transylvanian Hungarian community .
( LV ) Madam President , what do you think the word ' perversion ' means ?
In the dictionary this word means complete distortion .
Political perversion means nothing but lies and cynical deception of voters .
It appears that in Latvia , there has appeared a group of members of parliament who are political perverts .
The issue is that during the last elections to the Latvian parliament , members of the Saskaņas centrs ( Harmony Centre ) group promised their Russian-speaking constituents , who in Latvia comprise more than 40 % of the population , that they would protect their native language .
Last week , however , this group voted for increased penalties for those people who fail to use the official state language in the private sector .
It turns out that they promise one thing , and do another .
I believe you will agree that that is perversion .
It is possible that Latvia will become the birthplace of a new political movement , the ' Perversion Centre ' .
Thank you for your attention .
( EL ) Madam President , certainly no European , and hence no Greek , likes to go round with a begging bowl .
We Greeks need to understand that we have turned our standard of living back at least 10 years .
I fear that , unfortunately , the same will happen in other countries too .
However , we see that we are being blamed for things which go beyond our responsibilities .
Seventeen captains in Europe , plus as many mates , seventeen budgets , seventeen bond markets and one common currency .
The common currency cannot go on like this .
We need a common economic policy , a single bond market and joint coordination .
Without doubt , fiscal prudence implies a shake-up in the consumer climate .
I do not see anything happening in that direction .
We need to safeguard the major achievements of the last 65 years , culminating in the single currency , by being more disciplined with ourselves .
Madam President , less than a year ago I set up a cross-party petition for a referendum in the UK in respect of membership of the European Union .
The campaign has attracted high-profile support from across the political spectrum .
What these people have railed against is the EU obsession of creating a European federal state , ignoring the will of the people and democracy .
One cannot ignore the will of people forever .
My constituents constantly come to me and say , ' When are we going to get a say on our membership of the European Union ? '
The will of the people across Europe has been ignored , a single currency has been created , against the will of the people of Europe , and look what problems have been created .
There have been referenda in Member States and they have been ignored .
The people from my constituency , the people across the UK and the people across the European Union are saying , ' Let the people decide ' .
The professional politicians have made a mess .
Let the people decide .
( PL ) Madam President , a Treaty of Good Neighbourship and Friendly Cooperation was signed between Poland and Germany as long ago as 11 June 1991 , forming a basis for current relations between the two countries .
Yesterday , on the 20th anniversary of this momentous event , a joint consultation between the Polish and German governments took place in Warsaw , chaired by Mr Tusk , the Polish Prime Minister , and Mrs Merkel , the German Chancellor .
Over 20 ministers and deputy ministers from the individual departments of both states took part in the consultation .
The outcome of the joint meeting is the statement by the governments of the Republic of Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany entitled ' Neighbours and Partners ' , together with an attached programme of cooperation for the coming years .
On the occasion of this anniversary , I should like to remind the House of the commitment shown by successive German governments to supporting Polish attempts to join the European Union .
Relations between Poland and Germany are constantly improving , one example of which is the growing volume of trade between the two countries .
Our economies are among the most dynamic in Europe .
We hope that relations between Poland and Germany will continue to develop , for the good of our citizens and of Europe as a whole .
( DE ) Madam President , the European Union needs an effective common agricultural policy to enable it to meet society 's demands for high standards and , most importantly , to allow it to play a strong , independent role .
Businesses in Europe must remain competitive .
They are faced with major challenges , including fluctuations in the price of raw materials , high production costs and low income levels .
Downward pressure is being exerted on prices by the low production costs and low social , environmental and quality standards in third countries , which cannot be compared with the standards in the EU .
When new trading relationships are established , it is essential for us to protect European production levels by including safeguard clauses .
Clauses of this kind which are used in an industrial context , for example in trade agreements with South Korea concerning the car industry , must also be applied to agriculture .
This is all about establishing a level playing field and equal opportunities for all .
Every country should have the right to focus on the concerns of its citizens , including food security , the environment , reservations about genetic modification and the needs of rural areas , in order to support sustainable agriculture in Europe .
Madam President , last week in the Catalan Parliament some MEPs representing the main political parties of Catalonia made a common stand in defence of our language , Catalan , in the EU and in its institutions .
We call again for Catalan to be recognised as an official language in the European Parliament , just as many other Catalan MEPs have been doing over the last 25 years .
Now there is a new opportunity for the Catalan language , which has been prohibited for centuries in the Spanish state .
In a few months Croatia will enter the Union .
For Croatian to be an official language , the Treaty has to be modified .
When that time comes , we will again ask the Spanish Government to allow official status for Catalan in the EU .
The Spanish Government should bring the Catalan language to the EU just as the Irish Government did with the Gaelic language some years ago .
We ask for the support of the European Parliament and the Commission to achieve recognition of Catalan as an official language .
( EL ) Madam President , the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Aden , and now in the huge sea area of the Indian Ocean , is still getting worse , despite efforts by EU NAVFOR .
The size of the area in which pirates operate makes it hard to deal with the problem of piracy with military resources alone .
As such , measures to suppress the problem , if possible within the framework of an ambitious international strategy , must be improved in conjunction with measures to combat its root causes .
Piracy is rooted in absolute poverty and lack of governance , two permanent features of Somalia over the last 20 years .
The European Union has the facility to make greater use of the European Development Fund for this purpose .
Both the European Union and the United Nations have acquired experience in programmes which have produced real results in Somalia and that work must be continued and increased .
( PL ) Madam President , last night Anatoly Bitkov died in Magadan , the principal town of the Kolyma region in Russia .
He was the chief editor of the local television channel ' Kolyma Plyus ' .
Without wishing to pre-empt any findings as to whether this was murder or natural death , or whether it was a politically motivated murder or not , it is worth pointing out that this sad event is unfortunately not an exception .
Journalists die in Russia , and journalists investigating political issues die even more frequently .
A great many serious analyses have found that around 200 journalists have died in the Russian Federation over the past 10 years .
This is the highest-risk profession in Russia today .
Without freedom and safety for journalists , there can be no freedom of the media , and without freedom of the media there can be no democracy .
We should always remember this in our cooperation and collaboration with the Russian Federation .
Madam President , on Saturday I will set sail for Gaza with hundreds of other activists as part of the Freedom Flotilla 2 .
We will be bringing medicine and reconstruction materials that are desperately needed .
As a result of Israel 's illegal blockade , 300 000 people live on less than a dollar a day and there is over 40 % unemployment .
Catherine Ashton has said that the flotilla is not the right response to the situation in Gaza , but the EU 's response is to continue to fund , through research grants , the Israeli armaments companies that make the weapons that kill Palestinian civilians .
Instead of criticising the flotilla , the EU should condemn the threats of violence made against us by the Israel Defence Forces .
Given the fact that they murdered nine activists on the flotilla last year , these threats have to be taken extremely seriously .
The EU should also end its complicity with the continuing oppression of the Palestinian people .
- ( SK ) Madam President , two weeks ago in Strasbourg , there was a heated discussion on the Hungarian constitution .
Today we also have the statement of the Venice Commission .
I would therefore like to repeat my warning about the problematic wording of the Hungarian constitution , particularly in the formulation of Section D , which talks about the responsibility of Hungary for all Hungarians , about a single Hungarian nation , about collective rights and about the creation of collective self-governing authorities in other countries , based on the principle of ethnicity .
The Venice Commission has emphasised the individual nature of human rights , as the framework agreement for the protection of ethnic minorities does not assume any collective minority rights .
The Venice Commission has cast doubt on the principle of democracy by accepting a constitutional law for cultural , religious , ethical , social , economic and financial policy .
I expect a rapid response from the EU institutions to the opinion of the Venice Commission on the Hungarian constitution .
( EL ) Madam President , I wonder if the economic crisis can be resolved with measures at the expense of the climate .
The European Commission , unfortunately , says it can , given that it and Portugal have jointly endorsed a term on reduced guaranteed prices for energy from renewable sources as a lawful measure in the memorandum on the support mechanism .
In Greece , investments in renewable energy are one of the few counterweights to the economic crisis and the commitment by the outgoing Minister for Environmental Affairs to safeguard guaranteed prices needs to be renewed immediately by her successor .
However , the debate on a possible exemption for countries with economic problems from the already inadequate European climate targets , the 20-20-20 targets , is a serious absurdity .
These choices illustrate an unacceptable attitude endorsed by the Commission ; they set entire European policies in stone and no one anywhere is held to account .
All Europe will achieve with this is to cut the branch it is sitting on .
Climate targets must be increased to the levels called for by scientists and special programmes must be designed for countries with economic problems .
It is our destiny to find a way out of the impasse and face the economic , social and environmental crisis .
In the final analysis , fiscal restructuring is one thing and an attack on environmental sustainability is another .
- ( SK ) Madam President , Europe and the European Union want to become the most competitive and the best , most advanced economy in the world .
In order to achieve that , however , we should not just talk about funding and various related matters , but , as the European Union , we should certainly invest more in education , science , research and innovation .
The European Commission very recently published some additional results of research into Member State investments in this area .
The countries were divided into four groups , and my own country , Slovakia , unfortunately obtained a very unflattering place in only the third group , investing just 0.48 % of the original 2 % it had committed to investing in science , education and research in Europe 2020 .
I would therefore like to ask the EU , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council to try harder to support Member States , and to push harder for them to invest in this area , because it is only through the money we invest in research , innovation and education that we can really fulfil the objectives of Europe 2020 .
( GA ) Madam President , for the last 20 years the Union has taken a central role in encouraging peace and reconciliation in Ireland .
The Union has given more than EUR 1.3 billion to the Programme for Peace and Reconciliation since 1994 and around EUR 349 million to the International Fund for Ireland .


The violent incidents in east Belfast and the murder of Ronan Kerr show how important it is to continue with those schemes which encourage economic and social development on both sides of the border .
This week , representatives from the International Fund for Ireland and the Programme for Peace and Reconciliation were here in the European Parliament to speak to the Regional Development Committee on the importance of the support of Parliament and the Union for this programme .
I believe strongly that the European Union and the other international partners should think hard about the issue and make the decision to continue with this worthwhile and effective programme .
Madam President , farming is the heart of the Welsh economy , yet under increasing EU legislation Welsh farmers are prevented from competing successfully , despite standards being some of the highest in Europe .
Under EID regulations , farmers are fined for inaccurate data , despite serious faults with the technology .
I have presented this issue to the Commission on numerous occasions , as have representatives from many Member States .
Welsh farmers feel the flawed EID system amounts to a stealth tax .
On another matter , Welsh cattle under 24 months of age cannot be labelled as Welsh under PGI legislation .
The same is not true in Scotland , where the beef industry can label meat from any age of animal with the country stamp .
Wales is producing fantastic beef and must be able to label it as Welsh .
Trade in the global market depends upon a country 's produce being promoted .
These are significant matters for hundreds of farmers in Wales who run high-quality businesses that in many cases have been in families for generations .
I demand explanations .
( ES ) Madam President , I wish to express my support for the package of measures designed to strengthen the economic governance of the Union , as well as the measures aimed at clarifying and speeding up the disciplinary procedure for any Member States with an excessive deficit .
However , the Union should be aware that some Member States are trying to meet the budget demands that Europe makes of them at the cost of destabilising the accounts of sub-state governments .
The Spanish State is a paradigmatic example of that : it is attempting to meet requirements by passing its deficit on to the autonomous governments and local councils .
These practices must be condemned , because they do not enter into the spirit of the EU 's Stability and Growth Pact and , above all , because they greatly harm the economic recovery of economically powerful nations such as Catalonia .
( HU ) Madam President , the EU does not interfere with the administrative affairs of its Member States .
It is important to highlight this , because today some Romanian politicians explain the necessity of administrative reorganisation by claiming that this is the only way Romania can receive more money from the Structural Funds .
The current debate in Romania is about a reform that would create eight NUTS 2 level administrative units from the current 41 counties that are NUTS 3 administrative units , while ignoring geographical , economic , social and cultural realities .
The main debates concern the Romanian Hungarians in particular , because this native national community , despite the provisions enshrined in the relevant convention of the Council of Europe , would not represent a majority in any of the new administrative units and would lose its rights to set up a local government .
The EU has to ensure that Member States not only expect the EU itself to observe the principle of subsidiarity , but that they , too , ensure that decision making takes place as close to the citizens as possible .
( RO ) Madam President , as you are probably aware , the second round of voting took place this weekend in the local elections in Chişinău , in the Republic of Moldova .
As was also noted by the OSCE observers , these elections , like those in other locations in the Republic of Moldova , were conducted largely in accordance with European and international standards , marking real progress compared to the parliamentary elections which took place in 2010 .
I can only rejoice at the local election results in the Republic of Moldova , which have strengthened the position of the parties in the Alliance for European Integration , currently in government .
The results of the elections also send a very clear signal from Moldova 's citizens that their aspiration to become a prosperous , democratic society and for the Republic of Moldova to be integrated into the European Union is strong and real .
They must also provide encouragement to the parties in the Alliance for European Integration to continue implementing the reforms which they have committed to undertake .
On a personal note , I welcome and am delighted that Dorin Chirtoacă won a new term of office as Mayor of Chişinău .
( PL ) Madam President , public opinion in Poland was shocked recently by an event which took place at six o 'clock in the morning .
Eight armed officials , including six special services agents , forced their way into one of the flats in a tower block .
There was nothing strange about this , since the residents of the block included an individual wanted for drug dealing , an arms trader and someone suspected of organising bank robberies .
Yet the victim was none of these people .
The block of flats was home to an Internet user , a student who had the courage to describe the current government 's actions ironically .
It is highly alarming if those in power are so sensitive to criticism , satire and laughter that they send armed officials at six o 'clock in the morning to students who use the Internet .
Such practices should be opposed , particularly here in the European Parliament .
( PL ) Madam President , in 10 days ' time Poland will take over the presidency of the European Union , and therefore we should keep a close check on what is happening in Poland .
The quality of democracy can be measured by the way in which the opposition is treated .
In Poland , unfortunately , a witch-hunt is being conducted against the opposition , and the courts have joined in .
In the case involving the former prime minister and leader of the opposition , Jarosław Kaczyński , a court has ordered that he undergo psychiatric tests .
This is especially mean in view of the fact that the only reason for ordering him to undergo such tests was that he admitted that he had used sedatives after the Smolensk tragedy , in which his brother , sister-in-law and many of his friends died .
There was nothing unusual in this , and it is backed up by the appropriate medical documentation .
This turn of events is deplorable since it has a European subtext , and we will see its culmination on 6 July .
It is on this date that Jarosław Kaczyński will undergo psychiatric tests , while Donald Tusk is to deliver an inauguration speech in Strasbourg for his presidency of the European Union .
I hope that the international community will protest against the abuse of psychiatric tests for political battles , following the model of the Soviet Union and Belarus .
That concludes the debate on this item .
Greenhouse gas emission reductions and risk of carbon leakage ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Bas Eickhout , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the analysis of options to move beyond 20 % greenhouse gas emissions and assessing the risk of carbon leakage .
rapporteur . - Madam President , if Members look at their e-mails and all the requests from lobbyists and industry , and the pros and cons on the climate , they can conclude that climate is very clearly back on the political agenda .
That is a very good thing , because climate has never been off the scientific agenda .
If you look at how science has been evolving meanwhile , the arguments for stronger climate policies have become stronger and stronger every day .
However , in the political field , it was rather quiet on the climate front after Copenhagen and Cancún .
Now it is clearly back on the political agenda .
That is a good thing .
However , what is very important is that in the meantime it has become a different debate .
It is not only a climate argument any more .
It has become more and more an economic debate , an economic argument .
If you look at the new industries relying on climate policies , they are asking for more ambitious climate policies .
Or look at our oil dependency and the situation in northern Africa : the debate on oil dependency is becoming more and more important for our economic position in the EU .
But look too at all the letters from industry , really lobbying for going to 30 % because it is in their interest ; it helps their profits if we step up our climate ambitions .
This very clearly indicates that there is a fundamental shift in the debate on climate policies .
That is very important .
It is not the economy versus ecology ; it is the economy and ecology .
That is crucial .
So what is in the report ?
Of course , we are asking the Commission to come forward with a proposal to move to 25 % reduction domestically .
This is very important , because that is the way to become less dependent on oil ; that is the way to harvest the health co-benefits ; that is also the way to really harvest the potential of energy savings .
So energy savings are also a crucial part of the report because , if we meet our energy savings targets , we are already on the path of achieving 25 % domestically in the EU .
In the report , we are asking for 30 % overall ; so 25 % domestically , but 30 % as a whole .
There are a lot of offsets still in the market , so if you have 25 % domestically , we are discussing 30 % as a whole as well .
That also limits somewhat the role of offsetting , which has also been part of the debate ; that is also in the report .
This is also a discussion on the adjustment of the emissions trading system .
Let me be very clear .
If we are stepping up climate ambitions through energy savings and we only do something relating to energy savings , the carbon price will go down ; studies estimate from EUR 15 to EUR 0 per tonne carbon .
So we also need to do something in the ETS system to make sure we have the right price and really have the incentives to move to green technologies .
It is going to be a crucial vote tomorrow for a future economy , a green economy .
I urge the Commission to follow up the request we will make as a Parliament tomorrow by coming forward with a legislative proposal .
The Council is moving , Parliament will set out its position tomorrow , and then it is up to the Commission to come forward with a proposal .
We know when we are discussing a legislative proposal that in the Council there will be no veto for any country any more .
We will have a majority in Parliament , as we will see tomorrow , and a majority in the Council to really step up our climate ambitions and make sure that the true future economy is the green economy .


( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament supports Mr Eickhout 's report because it sends out a strong message both internally and externally that we are not giving up on combating climate change .
It is an internal signal that we are taking seriously the promise made in the 2008 climate package of 20 % renewable energy and 20 % energy savings .
Mr Oettinger , you have presented us with a proposal today and we have a great deal of work ahead of us .
Both of these measures together will result in a 25 % reduction in CO2 emissions within the EU .
Who could be opposed to this ?
It is not possible , because it is a package of legislation which we have adopted .
In addition , we have a responsibility to the rest of the world .
We also have to achieve a level of 5 % clean development mechanisms ( CDMs ) .
That makes a total of 30 % .
I hope that this will not be watered down .
The amendment to paragraph 3 would destroy the entire report .
If this amendment is passed , we will be voting against the report tomorrow .
I hope that this will not be the case , because we need to send out a strong signal .
( PL ) Madam President , I have the impression that we are dealing with a new kind of madness and a new secular religion in Europe .
There is no scientific basis to prove that humans have a decisive role to play in increased atmospheric CO2 emissions .
The climate is affected by cycles lasting several centuries .
Researchers such as Professor Jaworowski , an outstanding climate researcher from Poland , have issued expert opinions on these issues .
Why does Greenland have the name it does , and yet it is entirely frozen today ?
The answer is that it once was a green island , but the climate changed , independently of human activities .
We therefore need to oppose this new secular religion and madness , which is placing a question mark over whether there was any sense at all in countries such as Poland joining the European Union , since it would be forced to spend much more money on reducing CO2 emissions than its net gains from cohesion policy to date .
If a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions is pointless , a 30 % reduction is thus even more so .
I will therefore vote against .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that Fukushima has also changed the world with regard to CO2 emissions .
This is simply about ensuring that we have a reliable energy supply .
We will have to supplement or replace nuclear energy with gas and coal .
Burning gas and coal will , of course , result in CO2 emissions .
Therefore , the level of 20 % which we have currently set ourselves is very high .
We should be pleased that we have a reserve in the form of energy efficiency , because this reserve will allow us to support the new forms of energy that we need to replace nuclear power .
Gas and coal will play an important role in replacing nuclear energy .
I believe that the trade unions and the employers are seriously concerned that CO2 policies will result in jobs moving outside Europe and that the entire raw material industry , whether it involves steel , aluminium or paper , will leave Europe , if we introduce regulations that are too strict .
I would like to warn everyone that we are pushing ahead too quickly in this area .
Our policies must be viable and realistic .
- ( SK ) Madam President , in my speech I would like to draw attention to the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which pointed out in item 3 of the opinion that the current provisions of Commission policy in the area of climate change will lead to industry being relocated outside Europe , and I am afraid that the imminent price increase for carbon dioxide emissions will accentuate this trend even further .
At the same time , the Committee 's opinion draws attention to the fact that the current reduction in the output of emissions in Europe cannot be interpreted as a signal that the EU is on the way to achieving the goal of reduced emissions .
It should rather be understood as the result of reduced industrial output and the relocation of production away from Europe , as a result of which unemployment is growing in Europe .
I therefore firmly believe that the way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is to promote the innovation of new green technologies more consistently , so that we address the need to protect air quality not just through administrative and financial instruments , but rather through support for research and the implementation of new technologies in real life .
( PT ) Madam President , Europe 's energy and climate strategy must combine economic competitiveness with energy security and environmental concerns .
The purpose of going beyond the 20 % target for reducing greenhouse gas emissions must be to reconcile these objectives .
I agree with stepping up reduction efforts from 20 % to 25 % , in which the extra 5 % corresponds to an increase in energy efficiency .
It is essential , however , to find solutions that maintain the competitiveness of European industry .
In that respect , I welcome the fact that for the first time there is a broad consensus in Parliament for the inclusion of a sectoral approach .
This approach will make the greenhouse gas emissions reduction target set for a particular country compatible with the holistic , global treatment of each industrial sector , thus preventing carbon leakage .
( PL ) Madam President , the public expects us , as politicians , to be pragmatic , rational and efficient in all of our actions .
Taxpayers can forgive us many things , but they will not forgive us if we spend their money and have nothing to show for it .
When we discuss global warming , we should approach it as a rational project .
Let us leave aside for a moment issues relating to the legitimacy or otherwise of this theory , which formed the basis of our political decisions on this issue .
We are aware that the science is disputed , but we do not wish to resolve this dispute here .
I should however like to highlight the fact that a characteristic feature of greenhouse gases is that they know no borders .
Even if the European Union adopts the tightest possible limits on greenhouse gas emissions , the outcome will be the same if China , India and other developing countries do not also adopt such limits at the same time .
In addition to the fact that European taxpayers ' pockets will be hit , unemployment will rise if production is limited , and jobs will move outside the borders of the European Union .
In view of the above , let us act rationally if we are to act at all on this matter , so that this is a global process , for only then will it be effective .
If it is true that a month 's worth of greenhouse gas emissions in China corresponds to an annual 20 % decrease in Europe , then this says a lot .

( RO ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Eickhout for drafting this report .
I regard the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in Europe as vital , based on the conclusions from the Cancun Summit .
This means that the EU must retain its role as global leader in the area of environmental protection .
This is why it needs to reform the implementation of its green policy .
I should emphasise how important it is to review the mechanisms for monitoring emissions and the need to take them into account within the entire budget .
It would also be useful to improve the EU 's current emissions trading scheme .
With this in mind , a recommendation has been made to extend this system 's scope of application to facilities outside the industrial sector .
I must point out the impact of European environmental policy on long-term investments in forms of green technology .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , Mrs Hedegaard wants me to pass on her greetings to you .
She has been unavoidably detained this evening and she has asked me to make a few important points on her behalf and on behalf of the Commission .
I would like to thank Parliament , all its Members and the rapporteur for this significant and far-reaching report .
We continue to attach great importance to the target of limiting global warming to 2 ° C. For this reason , we have put in place short- and medium-term targets for 2020 and a long-term strategy for 2050 .
It is clear that we must also analyse the interim stages on the timeline between 2020 and 2050 and define additional interim targets .
Last year the EU established the goal of 20 % covering the period of the next nine years .
This was done almost a year ago in Parliament and before that in the Commission and the Council .
Of course , in the light of the technical possibilities , the economic effects and the financial changes , there are arguments in favour of higher targets .
However , we only put the target of 20 % in place just under a year ago .
I do not believe that the information which we based our decision on has changed since then .
We have said that Europe will reduce emissions by 30 % if other important regions of the world are prepared to make binding agreements , because the climate is a global issue . We believe that there are still opportunities to introduce binding agreements or partial agreements .
For this reason , the conditions are 20 % for Europe alone and 30 % if we have partners , in other words , the US or China .
I believe that this is a serious , far-reaching and fair offer .
During the last year , the Commission discussed and adopted a communication which highlights the options for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by more than 20 % in line with the conclusions , in other words , a reduction of 30 % .
It also considers whether this target is technically and economically feasible and whether it will have an impact on costs , although we assume that the costs will be lower than previous estimates indicated .
We believe that the principle of reliable planning should currently be given priority .
This means that industry , the economy and private citizens have the security to plan ahead on the basis of the targets which were adopted last year with a democratic majority of 20 % stand-alone and 30 % when other relevant partners are prepared to enter into binding agreements .
A sort of automatic mechanism was used to show that if energy efficiency was added to the 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions then 25 % would automatically be possible .
However , I would like to remind you that at the same time and on the basis of the same information Parliament has been discussing 20 , 20 , 20 for some years .
No mention has been made of the last 20 % automatically turning the second 20 % into 25 % simply because it was adopted later and is now being addressed by the Commission .
That would not be in the spirit of the inventor .
This was never referred to in speeches in 2007 or 2009 .
It is a new idea which is open to discussion .
However , I do not agree with the automatic mechanism .
If we in the Commission and in the European Union had taken energy efficiency more seriously at an earlier stage , the question of the automatic mechanism would probably not have arisen .
Then there is the question of balancing the interests of the economy and the environment .
I believe that innovation , in particular in the area of the environment , offers significant opportunities for engineers and technicians , for adding value in a variety of ways and , therefore , for creating jobs .
We must aim to ensure that these new jobs in the field of energy and climate are created in Europe .
On the other hand , we must make sure that we do not lose any essential jobs .
What do I mean by that ?
I mean that the world should not produce more aluminium and steel than it needs .
However , the quantity of steel , aluminium and copper needed in Europe and in the rest of the world should , as far as possible , be manufactured here in Europe , at least if it is currently produced here .
It is acceptable to relocate or avoid the production of steel , aluminium and copper wherever it is possible to do so .
However , the quantity of steel , aluminium and copper needed in Europe and in the rest of the world should , if possible , be manufactured in Europe , in competition with other locations .
We believe it would be wrong to move production deliberately .
Therefore , when balancing these interests , we must continue in future to consider whether higher CO2 emission reduction targets are feasible , whether they will help to retain jobs in ' old industries ' and whether we can prevent these jobs from being moved elsewhere .
One thing is clear .
I would prefer jobs in the steel industry and steel production to remain in Europe with a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions , rather than see them move to Brazil , Malaysia or America , where the CO2 emissions levels would be 100 % .
Then we would have put our money on the wrong solution .
It is better to have a 20 % reduction in emissions and to retain the jobs , the added value and the tax revenues than to lose the jobs , to have a clear conscience in Europe and to have 100 % emissions in America and Asia with the jobs and the tax revenues going to these areas .
This is a very pragmatic approach that nevertheless takes the environment and the economy into consideration .
You are calling on the Commission to make more far-reaching proposals in individual areas .
We will be happy to meet your demands .
We are relying on the fact that progress will be made by other governments throughout the world during other global conferences and also after the elections in the US in the late autumn of this year .
Finally , I want to encourage Parliament to continue to support us with its expert contributions and to make the appropriate demands on us .
We believe that the European Union remains on the right track and we want to ensure by means of controls and transparency that we achieve the target of 20 % and that nothing goes wrong in Europe .
In the autumn we will be presenting to you our thoughts on the revision of the emissions trading system ( ETS ) .
We will be submitting a report , as we promised today in the proposal on energy efficiency , about whether the increase in efficiency will lead to a significant change in the market for CO2 .
If necessary , we will have to investigate whether there will be shortages , to ensure that emissions trading remains an effective instrument for reducing CO2 emissions within the market economy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 23 June 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I take this opportunity to express my opposition to a unilateral increase in the European target for greenhouse gas emission reductions to beyond 20 % by 2020 , given the lack of a global climate agreement involving all the major emitters .
It should not be forgotten , in fact , that the European Union is still the only area in the world to have adopted legally binding emission reduction targets .
The immediate consequence of that is that European industry is exposed to strong competition from global competitors that are not bound by the same constraints .
In my opinion , therefore , the Union 's priority should first of all be to achieve the 20-20-20 targets set by the Climate and Energy Package , which are already very ambitious .
That is the only way we can define an environmental policy for the Union that enables European businesses to remain competitive at global level in order to sustain economic growth and especially job creation .
In conclusion , I share the concerns expressed by Italian industry representatives that industry is currently not in a position to sign up to more ambitious commitments than those already established by the European Council and confirmed by the Commission in the Emissions Trading Directive .
The Commission Roadmap for moving to a competitive low-carbon economy in 2050 suggests that achieving the 20 % energy efficiency target would automatically lead to a 25 % reduction in emissions , without any change to the current legislative framework .
Without an international agreement , unilaterally raising the emissions reduction target could threaten the competitiveness of our industry as well as growth and jobs in the European Union .
We should instead go down the road of energy savings and renewable energy .
In this respect I support Commissioner Oettinger on the new energy efficiency proposal , which will certainly bring about savings for individuals and businesses by helping them manage their own consumption .
Moreover , in discussing the EU 's future climate policies , we cannot leave out of the equation the new European and international energy scenario that has emerged following the uprisings in North Africa and the nuclear crisis .
These factors will have a significant impact on energy costs in the medium term , and we will need to assess their repercussions on Europe 's current environmental strategy .
Suffice it to say that abandoning nuclear power will force Germany to use more fossil fuels , thus raising its greenhouse gas emission levels .
We must therefore reorient our environmental policies to create much-needed convergence with our energy policies , leaving traditional sectoral approaches behind .
The economies of certain EU Member States , including that of my own country , Poland , are already suffering the harmful effects of the arbitrarily imposed climate and energy package , used as a tool to implement the political objective of 3 x 20 .
However this political objective is often misrepresented as well : people talk about a 20 % drop in energy consumption , yet the actual objective is a 20 % increase in energy efficiency , which is not the same thing .
The term ' efficiency ' is often used incorrectly in EU documents , due to a misunderstanding of the term ' energy efficiency ' and methods for its assessment , or in other words whether we are talking about national gross efficiency or efficiency per capita , or conversion efficiency , for example the conversion of primary energy into useful work .
An emphasis on increasing efficiency , instead of on limiting consumption , will result in technological innovations being prioritised , which will be to our advantage .
Such innovations hold the greatest potential for limiting emissions , by even more than the target of 20 % .
The Member States should have the right to make their own choices in respect of methods and timetables for limiting emissions , mainly through increased efficiency .
In the case of Poland , this relates mainly to the enormous potential represented firstly by the wholesale improvement of new and old buildings in terms of thermal efficiency , and secondly by the widespread replacement of old thermal power plants in residential buildings with modern thermal electric power plants .
The climate and energy package needs to be revised in order to ensure that the Member States are better adapted to reducing emissions .
Climate change presents the international community with a serious challenge .
The results which have been presented show that Europe is pursuing an effective climate policy .
It would be wrong for the EU to set new unilateral targets , in view of the fact there are no regulations at global level containing binding reduction targets .
Poland is alarmed at the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Eickhout , which covers many issues which could pose a threat to the European economy .
Imposing a further reduction in emissions from 20 % to 30 % may cause a great deal of damage as far as climate change is concerned .
If production costs in Europe are too high , the global quantity of emissions will rise , due to increased imports of products from countries with low efficiency in terms of emissions .
European industry has shown that we can count on its commitment to searching for innovative solutions which will help in the fight against climate change .
Groundbreaking achievements are only possible on the basis of well-planned long-term investments .
In view of the very high level of coal usage in Poland 's energy sector , as of 2013 Polish industry will be forced to bear significantly higher costs than its European competitors , due to the ETS .
This may give rise to huge problems in terms of accomplishing the original reduction target at the same time as maintaining financial liquidity .
Raising the reduction target by a further 5 % or 10 % will cause many Polish companies to collapse , and we cannot allow this to happen .
in writing . - When my own country , Scotland , passed a Climate Change Act in 2009 it called for a 42 % emissions cut by 2020 .
These targets are ambitious but we consider them a vital part of our efforts against climate change .
My colleague Mr Eickhout has highlighted the numerous benefits to the EU of having more ambitious targets , and moves within this parliament to reduce our ambitions will be rejected by Europe 's citizens .
In its original form , the report shows an enormous amount of amateurish enthusiasm and a somewhat unrealistic attempt to ignore the reality of electricity supplies today , as well as presenting a catalogue of wishful thinking .
It is likely that all EU citizens will applaud the bold plans for emissions reductions of 80-95 % by 2050 .
Yet when we get down to details , the plan as it currently stands ought to be based on the fully realistic opportunities offered by current energy resources .
It is impossible to eliminate the use of coal and natural gas from one day to the next , and incidentally there has been a marked increase in the use of natural gas in recent years in EU Member States .
In connection with the hysteria which broke out after the earthquake in Japan and the problems concerning the reactor at the Fukushima power plant , the citizens of certain EU Member States decided to move away from nuclear energy within a relatively short space of time , although there are still no signs of any generalised problem .
In concrete terms , we can see that the EU does not have any transmission lines that could transmit a sufficient quantity of electricity from north to south or east to west .
It is widely known that the wind does not blow all the time , even in North Germany , and solar cells , which currently have an efficiency of around 11 % , can only convert the solar energy which falls on them into electrical current .
The output of solar power stations thus fluctuates considerably over the course of a day and during the year .
I support the conclusions of the report by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , but they must necessarily be followed up a detailed analysis of the plans .
in writing . - ( FI ) The European Climate and Energy Policy is characterised by an abundance of irrational solutions .
It created emissions trading , which artificially raises the price of electricity and pushes up costs , with barely any benefit to the climate or the environment .
It established wind power in places where it is not windy .
Feed-in tariffs have made profitable what should never really be profitable .
Income has been redistributed away from industry to companies that produce electricity for the stock exchange .
Renewable energy targets have been set within such an unrealistic timeframe that it endangers sustainable forestry .
We can no longer afford such things , now that the global economy is in crisis and the euro 's credibility is at stake .
In the light of all this , I cannot understand Parliament 's eagerness to increase our unilateral targets for cutting emissions , the global environmental benefits of which will be minimal compared to the burden it will put on our industry and jobs .
As Germany has now said that it is abandoning nuclear power , it is obvious that the EU will not achieve its targets for cutting emissions , as a consequence of the increased use of fossil energy .
Instead , the cost of both emission rights and electricity will rise .
Employers and workers will have to pay the price , while emissions continue to increase beyond our borders .
Now is the time for common sense .
It is clear that we cannot obtain global support for binding emission cuts , and that is why the emphasis must be on technical solutions , and the problem must be seen in different contexts : we need a different strategy to control those things that affect the climate .
The short-term culprits are aerosols , soot , methane and ozone in the atmosphere : they act differently from the long-term ones , such as carbon dioxide , hydrocarbons or nitrous oxides .
If we just concentrate on one , carbon dioxide , it shows our ignorance of the complexity of the problem .
On the eve of the vote on the report on a possible increase in the greenhouse gas emission reduction target by 2020 from 20 % to 30 % , I would like to express my alarm at the conclusions , which go too far .
In general , we agree with the implementation of the 3 x 20 objectives which have already been set , but the scale and cost of undertakings associated with the possible adoption of a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions would be enormous .
Investors , who are already bearing the costs of keeping up with competition from third countries in which environmental regulations are less rigorous than in Europe , are faced with a dilemma as to whether they should remain in Europe or relocate their companies .
A unilateral increase in targets is not an effective way to prevent climate change .
The proposed scenario of a 30 % reduction will have a huge impact on sectors participating in the ETS , and will force them to step up measures to a significantly greater extent than those sectors not participating in the scheme .
Measures aimed at setting reduction targets even higher are detrimental to European industry as a whole .
The pressure put on industry by climate policy will mean relocations to countries whose policies in this area demonstrate more common sense .
On a global scale , this will not reduce emissions of gases which are harmful to the climate .
The phenomenon of ' carbon leakage ' , or the relocation of industry outside the EU 's borders , is not a myth , but a real threat to economic growth and jobs in Europe .
According to the World Bank 's report , implementation of the European climate and energy package will mean a loss to the Polish economy of 1.4 % of GDP annually until 2020 , and a loss to the EU as a whole of 0.55 % .
The World Bank also estimates that electricity prices will rise by around 26.2 % in Poland , and by 12.6 % in the EU as a whole .
The EU 's previous target of a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions is already hard to swallow for Polish and Central European industry , due to the high proportion of coal used in their power industries .
We accepted this challenge , however , and set about fulfilling our obligations .
Poland cannot afford to increase the target for reduction of carbon dioxide emissions to 30 % .
One solution would be for the Member States to join a CO2 emissions reduction club , on a voluntary basis .
I would call for common sense to prevail during tomorrow 's vote , against ambitions to reduce CO2 which are economically unfounded .
in writing . - ( HU ) The European Union , including Hungary , can only maintain its leading position in combating climate change by introducing new technological and economic solutions and through continuous innovation .
Hungary could be a real winner where green economic growth is concerned .
Our country still possesses CO2 emission allowances worth several billion HUF , which should be put on sale again by the government as soon as possible .
Given the abundance of resources , we could produce huge quantities of raw material for bioenergy production .
This is why I find it incomprehensible that the new Hungarian rural strategy excludes assistance for agricultural raw material production aimed at energy production .
It is high time the Hungarian government made a commitment to extend renewable energy utilisation , and supported innovative national development .
The EU , which is currently responsible for only 12 % of global greenhouse gas emissions , cannot stop climate change by itself .
In large emerging countries such as China , Brazil , India or Russia , environmental consciousness is increasing , and immense markets may open up for European companies in alternative energy sectors .
However , European companies will only be competitive on these markets if they are motivated by the European regulatory environment to pursue continuous innovation and development .
This is why we need to adopt ambitious CO2 emission targets .
Thanks to the positive CO2 balance of the new Member States , the emissions of the EU27 have already decreased by 17 % compared with the 1990 level .
Therefore , raising this target to 30 % by 2020 is very realistic .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
2012 draft budget trilogue ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mrs Balzani , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the mandate for the trialogue on the 2012 Draft Budget ( 2011 / 2019 ( BUD ) ) .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the mandate for the trialogue the budget procedure entered its most concrete phase , the phase in which the budgetary authorities actually enter into discussions which may produce useful and significant results .
This is why , above all , I hope that this trialogue is an opportunity that will be taken , an opportunity not to be missed .
We embarked on the budget procedure in a spirit of great realism .
The Member States are currently implementing tough national budgetary consolidation policies , and these policies have to find an important balance between the need to tackle the crisis and the need to relaunch the economy and investment .
This is precisely why at this time the European Union budget , which has a great and unique ability to give added value to expenditure , investment and resources , can and absolutely must play a fundamental role .
A fundamental role in which it is crucial that the Europe 2020 strategy should be taken as a starting point .
This Parliament has made the Europe 2020 strategy a central issue of the budgetary discussions right from the start .
The 2012 budget can and must be the first step in taking concrete measures towards this strategy , which is the tool that has been chosen precisely for the relaunch of our Union .
In this sense , giving a financial dimension to the Europe 2020 strategy brings into play and gives a central role to our consistency and credibility .
We cannot build such an ambitious strategy without implementing it immediately , precisely at a time when it is crucial that this tool for relaunching the economy be made to fully deploy its effects .
Consistency , credibility and the ambitious Europe 2020 strategy therefore also become decisive and fundamental in guaranteeing the stability we need today within the European Union , as well as with regard to our single currency .
There are also other facts and policies that are coming to the fore .
I am thinking of democratic processes in the Mediterranean area and the need to guarantee an external dimension to the European Union , which at this time can truly play a role and resume an important position of leadership for itself .
Let us not forget that the budget is not just an instrument to be approved when there has to be a forecast for the following year .
It is also a tool that has to function throughout the course of the year .
In this sense it is an issue requiring delicate handling not only with regard to the payments for the following year , but also with regard to implementation of the 2011 budget for the current year .
Consistency , credibility and strong , decisive , single-minded use of the budget as a fundamental instrument for fighting the crisis and compensating for Member States ' consolidation policies - these are all issues that require a serious commitment on our part , that must truly ensure we once again play a crucial role in the security of the European Union , and above all - and this is my major concern - that invite us not to waste the opportunity of the trialogue .
The trialogue can and must truly be a valuable opportunity for a concrete and useful exchange , which this year will bring us to a shared vision of the budgetary choices we need to make .
I find that sharing choices when working on a document as important as the budget is another excellent sign of our ability to work within the Union , which is particularly important at this time .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am here to listen to your views on the draft budget presented by the Commission and on the mandate for the trilogue .
Important work lies ahead of us and we will soon have the opportunity at the forthcoming trilogue to discuss the points of interest to Parliament .
But it is clear , and this was in the presentation by the rapporteur , that under the present unusual circumstances drafting and finding compromises on the 2012 budget cannot be ' business as usual ' .
Therefore , a balance between consolidation of public finances and investment conducive to growth and jobs is a must and I think this is visible in our draft .
Even in a time of crisis we need investment to reinforce the very fragile recovery of the European economy .
So here is a part of our answer in the 2012 budget .
We have also clearly upgraded the priorities relating to the Europe 2020 strategy .
In our estimates this represents EUR 62.6 billion , which is equal to 43.5 % of the total draft budget .
Also upgraded is the Lisbon-Treaty-related expenditure , which is increased by 4 % .
This is the first part of the answer .
The second part of the answer is , of course , a rigorous approach to administration , zero growth of the Commission , and what we call the negative priorities for the very tough assessment of programmes - to see whether they are working or not - and , on the basis of performance , in some areas budgeting below the pre-existing financial programming for 2012 .
As a result the 2012 draft budget is almost EUR 9 billion below the ceiling of the financial perspective set for 2012 .
It is not enough to draft a budget .
There is our common obligation to respond to developments globally .
This is especially the case of the southern Mediterranean .
Therefore we have agreed amending letter No 1 to the 2012 budget , which was agreed a week ago , in order to upgrade the budgetary response to our neighbourhood and especially to the southern Mediterranean for 2011 , 2012 and 2013 by more than EUR 1.3 billion .
For next year that means mobilising additionally almost EUR 500 million for the southern Mediterranean and generally for that neighbourhood , consuming the margin of Heading 4 , but that is also at the expense of flexibility instruments up to EUR 150-153 million .

The result is as it was presented .
The payment should grow by 4.9 % but this is not par plaisir ; this is in order to pay the pending legal obligations , which are growing at the end of the financial perspective .
This is , I have to repeat once more , exactly EUR 8.8 billion less than was the ceiling for 2012 .
What is growing is research and development ; what is growing is cohesion , which is now moving because eligible programmes have now finished and we have to pay the bills of the Member States .
But generally we are , even for cohesion , very much below what was the upgraded forecast of the Member States for 2012 .
So to sum up , I do not expect any easy discussions with the Council over the future .
The experience of the 2011 procedure was very instructive .
We need the support of Parliament to shape a decent budget for the next year : consolidation on the one hand and contribution to growth and jobs on the other .
I hope that this year the procedure will be smoother and less nervous than the procedure for the 2011 budget .
Mr President , the Commission 's suggestion that the 2012 budget should limit its increase to the absolute minimum necessary to meet the EU 's legal commitments would mean freezing the European Union , and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament cannot agree with that .
We believe in Europe , we believe in its policies and the need to finance them , because , Commissioner , the EU is not an expense but rather an added value for national policies .
As noted by the rapporteur , we fully agree that the budget should be aimed at achieving the EU 2020 strategy , competitiveness and employment , but this major concern must not further distract us from the chronic underfunding of the Union 's external action .
It is incompatible with the goal of the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council for the Union to be a prominent global player with an inflation increase of barely 2.9 % .
The proposal that has been made makes it difficult to meet the public 's demands and fulfil our responsibility to promote peace , development , international stability and human rights in the world .
I shall focus on the points that are of concern to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Firstly , the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy , particularly its Mediterranean dimension , must be reflected in the budget .
To begin with , Commissioner , with regard to Palestine , the Middle East peace process and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency ( UNRWA ) , the Commission 's proposal suggests a budget cut of EUR 100 million .
I believe that peace in the Middle East is sensitive enough , and UNRWA 's work important enough , not to be subjected , year after year , to the Commission 's game of proposing lower figures which then rise during the negotiation on budgetary procedure .
The Mediterranean area is very important , Commissioner , but not to the detriment of other areas of the European Union 's external action .
An example of this is Latin America and its notorious underfunding .
As well as that infamous underfunding there is a deadlock of funds for countries that could benefit from the Industrialised Countries Instrument ( ICI + ) but - and I shall finish now , Mr President - are unable to do so because there is no solution to the problem of the legal basis for this instrument .
Enlargement and the Instrument for Stability must also receive the funding they need , as should multilateral issues such as the European Union 's contribution to UN Women .
Just one more second , Mr President , to say that it should also be possible for us to be flexible in our use of the budget .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( DE ) Mr President , from the perspective of budgetary control , the European Union is often accused of taking a sloppy approach to spending .
Who is responsible for this ?
In 80 % of cases it is actually the Member States , which have joint responsibility for the expenditure .
It is often the Member States .
We all remember how the British Prime Minister , Mr Cameron , said to the President of the European Parliament that instead of asking for more money , we must first of all make sure that the money is spent more effectively .
Which country was the biggest offender in 2010 ?
The United Kingdom .
All the British programmes were stopped in 2010 .
Why is that ?
It is because the rules are too complicated .
Therefore , I would like to ask my fellow Members and , in particular , the Commission to campaign together with the Member States for simpler rules , for more effective and simpler monitoring systems and for the introduction of new components .
For example , if research policy were to include an award or a prize for a particularly successful , innovative project , this would make it much easier to monitor .
The same applies to cohesion policy , where we could create a leverage effect by providing project-related loans .
There are a lot of opportunities open to us for innovation .
We should take a brave step forward .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has set out its priorities in the light of an alarming fact : the economic , financial and social crisis is continuing to wreak havoc , with 23 million people currently unemployed , including 5.2 million young people .
In its resolution on implementation of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States , the European Parliament asked the European Council ' not to make employment issues secondary concerns when examining the Commission 's recommendation in the Annual Growth Survey to make rigorous fiscal consolidation the first priority for the 2011-2012 period ' .
In terms of the budget , this requirement must translate into strong support for the five principal targets of the Europe 2020 strategy , in particular raising employment levels and reducing the number of people affected by or at risk of poverty or social exclusion .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs emphasises the fact that these targets require the EU budget to be comparable with , compatible with and complementary to the budgets of the Member States .
We warmly thank our rapporteur Francesca Balzani , as we know how strongly she promotes the standpoint adopted by the committee in the trialogue .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( HU ) Mr President , the Committee on Regional Development has debated and gladly supports the proposal .
The Committee finds it to be quite prudent and believes that it provides appropriate preparation not only for the trilogue itself , but also for the whole budgetary process in the future .
Of course the most important aspect for the Committee on Regional Development is financing cohesion policy , and we draw attention to the fact that during the natural course of the seven-year cycle we have reached the phase where the Member States draw , or try to draw , and spend larger and larger amounts based on their conceived programmes .
In my own country , for example , the funds we received in the last year were twice what we would previously have received in two years .
So this , too , indicates acceleration , which is , of course , also due to internal reasons , but this phenomenon is conspicuous in other Member States as well .
That is why we are hoping that this policy will receive definite support .
Mr President , there are three key issues with regard to Heading 2 : the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
There are no major problems in relation to the first pillar , since it represents about 90 % of expenditure and is implemented at about 100 % , so we welcome the 3 % increase in expenditure for 2012 , as this neatly accommodates the costs of the expansion of the CAP which , as we know , will take place gradually until 2013 .
The second pillar does not present any particular problems either , since appropriations are increased .
This is a positive step , as we are in the middle of the programming period .
In view of the crisis and the difficulties certain Member States face with cofinancing , it is important that we speed up the implementation of this second pillar , which represents about 70 % .
The third issue that I would like to raise - and this is the one that I believe to be the most important - has to do with certain specific programmes .
In line with a General Court judgment , the School Fruit Scheme and the School Milk Scheme , and , in particular , the programme of support for the most needy , have ended up being substantially reduced because it has been ruled that surplus funds should only be mobilised and used up through intervention mechanisms .
At a time of such acute crisis as this , solidarity should not merely be a political priority , but above all an imperative of conscience .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to submit legislative proposals to correct this unjust situation .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I would like to highlight three priority areas .
Firstly , the new European Supervisory Authorities must be financed in a satisfactory way .
Their ability to play a stronger role is crucial for stability on the financial markets .
When the authorities are assigned new tasks , their resources must be increased immediately .
In the longer term , we must look more closely at whether the staffing that is currently planned will in fact be adequate .
Secondly , the Commission must be prepared to increase human resources in the area of economic affairs once the economic governance package has been adopted .
The updated regulations must be managed efficiently right from the start .
Thirdly , scope must be provided in the budget for improving the quality of EU statistics .
Poor economic statistics could be one of the reasons for the crisis .

rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Lewandowski , Mrs Balzani , firstly I would like to thank Mrs Balzani very much on behalf of my committee for her very hard work and her close cooperation .
She sets a very good example .
Mr Lewandowski , you have said that a business-as-usual approach is not acceptable .
That is , of course , absolutely right .
However , if we look at the energy priority area in the Europe 2020 strategy , it is clear that the Commission has a slight tendency to go on as before , because the priority area has not been fully financed .
Cuts are even being made in an important area of energy policy and this really does not make sense .
As the Americans say , we must put our money where our mouth is and not make commitments which we then fail to fulfil .
Secondly , we in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy want to make sure that the dramatic increase in costs for major projects such as the ITER nuclear fusion reactor and the GALILEO PAS global navigation system does not eat into the research budget any further .
We have made proposals on this subject and we would be pleased if they received a positive response .
Ultimately , this is all about small and medium-sized businesses .
We want to lay down the priorities for their access to research and innovation funding and to innovative financial instruments .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - Mr President , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs very much welcomes the increase in the area of freedom , security and justice but also believes that , before taking up new measures and programmes , the existing ones should be properly evaluated and that those evaluations should be taken as a base for drawing up the new programmes .
We see room for using synergies and avoiding duplications , making things simpler and ensuring that there is clear added value for whatever we do at EU level .
The Committee on Civil Liberties strongly believes that we should look at what is actually happening around us right now and that we need to improve our spending capacities in the area of refugee protection as well as in the area of Roma integration .
All our agencies need to be able to fulfil the tasks that we currently pile on them .
Lastly - and this might also be of interest to the Commission too - the Civil Liberties Committee strongly believes that a substantial part of the SIS II budget should be put into reserve as there is still no clear result .
We should also consider putting parts of the staff expenditure into reserve in the event of the EU TFTP programme - which has only been discussed in the Commission and not , so far , by the Civil Liberties Committee - not coming to fruition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the difficult economic and financial situation in Europe has highlighted the weaknesses of individual Member States , which are working hard to avoid the sovereign debt crisis .
The crisis has resulted in a steep fall in public investment in key areas for promoting job creation and growth .
The Europe 2020 strategy , which is central to the 2012 budget , proposes a way to break this vicious circle .
While acknowledging the due responsibility shown by the Commission in the allocations planned for 2012 , in my capacity as rapporteur on the budget for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I regret the minimal increase in programmes such as PROGRESS , which is responsible for implementing important initiatives for young people , for the fight against poverty and for gender equality , and the Daphne Programme , which is responsible for policies for combating violence against women .
In conclusion , therefore , I believe it is necessary that the 2012 budget is able to respond to the challenges Europe is facing in a more concrete manner .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the task facing the three institutions involved in the budgetary procedure is not a simple one , and involves identifying a level of resources that takes into account the commitments undertaken in previous years and the challenges the Union is preparing to face .
The aim is to try and find a balance between growth and development requirements and awareness of the need for responsible austerity .
Today Parliament is preparing to vote on this important document , which represents the mandate , that is to say a specific direction to be taken in negotiations with the Council .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) wanted to add to the document presented by the rapporteur , Mrs Balzani - whom obviously I thank for her work - thus helping to underline the need to have sufficient resources for financing the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , which is central to the 2012 budget , and the key role of the Community budget as a method of realigning the policies of Member States .
Our priorities are smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , support for research , development , growth , innovation and work , and a boost for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I believe that investment in these sectors is the only way that Europe can be brought out of the crisis .
I am a supporter of the concept of European added value , and this added value must be achieved by means of the budget and financial planning .
I believe I should add a specific note on the subject of the surplus .
Personally , I am in favour of the request that funds not spent should remain in the European Union budget , but from the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) , because at the moment there is no legal basis allowing the Union to retain these funds .
The same applies to fines and interest on late payments .
I will conclude by noting that this year we must avoid a repetition of what happened last December , and try instead to find a balance with the Member States from next July 's trialogue .
At the same time we must not fail to obtain adequate financing for Europe 's strategic policies and action priorities , which are indispensable for a true relaunch of the Union and for the 500 million European citizens .
Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner and my fellow Members .
Basically , the 2012 budget can be considered the little brother of the legislative package on economic governance , because it , too , aims to establish the conditions for a balanced budget and economic growth , and to increase employment and competitiveness though appropriate means of economic and budgetary policy .
We need results , we need jobs , we need growth , we need industrial policy - in other words , we need a strong European economy .
With an unstable euro , Member States cannot be expected to begin to increase their GDP-proportionate contribution to the EU budget despite the crisis and recession just because we are hoping for an increase in the GDP .
However , a solid economic basis must be created in order to enable the European Union that we have envisaged to really serve its citizens .
We have identified our goals to achieve this .
We must implement the Europe 2020 strategy .
Instead of a path to decline , we must pave the path to growth for Europe , a path to industrial and technological revolution , which is the leading innovation area .
The 2012 budget should contribute to the achievement of our Europe 2020 strategy .
We are now talking about the second year of this 10-year programme .
We cannot say that this will only stop later .
Therefore , it is not enough to propose constraints or curtail the European Union for European citizens .
It is imperative that the 2012 draft budget and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research which must be implemented in 2013 serve this very purpose .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank our excellent rapporteur for her sterling work .
I , too , am pleased that the Europe 2020 strategy forms the basis for this work .
The decisions that we are to take with regard to the future cannot wait until we have the new Multiannual Financial Framework in place ; we really need to get started on this future-oriented work now , and in this regard 2012 and 2013 will be absolutely crucial .
At the same time , we should probably remind ourselves that producing the 2011 budget was quite a difficult process .
We could not agree with the European Council on a common approach .
In light of this , it is unfortunately the case that we have to complain about the considerable increase that the Commission is proposing with regard to the 2012 budget .
In the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe we believe that this increase is too big .
Therefore , we have also tabled an amendment that seeks to root the budget more firmly in reality , something that I hope the other groups will be able to support when we vote later today .
Something else that we would like to highlight is the fact that we have a rather strange fixed culture whereby every year we allocate too much to certain areas despite the fact that we know that these funds will be sent back unused at the end of the year or in fact the year after .
Is there nothing we can do about this over-allocation for a number of activities within the Union ?
We believe that it is absolutely crucial that we understand the economic realities in Europe .
This unfortunately means that next year 's budget cannot be quite as large as the Commission thinks it ought to be .
At the same time , I believe that , in turn , the Council needs to realise that we cannot manage with so-called zero growth either , but that we need some new resources for the priorities that we have agreed on .
A happy medium needs to be found here , and , in our group at least , we believe that it can only be found if everyone takes responsibility .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the Greek State is technically bankrupt .
The relevant question is no longer whether it needs debt forgiveness , but when .
The sooner the better .
European institutions are failing spectacularly to understand the nature of the problem .
It is not a liquidity crisis but a deep solvency crisis , reflecting the lack of international competitiveness of the Greek economy .
Piling more debt upon the Greek taxpayer is not only useless but completely counterproductive .
For Greece to start to grow out of the fiscal crisis , part of the debt burden should be forgiven and absorbed by creditors , public and private alike .
French , German and especially Greek banks will have to be recapitalised .
Having purchased a huge amount of Greek Government bonds , and also having accepted much as collateral , the ECB is now trapped .
Twenty years ago , when transition started in the former Communist countries , one of the most important structural reforms was the establishment of an independent central bank with strict legal prohibition of the monetisation of public debt .
The ECB has basically been following the practice of Communist countries .
There is clearly a conflict of interest in its mandate , and now the euro zone is suffering the consequences .
It is in exactly this context that we have to look at the budget for 2012 .
It is an illusion to expect any growth in Member State contributions for the next year , in the light of the enormous burden that taxpayers are likely to assume either way .
The letter from the Presidents and Prime Ministers of the five solid and solvent countries should not be forgotten and pushed aside .
The experience of the painful negotiations , and the frustrating failure of Parliament , at the end of last year should likewise be remembered as a warning .
The mandate of the EP delegation for the trilogue should be much more modest , and at the same time more realistic , if Parliament wishes to remain relevant in the light of the huge challenges the EU faces for the future .


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to give my general support to what Mr Lewandowski has said about the fact that in times of crisis the important thing is to ensure the right balance between the need to make savings , the effective use of funding , austerity measures and , at the same time , the readiness and the ability to invest , so that we do not completely stall our economy .
I am in favour of these general guidelines and I believe that they should also be the benchmark for our budget .
Now the question is whether the requirement that Mr Lewandowski has so rightly referred to can actually be met .
There are a number of important areas of criticism from the perspective of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
If we highlight one particular project , the ITER nuclear fusion reactor , it becomes clear that this is one of the projects which is receiving the largest increase in funding in the next budget , in other words , EUR 740 million .
Is this the right signal to be sending out at a time when funding for other research projects , in particular for renewable energy , is being cut ?
We want to take seriously the claims made by the Commission and the European Union that they really intend to combat climate change and to move towards the use of renewable energy , but then we see that the funding for this project is given such a high priority and we believe that this is the wrong decision .
For this reason , we were not able to give our support to this negotiating mandate , despite the fact that we believe that much of it is correct .
Mr President , my group agrees with the mandate for negotiating with the governments , which we are here to adopt today , but I would nonetheless like to raise a political issue that is not in the document in question , and which relates to what is currently happening in Greece and my country , Portugal , and to recent statements by Jean-Claude Juncker .
These two countries , and probably others in the future , may be subjected to a hellish cycle of bailout policies , whereby bailing them out serves to bail out another bailout .
This austerity-linked Hell has clear implications for falling levels of public investment and job creation .
I believe it is absolutely vital that the EU be able to have a policy on funding from the Structural Funds for these countries in 2012 and 2013 .
This will entail , not only resources being made available from these funds , but also specific conditions entailing a reduction in cofinancing : in other words , reduced national contributions to funding that creates jobs and is intended as productive investment .
This is an absolutely critical issue for the next two years .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , while debating how Greece can be rescued from a default that could cause an economic and financial storm around the world , this House is asking to increase its own budget for 2012 by almost 5 % .
That is simply unsellable to taxpayers around Europe and it does not enhance the credibility of the EU institutions .
The EU budget has not taken us out of the crisis , and nor will it do so .
There are several areas of the budget where we all know we could be cutting expenditure .
Failed projects should be discontinued .
Funding of projects where irregularities have occurred or funding to regions where citizens ' rights are being disregarded should simply be stopped .
If common sense prevails , this Parliament will vote for a reduction of the EU budget for 2012 .
If this is not the case , the EU 's already embattled citizens will have to rely on their heads of state to defend them .
( NL ) Mr President , today we are debating the EU budget for 2012 .
Naturally , the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is vehemently opposed to the proposed increase of nearly 5 % .
All sorts of flagship initiatives pass in review , and the result is that even more money is pumped into all kinds of pointless European agencies that just cost us taxpayers ' money .
The most important detail in the budget , however , is the additional EUR 1.3 billion that is required for the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ( ITER ) project .
Money for this project has to be taken from other headings in the current multiannual budget , and that means that what we are dealing with here is a revision of that budget .
As a consequence , every Member State has a veto over the 2012 budget .
That is fantastic news , as it means that the Dutch Government can exercise its right to only approve the budget if it complies with the absolute no rises rule that my Dutch Government advocates .
I call on the Netherlands and like-minded European Member States to go on and make full use of that right .

( ES ) Mr President , Mr Lewandowski is usually reasonable in what he says , which is why the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) supports him .
This year , the mandate for the budget is even more important than it might have been in previous years , given that in 2012 we are going to be negotiating the next financial perspective .
In fact , the failure of the mandate for the trialogue of June 2010 caused very serious problems in the November agreement .
We therefore hope that the institutions now have a greater capacity for consensus than they had last year .
In addition , Mrs Balzani has drafted a mandate that is very reasonable , since it includes all the conditions to be negotiated in the next financial perspective .
She stresses the importance of the Europe 2020 strategy and quantification of the budget , and of paying attention to appropriations still uncommitted , security , and credibility of the budget .
All of this will be in the 2012 budget and the next financial perspective .
It is therefore necessary for this mandate and trialogue to be successful , because the outcome of the budgetary agreement for 2012 will largely determine the success of the interinstitutional negotiations for the next financial perspective .
We particularly support the European Commission 's request for a 4.9 % increase in payment appropriations .
Anyone who does not want to see things in those terms just has to look at how the budget is being implemented this year and the major problems that are being experienced with finding sufficient payments , even to put into action the solidarity instrument , for example , which benefits some needy regions of Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to thank our rapporteur and praise the quality of the draft text of this mandate for the trialogue , which stresses the urgency of finally mobilising the annual budgets for the benefit of the Europe 2020 strategy and in a way that is consistent with the European semester approach .
Nevertheless , the negotiations promise to be difficult , since the Commission 's guiding principle is to satisfy , by presenting a squeezed budget , the austerity requirements imposed by the Member States , while ignoring citizens ' needs .
In this respect , the fate awaiting the food aid programmes targeting the most impoverished populations is symptomatic .
Like many of my fellow Members , Commissioner , I was informed by the press that the European Commission is planning to drastically cut funding for the Most Deprived Persons ( MDP ) programme .
Thus , it would be divided by four , from 500 million this year to only 113 million next year .
The Union currently spends EUR 1 per capita and per year to defend the fundamental principle of these citizens ' right to food , in a rationale of European solidarity .
The scrapping of this symbolic euro on the altar of national self-interests and budgetary austerity illustrates Europe 's moral and political failure .
It is often said that the level of development of a human society can be measured by how it cares for its most vulnerable and deprived members .
To cite technical and legal difficulties as an excuse for dismantling this food aid programme is disastrous not only for the people concerned but also for Europe 's credibility and image .
The Commission is making fools of MEPs and the citizens they represent by proposing amounts in April and then dividing them by four two months later .
Commissioner , I hope that you will change your mind on this particular decision , and that you will not remain deaf to the political objectives and budgetary intentions thereof which are expressed in this mandate for the trialogue .
Mr President , I would like to extend my congratulations to the rapporteur .
She has a very difficult job to do in these circumstances where the ambitions are set out in the 2020 strategy , and there are few who would disagree with the need to finance a range of different projects .
The real problem is how to finance these ambitions in what are today even more dire circumstances - as we see in the European Council and in the discussions about the euro , and as my colleague , Mr Bokros , has mentioned .
Our group considers that we need to focus more attention on the question of value for money and on those areas of the budget where we could actually cut back .
The Commission has begun to indicate this , with zero expenditure on administration , but there are perhaps other areas of the budget on which we have not yet really focused in the budget procedure .
As we come into the autumn , we need a serious examination , and we have put down some 60 questions to the Commission on this matter , with the aim of identifying where we are getting poor implementation .
Otherwise , like the cynic in Oscar Wilde 's nice definition , we will reach a position where we know ' the price of everything and the value of nothing ' .
( DE ) Mr President , in the draft budget for 2012 , for the first time the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy are being carefully interlinked with the budget process .
Therefore , we welcome the work that Mrs Balzani has done .
Youth unemployment in Europe is around 20 % on average and in Spain it has even reached the level of 40 % .
These are alarming figures .
They make it easy to understand why young people are taking to the streets , for example on the Puerta del Sol , and why we are increasingly talking about a lost generation .
We must do much more for young people .
As far as the Europe 2020 strategy is concerned , according to the Commission , around 43.5 % of the funding relating to commitments will help to achieve the 2020 objectives .
Therefore , I am calling on the Commission to open up more opportunities during this year 's budget process to redeploy funding with the aim of achieving long-term goals .
Mr President , I think we all know that this year 's budget and trilogue are going to be difficult .
Therefore , as a Parliament , we need to be clear on what our priorities are and be prepared to fight for them .
In other words , we should be prepared to look at reallocating resources to our priorities .
In my view , our priorities should be policies which promote jobs and growth across the EU , especially at a time when Member States are cutting back on their spending .
For example , cohesion policy and structural funds are key to encouraging growth in our regions .
Therefore they need adequate funding , and I support the increase for the structural funds .
Research and development in our universities and academic institutions are also important .
Innovation is vital and we can turn research and development into projects , businesses and jobs .
Infrastructure investment is also crucial .
Investment in transport , our energy networks and broadband expansion , particularly in our regions , will all boost jobs and growth .
Finally , with the Lisbon Treaty the EU has new responsibilities , and we should be prepared to put money into those new responsibilities .
I would ask the Commission to look at that in the future as well .
( DA ) Mr President , we can already see that it is the payments that are becoming a problem this time , and that in the Council there are a lot of countries that do not want to pay .
We obviously need to find a solution to this .
However , it very much depends on the Member States ' ability to use the Structural Fund appropriations .
I consider it to be extremely important for us to ensure that we do not fail in our attempts to give the field of energy a higher priority in the 2012 budget .
We must ensure that we allocate funds to the SET plan for renewable energy .
The projects are in place and we must ensure that we get this plan off the ground .
We must support it .
Secondly , there are problems relating to the ITER fusion energy project , with regard to which the Commission is putting a great deal of pressure on us .
However , the pressure should really be put on the Council , because that is where the problem currently lies .
Parliament supports the project , but the Commission knows full well that we do not support the provision of funds by cutting other research appropriations .
Mr President , money spent at European level should , generally speaking , be adding value and that should be clear to citizens .
Unfortunately , adding value and demonstrating it are two different things .
This is something we need to look at closely , perhaps aligning the budget to prove to citizens and Member States that what we are doing here is adding value .
Secondly , the 2020 strategy is crucial to the future of the European Union .
In 2020 we will be judged not by the size of our budget but on whether we delivered on the 2020 strategy or not .
If we do so , Europe will be a better place : it will have more growth , more jobs , more renewable energy , more money being spent on innovation and more entrepreneurs .
I think that has to be our target .
Finally , we also need our own resources , and the sooner we have them , the less time we will have or need for debating budgets every year .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Balzani , on the report that she has presented to us .
The budget is , indeed , the basic , fundamental tool that supports all EU policies - common agricultural policy , cohesion policy , research policy and foreign policy .
They would be meaningless without a budget to back them up .
Commissioner , this is why today more than ever , at a time of crisis , we need a strong budget that answers the needs that we face at present .
Therefore , we ask you to allocate resources to fundamental programmes such as employment programmes and youth training programmes or to the programme that has been torn to shreds by the Court of Justice , the most deprived persons programme .
We would also ask the Council to stop thinking like an accountant and put on its politician 's hat for once , and not to do its calculations by trying to work out how to cut back on payments , because we could end up in the Court of Justice given that , as you have reminded us Commissioner Lewandowski , the payments are legal obligations deriving from pre-existing commitments .
Otherwise , we simply will not be able to meet them .
( PT ) Mr President , there are some crucial decisions to be made within the extremely tight limits of the Union budget , which the overlords of the EU do not seem willing to change , thus blocking any prospect of real convergence and cohesion .
It is unacceptable that , in the face of the extremely severe crisis affecting the most vulnerable economies in the EU , they are continuing to make unsupportable cofinancing demands for the use of Union funds , specifically the Structural Funds .
The Commission itself acknowledges the low take-up of EU funds by these countries , but it insists on making cofinancing a requirement , so the so-called austerity measures which are imposed on them do not enable them to guarantee public investment , first and foremost because it is being cut to penury levels .
We have therefore been advocating the abolition of , or a substantial cut in , national contributions , up to a maximum of 10 % , so that countries facing major difficulties can make full use of Union funds , and so that the money can be used effectively by those who need it most , instead of being returned to the coffers of those who need it least .
We must stop the relentless and unstoppable divergence dynamic in which the EU is mired .
Budgetary policy plays a crucial role in this .
( DE ) Mr President , as we all know , the European Union is having to tighten its belt .
This is not just because increasing the size of the budget would be a slap in the face for our citizens in the light of national austerity programmes , but also because next year payments have to be made into the permanent European financial stabilisation mechanism .
This money has to be found from the already cash-strapped national budgets .
When one group wants to circumvent the budgetary constraints by carrying over into the next year the annual budgetary surplus that is normally paid back to the Member States , it is clear that this is an attempt to pull the wool over the citizens ' eyes .
This would result in an even greater increase in the budget than that proposed by the Commission .
It may well be that spending is planned for many multi-annual programmes and the relevant funding cannot be cut at present because the EU would otherwise be open to accusations of breach of contract .
However , in my opinion there is plenty of scope available for making savings .
In addition to reducing the number of EU agencies , the most important thing is to improve the procedures for combating fraud .
Simply by recovering amounts of money that have incorrectly been paid out , we would be able to ease the strain on the budget significantly .
( HU ) Mr President , this gives me the opportunity to explain the two specific proposals that I have .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament supports the establishment of ITER , but does not accept the transfer of EUR 100 million from the funds allocated to the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , since the Seventh Framework Programme is necessary for achieving the European goals .
Instead , we would like to utilise the 5 % flexibility allowed in point 37 of the Interinstitutional Agreement to finance the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , the Trans-European Transport Network and the Trans-European Energy Network .
This is a necessary and essential condition for the budget of the European Union to actually fulfil its economic recovery function .
Thank you , and I congratulate the rapporteur .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have a short comment in anticipation of our trilogue and in response to two specific questions , from Mr Capoulas Santos and Ms Grelier , defending the food scheme for ' most deprived persons ' .
They know what has happened : a Court of Justice ruling requiring that food covered by the scheme should come only from ' stocks ' has resulted in a reduction of volume from EUR 500 million to EUR 113 million .
Therefore we need to find a solution , and probably a new legal basis for the scheme .
My second brief comment is in response to Mr Bütikofer , who claims that we have not done enough to reflect energy priorities in the next budget .
It has to be understood that in the current year - as a result of delay on investment projects , especially Nabucco and the other projects with Azerbaijan , and also of Azerbaijan relaxing after winning the Eurovision song contest - we have huge delays . Unfortunately , this also affects programming for the next period in relation to major energy interconnectors .
To all those who would like to cut the budget , my message is that among our legal obligations to make payments in 2012 , we are required to make payments to Greece and to some other countries that are in trouble .
They need austerity but they also need investment , and our legal obligations are about investment - about structural funding for these countries for the next year .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that this very interesting debate , which follows on from the one we had in the special committees , shows that there is a great consensus in this Parliament as regards the fundamental strategies .
Among the many others , the most important point is the budget , which is undoubtedly the only and most important tool for constructing the delicate balance between consolidation of the public accounts and the need to support growth .
It is the only real bastion we have against the risk that consolidation might depress the European economy in a severe and irreversible way .
The budget is therefore a focal tool .
The European Parliament is not asking for a generally ambitious budget , but for an instrument that is strong on all the priorities that are today clear and easy to see .
In the Europe 2020 strategy , the priority is first and foremost investment in work .
Here in the Chamber today we have again mentioned research , development , social cohesion and energy , all priorities for which the budget is the most important indicator of the seriousness of our intentions .
The seriousness of our intentions implies our strong institutional credibility .
Today this focal budget is therefore a very important element among many , because we have once again drawn attention to the fact that it then becomes a driving force for transforming our commitments into reality , which is no small thing .
The budget therefore becomes an important element for restoring stability to the European Union , and also to our single currency .
Therefore , I hope that already in this trialogue this strong sense of responsibility that we all share , and it could not have been otherwise , will open the way to calm , responsible and constructive negotiations for the future of our Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The budgetary trialogue has become a very important step in the budgetary procedure and is an opportunity not to be missed .
The report which we are going to vote on today must help give Parliament 's negotiating team a strong , clear mandate .
Member States are currently pursuing tough austerity policies which are having an adverse influence on economic recovery .
In this difficult climate , the EU budget has to play a key role in helping the European economy .
In particular , the EU budget must also be linked to the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
We cannot have this kind of strategy without making the necessary funds available for it .
On the other hand , the 2012 budget is , in a sense , the ' little brother ' of the European governance package , but it must provide economic support for the political package .
in writing . - ( HU ) I welcome the intention of the European Commission to provide more resources for strengthening freedom , security and law in the draft budget for next year .
However , I find the provisions allocated for handling the consequences of unforeseen incidents to be insufficient , in particular the appropriation allocated for handling immigration that increased in the wake of the riots in North Africa and for the partnership initiatives .
The European Union must respond efficiently to the changes in North Africa , and it must be better prepared for managing unforeseen events .
The crisis may burden the common budget more than planned .
It is appropriate for the Commission to provide more resources for the protection of external borders , but at the same time the European Refugee Fund and the financial assets serving integration should also be increased .
The overall implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the strengthening of the human rights dimension of the EU are in the interest of every citizen of the Union .
Rising discrimination and continuously spreading intolerance are our common concerns across Europe .
This is why I consider the expansion of programmes promoting respect for fundamental rights and the strengthening of EU citizenship to be equally important .
5th cohesion report and strategy for the post-2013 cohesion policy - Implementation of cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 - European urban agenda and its future in cohesion policy - Objective 3 : future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation - Increased effectiveness between ERDF and other structural funds ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the report by Markus Pieper , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the Commission 's fifth Cohesion Report and the strategy for post-2013 cohesion policy ;
the report by Miroslav Mikolášik , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the Report 2010 on the implementation of the cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 ;
the report by Oldřich Vlasák , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy ;
the report by Marie-Thérèse Sanchez-Schmid , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on Objective 3 : a challenge for territorial cooperation - the future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation ;
the report by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the state of play and future synergies for increased effectiveness between the ERDF and other structural funds .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I want to begin by saying that I would very much like to have two minutes speaking time for my closing remarks .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is a Europe of solidarity and it is also the advocate for the European regions .
Today , the European Parliament is sending out a strong signal to our regions .
We want to help the weakest regions to establish better connections .
We are providing support for the border regions , so that Europe can become more cohesive , and we want to use the potential of all the regions to make Europe more competitive .
Even though the economic and financial crisis has eclipsed many of these activities , European structural policy will continue to provide a strong stimulus for growth and employment .
There will be a significant need for action after 2013 because of the challenge of demographic change , the changing structure of the economy , failings in our transport systems , the beginning of the age of regenerative energies and an increase in social discrepancies .
The art of structural policy will lie in enabling the regions to innovate in order to meet these challenges and helping them to help themselves .
At the same time , Europe needs the regional potential to be able to implement the Europe 2020 strategy and to ensure that it is a success .
We must make sure that we have appropriate funding for all these tasks .
Therefore , we will oppose all attempts to abolish our successful structural policy , by means of renationalisation , new climate or employment funds or whatever other centralisation measures Brussels may be planning .
We want to strengthen the principle of multi-level governance .
The responsibility of the regions for implementing European objectives brings added value in itself .
We have made a series of proposals in the report as to how Europe can increase this added value even further .
We are calling for more resources to improve the infrastructure in our border regions and to strengthen the Trans-European Networks .
We want to invest more in the future of our cities and our rural areas and we are calling for the programmes to be better coordinated .
It is likely that a majority in Parliament will be in favour of an intermediate category with high subsidy rates for less disadvantaged regions .
I would like to advise against this , because it will turn phasing-out into sleeping-out , which the Council cannot afford .
We are also introducing improved proposals for more efficiency and transparency .
It is very important for us to ensure that tougher conditions are attached to the allocation of funding .
EU law must be implemented before EU money is made available .
This applies to public procurement and to price regulation .
We also want to see significantly stricter controls on the allocation of subsidy funding .
If we do not finally and regularly name and shame the Member States where the majority of fraud is taking place , we will lose our credibility .
We are calling for greater commitment from the Commission on monitoring the use of funding .
Mr Lewandowski , please do not place too much trust in the Member States .
Take responsibility yourself for the accreditation of national inspection authorities and Parliament will give you its support .
Finally , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to a few points which are not made in the report .
In contrast to the draft report , we are no longer calling for a reduction in cofinancing , but , and this is the point I would like to make , we are also not calling for an increase .
The report also no longer includes our proposal for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the European Social Fund to be merged .
However , please note that we also do not want an independent European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Please take these two examples as proof of the fact that Parliament is much more in favour of reform than the report might suggest .
We need reform of our structural policy to ensure that the EU remains strong .
In conclusion , I would like to say that I have enjoyed working on the report overall .
However , I was annoyed about the many occurrences of self-interested nationalism which unfortunately are also reflected in this report .
I am keen to see how this is handled in the vote .
Thank you very much for your attention .
rapporteur . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank all the honourable Members concerned for their interesting input , and especially the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation .
There were many inspiring and relevant ideas expressed in amendments , as well as in opinions , so I devoted special attention to creating a well-balanced approach that would capture as much of their essence and variety as possible .
Strategic reporting represents a new feature of cohesion policy , introduced in the current programming period 2007-2013 .
With the 2010 strategic report , Parliament has the first occasion for analysis and evaluation of the outputs and results of cohesion policy implementation .
This is also an opportunity to express Parliament 's opinion on Member States ' spending priorities , and to highlight areas where more efforts are needed , including the Commission 's tackling of cohesion policy implementation and of the strategic reporting exercise itself .
The 2010 strategic report focuses mainly on the implementation of programmes during the current programming period and the strategic reporting exercise .
However , it also provides several valuable insights into the future of cohesion policy .
Firstly , regarding implementation of the programmes , the reported financial volume of the selected projects is EUR 93.4 billion , representing more than 27 % of available EU resources in the period in question .
This can be considered quite reasonable , given not only the context of serious deterioration in the socio-economic situation in 2008-2009 due to the global crisis , but also the reform of the policy for the period 2007-2013 .
Nevertheless , progress varies significantly between countries and across themes , with aggregate selection rates at about 40 % in the case of nine Member States and below 20 % in four Member States .
Striking economic , social and environmental disparities between the European regions clearly still exist .
On the other hand , there was a more consistent average rate of project selection for the three objectives of convergence , regional competitiveness and employment and European territorial cooperation - and the same applies in the categories geared to the Lisbon Strategy objectives .
The higher absorption rates for environmental programmes under the European territorial cooperation objective show the added value of cross-border and interregional cooperation - which should therefore be encouraged in future .
On the other hand , more efforts are needed in certain areas , especially to improve implementation , avoid excessive delays , ensure tighter financial discipline and increase synergies with other EU policies .
Secondly , with regard to strategic reporting itself : this is a tool for reflecting strategically on , and discussing , the thematic dimension of cohesion policy on the basis of concrete evidence provided by Member States .
Strategic reporting is also an evaluation of the ongoing process .
It is carried out during the programming period in order to provide an overview of the Member States ' progress in delivering on the EU 's goals , and a useful basis from which to improve performance .
The report thus highlights many good practices capable of helping to enhance the quality of the reporting exercise , increasing ownership by stakeholders within the Member States , and ultimately improving the efficiency of implementation .
I will conclude by mentioning just one of the many good practices , namely the use of core indicators by all the Member States .
Mr President , I would like to share several points with you regarding the report for which I am the rapporteur , in other words the report on the urban dimension of future cohesion policy .
The report focuses on cities and their role in cohesion policy .
I would like to begin , however , by emphasising that this does not mean we should forget about rural areas when distributing European funds .
On the contrary , there is a need for the synchronised development of both big cities and small rural communities to go hand in hand .
I have , incidentally , highlighted these themes in my draft amendments to Mr Siekierski 's report on the future of the common agricultural policy .
I would like to raise several points in my introduction .
First , we need to be aware that cities are an important platform for implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , for reasons that include their undeniable importance in the economic development of Europe 's regions .
It is therefore essential that cities are given a strong mandate in the implementation of the aims of this common European strategy .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise that we need to develop basic infrastructure in many cities .
In my opinion , a good solution would be not only simple renovation , but also modernisation and technological investment in infrastructure , through information technologies .
We could then be sure that sharp growth and improved quality of life really will occur in cities .
We should prioritise just such growth investments , for reasons that include the principle of concentration .
Thirdly , I would like to mention the theme of partnership .
Partnership is often an empty concept .
I would therefore like it if we could provide cities with real support , and I therefore call on the Commission to place an obligation on Member States to involve the political representatives of the main cities and federations of local and regional authority bodies in all phases of decision-making within the framework of cohesion policy .
Local representatives should have an opportunity to participate in negotiating the national planning agreements for strategic development .
Fourthly , and this is the final main point I would like to mention today from the draft report , there are the financial engineering instruments .
Much has already been said on the topic of JESSICA .
In the real world , however , not much is happening .
I would therefore like us to call on the Commission to evaluate the experience with these instruments and amend their rules to make them competitive in comparison with other instruments on the financial market .
At the same time , I think we should call on the Member States to implement the JESSICA initiative at the level of cities , and not of regions or states .
Only thus will the cities really own JESSICA , enabling it to have a long-term effect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a priority debate on cohesion policy is rare , and today 's one is extremely important .
Regional policy has had many successes during its long history and in 2009 it became the European Union 's main item of expenditure , with EUR 350 billion invested in our regions between 2007 and 2013 .
Today , Parliament is going to vote on the future of this policy and define its priorities in preparation for the forthcoming budgetary and regulatory negotiations for the next financial framework .
For my part , I had the honour of working on the future of European territorial cooperation - Objective 3 of cohesion policy - and I should like to thank the shadow rapporteur and the European Commission for their fruitful collaboration .
What is territorial cooperation ?
What purpose does it serve ?
What are the issues at stake ?
How prominent should it be within regional policy ?
These are the questions we need to answer .
Today , 196 million European citizens are living in border regions .
These regions reveal , through the disparities they are confronted with , our countries ' difficulties in adapting to the challenges of open borders , the completion of the European Common Market and globalisation .
Europe is divided into 27 Member States and 271 regions .
As a result , European territory is divided and split by a great many administrative borders which define different political and legal systems .
To paraphrase a French sociologist , a border is a political object which creates distance where there is proximity .
Conversely , the European Union wishes to create proximity where history had created distance , misunderstanding and sometimes hatred .
As a matter of fact , the preamble to the 1957 Treaty of Rome is the common thread in our role as European elected representatives .
The aim of the European Union is ' the ever closer union between nations ' .
Without erasing borders or calling into question their legitimacy , Objective 3 , with EUR 8.5 billion , is seeking to reduce the negative impact of borders in the everyday lives of our citizens , in order to turn these dividing borders into connecting borders .
That is what makes European territorial cooperation the embodiment of European integration and an extraordinary source of competitiveness .
What future do we want to give it ?
This report contains concrete and pragmatic proposals , stemming from the demands on the ground , from the numerous stakeholders met and from citizens ' expectations .
First of all , an explicit reminder of the added value of European territorial cooperation and of its potential for increased competitiveness .
A proposal to increase its funding to 7 % of the next budget for cohesion policy .
Maintaining the overall structure and the key role of the cross-border dimension in order to meet the local needs of border communities .
A provision of funds for each cooperation programme , carried out using harmonised criteria , so as to prevent some Member States from calculating financial returns .
A more strategic programming of the funds , in connection with a territorialised Europe 2020 strategy .
Incentives so that the regional operational programmes play a part in large cross-border or transnational projects , such as the trans-European transport networks .
Enhanced coordination between the transnational dimension and the macro-regional strategies , simplified implementation by adopting a separate regulation .
A better use of European groupings for territorial cooperation , which are the only purely Community-wide tool for multilevel governance .
Finally , improved visibility and enhanced clarity of territorial cooperation among local government and among citizens .
To conclude , I would say that territorial cooperation is one of those purely European policies with high added value .
It is the simplest , fastest and cheapest way to achieve lively and practical European integration .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we have the duty to strengthen the most European objective of the cohesion policy .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the main assumption expounded in the report is that strengthening synergies between the European Regional Development Fund and other cohesion policy funds will help enormously in increasing both the effectiveness and the added value of cohesion policy .
At the same time , greater synergies are called for with the development actions of the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Fisheries Fund .
Greater synergies in practice mean that actions financed by the various cohesion policy funds are prepared , designed and implemented within the framework of an integrated common plan , so that each action uses and complements the positive results of other actions .
Experience from the implementation of cohesion policy programmes now clearly illustrates that the successful outcome of most regional development actions basically depends on the implementation of complementary initiatives .
Infrastructure improvements , for instance , do not lead automatically to higher growth if they are not combined with investment in education , enterprise and innovation .
We believe , therefore , that effective coordination will bring real benefits from the point of view of efficiency and improvements to sound budgetary management .
The main demand formulated in the report in order to achieve this objective is for common rules on management and application to be adopted within the general framework of cohesion policy and with the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Fisheries Fund .
Apart from the benefits gained from saving resources and making use of complementarity , this would simplify both the use of the funds by beneficiaries and the management of the funds by the national authorities .
Finally , the simplification achieved by harmonising rules at all programming levels will facilitate the participation of small agencies in cohesion policy programmes and improve the take-up of funds .
Within the framework of the report , we also welcome the initiative by the European Commission to adopt a single strategic framework covering more funds .
However , what we in the Committee on Regional Development are calling for is for this single framework and coordination not to be confined to the policy planning stage but to be extended to cover all policy-making stages : planning , implementation and payments , auditing and evaluation .
I should also like to express my satisfaction at the fact that the main messages of my report were adopted both in the extremely important motion for a resolution by the European Parliament on the future financial perspective of the European Union and in the report on the future of cohesion policy .
To close , may I point out , as I emphasised at the start , that the basic principle of my report is that greater synergies between the funds will improve the efficacy of cohesion policy still further .
This being so , I should like to express my particular concern at the fact that a tendency towards splitting cohesion policy between various budget lines has emerged recently .
We are clearly against any such proposal , because it directly undermines the foundations of cohesion policy itself , especially the partnership and the integrated approach to regional development .
Mr President , honourable Members , visitors to the European Parliament , cohesion policy is a central pillar of the European integration project and in overall terms it is one of the most successful policies of recent decades .
We have genuinely succeeded over this period in reducing the differences in prosperity between the regions of Europe .
The changes to the categorisation during the next period will highlight this fact .
I must emphasise once again that at the same time regional policy has become the central and sustainable investment policy for all European regions .
If we want to ensure that Europe 2020 is a success and if we want to turn the strategy that is currently only on paper into concrete activities , initiatives and projects , it is exactly this up-to-the-minute , advanced form of regional policy which needs to be implemented in all our regions , in order to achieve the necessary results in our cities , communities , businesses , research centres and schools .
I would like to thank the European Parliament and , in particular , the rapporteurs Mr Pieper , Mr Mikolášik , Mr Vlasák , Mrs Sanchez-Schmid and Mr Stavrakakis for their excellent reports , which will help us to make progress with our work .

The wide variety of the discussions held not only in committee but also on a number of other occasions has shown that this is the case .
I am working on the assumption that many of these significant and highly constructive contributions will be incorporated into the design of future regional policy .
Parliament and the Commission are moving in the same direction when it comes to the main aspects of the future development of regional policy and I would like to thank you for this .
I want to make it quite clear that during the discussion about the transitional regions we rather lost sight of the fact that we have so much in common in this area , including shared priorities and very substantial proposals for changes in the future direction of the policy , which will make it even more successful , sustainable and visible and more comprehensible and tangible for the citizens of Europe .
We have a common commitment to creating strong links between regional policy and the Europe 2020 strategy and to establishing jointly the necessary conditionality , so that we can help to overcome any difficulties in implementing the policy .
We also have a common commitment to ensuring that our policy focuses heavily on results .
This will ultimately enable us to find out what this policy could achieve with the targeted use of financial resources in all the individual regions by the end of the period and could therefore contribute to the central objectives of Europe 2020 .
If I may , I would like to make some brief remarks on the individual reports .
Firstly , I want to look at Mr Pieper 's report .
I would like to emphasise what he said about being prepared to introduce reform and about the agreement in many areas .
It is important that we are committed to innovation , to sustainability , to energy efficiency and to exploiting the potential of smart green technologies for the European economy and for safeguarding jobs in a competitive global environment .
This has been discussed in this House and I would like to thank Parliament for its substantial support for the proposed creation of a so-called transitional region in the next period .
We have had frequent discussions on this subject .
It has been covered adequately and I do not need to go into detail about it now .
However , I would like to emphasise once again that our concern has always been to produce a proposal to help those areas of regions which were not among the very poorest but which were still well below the average level and to provide support for the catching-up process .
Nevertheless , I understand the concerns and misgivings which some people have expressed .
I am prepared , and I will even take a proactive approach here , for us to consider towards the end of the next period the opportunities already available for a preliminary evaluation , in order to establish the extent to which the objectives were achieved in the individual regions , to assess whether the failure to meet targets was due to internal or external factors and to identify the conclusions we can draw for the allocation of funding during the period after next .
These are sensible and necessary moves which will guarantee political acceptance in future and also the acceptance of the citizens for this type of European policy .
I would like to thank Mr Mikolášik for the clear commitment in his report to achieving results and for the explicit references to the importance and the future development of the strategic reports , the impact of these reports and the way in which they can be used .
Mr Vlasák , who has always campaigned strongly on behalf of the cities , and the entire team also deserve my thanks .
Our cities are a central aspect of our key European objectives , although we must not ignore rural areas .
I will never get tired of saying that if we are to improve energy efficiency we must begin in the cities .
If we want to cut CO2 emissions , we must begin in the cities .
The fight against poverty is a struggle to improve the run-down districts found in all the major European cities .
Therefore , there are many reasons why we must begin in the cities and , as I have said , we must not forget the rural areas .
However , and this concerns Mr Stavrakakis , there is also a need for improved cooperation with the other funds in this area and , in particular , the fund for rural development .
It will be necessary to ensure that the coordination with the Framework Programme for Research , in particular with regard to innovation , is effective , sound and transparent .
This is because the key decision criterion in the case of research is excellence , which is not determined on the basis of geography .
This is obvious from the fact that more than 30 % of the research funding goes to 10 European regions which have this concentration .
That is why it is important .
In the current period we are starting to invest money from the Structural Fund in research infrastructure all over Europe , where the nature of the projects justifies this , and we will be increasing our spending in the next period .
This will make it possible gradually to establish a broader base of research activities throughout Europe .
In principle , small and medium-sized companies are also responsible for innovations , for example , in product development and in administration , services and marketing , covering a number of different layers .
We need this broad base , because it is the small and medium-sized businesses in Europe which ultimately create jobs and safeguard them in the long term .
I would also like to thank Mrs Sanchez-Schmid for her contribution .
We have already discussed territorial cooperation on several occasions .
This is an area in all its variety and complexity which is one of the most European of our policies .
It enables us to break down the borders which the citizens should not even regard as being borders and to make real progress with the process of European unification and integration .
The new approaches , for example , in the area of macroregional strategies , demonstrate the potential of cross-border cooperation .
Thank you once again for your contributions .
I am looking forward to the discussion .
I can assure you that many of these thoughts and ideas will be incorporated into the proposal on the legal basis that we need for the next subsidy period , which we will be presenting in September this year .
Thank you very much also for your ongoing support for European regional policy and for its development .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - Mr President , a strong , well-funded cohesion policy is vital if the EU is to play its part in creating jobs and growth , particularly when Member States are cutting their spending .
Structural funds are making a difference in places like Wales and , if they are to continue to do so , we need to ensure that the cohesion policy is adequately funded , it is well-targeted , the money is properly spent and the system is made simpler .
These two latter points are of course very important to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
We want to make life easier and simpler , not just for Member States but for applicants as well .
We need to ensure that there is a balance between ensuring that the money is properly spent and making funds easily accessible , particularly for smaller organisations .
Finally , I would make this point .
When considering any move towards a greater focus on urban areas and cities , the creation of a potential new infrastructure fund , and the possible creation of a performance reserve , we need to ensure that all those things do not put at risk or damage the poorer regions in the EU .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( ES ) Madam President , first of all I would like to draw attention to the significant contribution that cohesion policy has made to economic growth and to the integration of the citizens and territories of the EU .
For this reason , it was essential that Parliament should have its say on the policy to be followed from 2013 and it would be unfair to fail to mention the work carried out by Mr Pieper in his extensive report .
Within cohesion policy the European Social Fund has been and will be a very important tool to assist Member States to adapt their policies to the Europe 2020 strategy and to combat the financial crisis .
The Fund must concentrate its efforts on creating employment , promoting lifelong learning , helping in particular low-skilled workers , those outside the labour market , along with the most vulnerable groups , those who suffer discrimination and , of course , SMEs .
It should also aim to achieve social inclusion and reduce poverty .
In order to achieve these objectives it is imperative for the Social Fund , as part of the Structural Funds , to count on adequate resources and that administrative and procedural burdens are relaxed as much as possible and reduced to a minimum .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - Madam President , the global economic recession changed the economic landscape in the EU dramatically : it increased unemployment , reduced economic growth and impaired the business environment .

Cohesion policy needs to be an effective tool for responding to the socio-economic challenges brought about by the financial crisis and for reducing disparities between the levels of development of European regions .
Evaluation of the implementation of the cohesion policy programmes co-financed by the structural funds in the period 2007-2013 should reflect the impact of projects selected within the cohesion policy framework on the recovery of the European economy , particularly in terms of creating new jobs , reducing socio-economic disparities , enhancing social inclusion and improving human capital .
However , at a time when the economic and financial crisis is heightening social inequalities , structural fund allocations to the Member States are in decline .
The Commission should boost the effectiveness and public profile of the European Social Fund and , in cooperation with the Member States , should secure strong synergies between the structural funds and relevant European policies , as well as promoting synergies that meet the changing demands of today 's labour market .
Madam President , when we talk about the towns and cities of the future , we know that the need for greater mobility will increase .
Transport will become an even more important part of citizens ' lives .
Many will move further out into rural areas and commute to work near the towns and cities .
However , in order to avoid pollution , traffic jams and time-consuming journeys , we need to find new arrangements , such as free park-and-ride schemes combined with flexible monthly cards for several modes of transport , such as bicycles , motorcycles , car sharing , metros , electric buses , underground rail systems , etc .
Without flexible transport options , the towns and cities will die .
We therefore need some rapid new thinking .
The automotive industry itself knows that we need to think quickly , otherwise companies outside Europe will beat us to it .
They are preparing for a future of smarter cars and mixed modes of transport .
We as politicians ought to do the same .
This is all well and good , but I cannot quite understand why EU funds are to be used for these initiatives , as it is in the regions ' own interests to be attractive to citizens .
In these times of crisis , I think that we should finally stop asking for more money like spoilt teenagers .
Madam President , the Europe 2020 strategy is supposed to help generate economic growth in a way which will also counteract social exclusion .
Cohesion policy , as one of the main tools of Europe 2020 , should make a greater contribution in the coming period to a reduction of the phenomenon of poverty in our countries .
The work of the European Social Fund should concentrate more on the group of people who need support to help them find employment and integrate into society .
This should be helped by the establishment of modern care and education facilities for children and by high quality training for people who are looking for work .
These are specific examples of measures which will make it easier to reconcile work and family life .
It is these measures which in particular deserve support from the Structural Funds , and it is these measures which will bring about a reduction in poverty among people who are particularly at risk from it .
In the next funding period , it is also important that the establishment and implementation of structural programmes be directed above all at people , to simplify the procedures for using the funds .
The numerous inspections and audits mean that formal questions related to the implementation of programmes have become the highest priority , and are a hindrance to the effective and efficient use of aid .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( CS ) Madam President , the INTERREG III programme for cross-border interregional cooperation is a complete development instrument .
The flexibility under Article 21 of the Regulation on the European Regional Development Fund , in other words the possibility of also providing funds for expenditure outside the scope of the programme is , I believe , an important element .
In my opinion , implementation of the programme will be facilitated on the one hand by stabilisation of the rules , and on the other hand by this flexibility .
The European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation ( EGTC ) can , as legal entities , play an important role .
I believe their statute will soon be finalised , and this will greatly boost their standing .
This may also lead to the greater involvement of private entities , or contributory organisations , and thereby to the more effective use of resources .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports this improved territorial cooperation programme .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon added a territorial dimension to cohesion policy .
This development makes it even more urgent to promote a mechanism of real participation .
In order to make such an involvement effective and efficient , it is essential to allow a more appropriate use of the available tools .
The report by Mr Vlasák , whom I thank , on the European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy presents a very balanced vision of the urban dimension within cohesion policy , which takes into account all the positions expressed by the groups during the debate in the Committee on Regional Development .
Approximately 73 % of Europe 's total population lives in urban areas .
They generate 80 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) and consume up to 70 % of the energy in Europe .
Their development is therefore directly related to areas such as employment , social inclusion , environmental protection and the achievement in general of the cohesion policy objectives .
The argument put forward by Mr Vlasák with regard to this central issue of relaunching urban policy as a platform for development of the Europe 2020 strategy is entirely acceptable , although it is important not to forget rural and peri-urban areas .
There are two priorities on which I would like to focus the Commissioner 's attention , and these are promotion and enhancement of the multi-level governance system and synergy between the various funds , in other words an integrated vision and approach to funding .
With regard to the former , we have shown in the overview that we presented and in the ensuing debate that regional and local authorities and civil society are insufficiently involved in the design , implementation and development of regional planning , that is to say in the use of cohesion policy tools .
On the other hand , we have shown the difficulties that arise when funding is rigid .
We have therefore asked and ask the Commission now to consider greater flexibility in funding and , specifically , greater integration between the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the Cohesion Fund .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , cohesion policy is a successful European policy which everyone makes use of , including regions which are not as well developed and those which already have a strong economy .
A variety of studies have demonstrated this .
However , most importantly , the citizens of Europe can experience its benefits at first hand .
This is why we need cohesion policy in future in all the regions of the European Union .
Nevertheless , we are under an obligation to make our good policies even better .
This is what the European Parliament is aiming to achieve with Mr Pieper 's report .
Modern cohesion policy means facing the new challenges , creating up-to-date infrastructure , combating climate change , supporting energy security and efficiency , promoting research and development , providing support for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and creating jobs .
Of course , we also need to ensure that the funding is used efficiently .
Therefore , we are making it clear that cohesion policy must be more transparent and results-oriented and must involve less red tape .
The coordination between the various funds and programmes must also be improved , as Mr Stavrakakis said earlier .
One very important point is that the partnership principle must be taken to a new and better level .
We must involve everyone , including the regions , local areas , both sides of industry and major non-governmental organisations .
The new intermediate category remains controversial .
We are of the opinion that the intermediate category will help regions which need more support than the classic Objective 2 regions .
They will not be funded at the expense of other regions .
On the contrary , the result will not be a patchwork of subsidies .
Instead the many phasing-in and phasing-out procedures will be standardised and I believe that this is something which we really need in the European Union .
Anyone who thinks that we are introducing a permanent subsidy category is underestimating the European Parliament .
Over the past few years we have demonstrated often enough that we are able to bring in community initiatives when they are needed .
However , we have also worked jointly to remove them again once the objective has been achieved .
We are competent enough to be able to judge at the end of a subsidy period whether the results are good and how we should redesign the programme .
Therefore , I am calling on my fellow Members to support this new intermediate category when it comes to the vote .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for the fine job they have done .
I am pleased that Commissioner Hahn is present during this debate on the future of cohesion policy .
We need a strong , well-funded EU regional policy and , in the future , one targeted at every European region , which will generate economic growth , innovation and competitiveness .
For the future programming period I think that a single strategic approach , supported by a set of common implementation regulations for the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund , will produce added value .
Territorial cooperation will also play a key role in successfully meeting the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
This is precisely why I think that it must be much more accessible for potential partners in the private sector , who we really need to give the opportunity to become full partners in territorial cooperation projects .
We must not forget either the key role played by both national governments and the European Commission in drafting and effectively implementing European policies at national , regional and local level .
With regard to the post-2013 regional policy , I endorse the idea of setting up intermediate regions , thereby enabling regions with a GDP between 75 % and 90 % of the EU average to receive real support , however , through finding suitable solutions .
Last but not least , I would like to stress the need for the regional aspect to enjoy its appropriate place as part of both the revised EU budget and the future financial framework .
Therefore , I expect a suitable proposal to be tabled by the Commission , which will primarily reflect the views of the Committee on Regional Development and the European Parliament .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , in my view these reports before the plenary today fail to address the fundamental problems with the current system of structural funding .
In the wake of the financial crisis and the ongoing need to reduce budget deficits across Europe , Parliament must recognise that the cohesion budget cannot continue to grow , unchecked .
It is not business as usual .
Our focus should instead be on tackling the unacceptable levels of error in spending highlighted by the European Court of Auditors .
Similarly , macro-regional entities are not the answer to increasing the effectiveness of regional spending .
They are of highly questionable value and undermine the Member States which , in my view , should remain the primary vehicle for managing cohesion spending .
They will not help meet our vision of a smaller and better-targeted cohesion policy that truly helps Europe 's most deprived regions .
These reports go in completely the wrong direction , and I shall be voting against them .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Hahn , ladies and gentlemen , I have to contradict the previous speaker .
The central message for the Commission from Mr Pieper 's report is that European cohesion policy brings its own added value for Europe .
It is the instrument which holds the EU together at its heart .
This is obvious to the citizens in all the regions of Europe and , in particular , in the very disadvantaged regions and the crisis regions .
The decentralised and participative structure of cohesion policy allows it to make a decisive contribution to creating a resource-efficient , low-carbon , innovative and social Europe .
In contrast to the rapporteur 's personal opinion , I believe that the instruments of cohesion policy , together with intelligent investment , can also help to combat climate change and poverty .
Therefore , we are disappointed that , despite the attempts which the rapporteur has made and is still making , these two aspects were omitted from the report .
I would like to say to the Commission that a significant majority of this House is in favour of these two aspects .
Unlike the rapporteur , and I am saying this as a German , I am of the opinion that the Commission proposal for an intermediate category will result in a balanced and transparent structure for future cohesion policy in the light of the dramatic problems in some regions .
It is ridiculous to believe that savings can be made in this area .
It is also important for Germany that the European Union continues to develop in a harmonious way , because this brings benefits for Germany .
This is why we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are voting in favour of an intermediate category .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
- ( CS ) ( initially without a microphone ) ... agrees with the idea from the Guellec report from the previous period that the current form of cohesion policy is not helping to bring the regions closer together , only the states , and it is the reason why the EU 's most dynamic regions are losing their dynamism .
( DE ) I have to disagree with this question .
We have tried hard to ensure that the focus in all the reports has been on the regions .
Mr Pieper 's report in particular strengthens their position .
This is especially important for us at this point .
It is clear that the major players for the future of cohesion policy are the regions and not the Member States .
Madam President , I would say that , among the most disadvantaged regions of the European Union are the outermost regions which , as well as lagging behind , combine permanent disadvantages , such as remoteness , smaller markets , insularity and vulnerability to the vagaries of the weather .
It is a good job that the fifth report on cohesion has reaffirmed for these regions a specific and special treatment , in accordance with Article 349 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The report also requires that the funds earmarked for them after 2013 be at least equal to those they are receiving in the current programming period .
As for creating an intermediate category for regions whose GDP is between 75 and 90 % of average European GDP , I am in agreement , provided a double condition is met .
Firstly that Objective 1 funds , for the convergence regions , not be reduced - I would even like to see them increased - by the savings made as a result of certain regions no longer being under Objective 1 .
These savings must benefit the new intermediary regions of course , but also the other regions .
The second condition is that this creation be at least as favourable as the phasing-out process for the regions concerned .
Finally , cohesion policy is one of solidarity and redistribution , to enable regions to get up to speed and to catch up .
It cannot replace any other strategy like , for instance , Europe 2020 , which should have its own funding , separate from the cohesion funding , even if these two policies must naturally be coordinated and harmonised .
It is for this reason that our group , for instance , is opposed to the European Social Fund being separated from cohesion policy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , west Wales and the valleys should again qualify for regional funding despite average EU GVA falling , posing serious questions over whether cohesion policy even works .
It is my understanding that a significant amount went into developing the public sector , though undermined by widespread domestic cuts across the UK .
Some GBP 12 million in corrections was levelled against programmes in Wales from 2008 to 2009 , while a total of 35 % of funds for the same period was recouped in fines by the Commission .
This money is not being used effectively if it remains in Brussels ' coffers .
With proposals to increasingly narrow cohesion policy and focus upon results-based deliverance , I feel the level of corrections will increase .
Regional funding is not a gift from Brussels , but meagre remuneration from the billions the UK pays in .
Public consultations on the fifth report on cohesion policy reveal an overall desire to pull away from the Brussels-dictated policy .
It will be revealing to see whether the Commissioner listened to those concerns .
This money is not a freebie from Brussels .
It is only a small percentage of the money taken from taxpayers ' pockets and then spent on exactly what the Commission wants , with an added threat to publicise that this or that has been given to us by the EU or face a fine .
It is cynical propaganda .
( DE ) Madam President , cohesion policy will only be successful in future if we face up to certain problems now .
Firstly , what is happening to the Member States that are permanently in breach of the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact ?
In these cases , the Structural Funds cannot have the desired effect .
Instead , the money simply disappears and the EU degenerates into a transfer union which is also a bottomless pit .
Anyone who receives regional subsidies must also adhere to the rules .
Secondly , the Structural Fund must not be centralised under the aegis of the Commission .
This will increase and not reduce the amount of administrative work and the result will be that expensive , new , decentralised agencies will be established .
Thirdly , we need greater efficiency in the use of structural money .
There must be clearer objectives and more frequent evaluations and the recipients themselves must take more responsibility .
The principle of cofinancing must be firmly established .
Fourthly , in addition to all the cultural , social , religious and foreign policy concerns , the accession of Turkey would place a massive burden on the Cohesion Fund .
In realistic terms , it would blow the budget .
We know this to be a fact .
It is not just something that people say .
Turkey has been receiving billions of euros of structural money for years .
We need to take a critical look at this approach .
To summarise , in future I would like to see regional subsidies ending up where they are really needed , in other words , in innovative projects which produce clear results , in small and medium-sized businesses and , most importantly , with citizens in the regions and the cities .

( PT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by praising the work carried out by the rapporteur , my colleague Mr Stavrakakis , who has done an extraordinary job of identifying future synergies between the different Structural Funds to increase their effectiveness .
His report is also involved in this joint debate on cohesion policy , which is of the utmost importance not only in terms of the issue at stake , but especially because the timing of the debate is opportune .
We are currently getting to grips with the Commission 's proposal , not only in terms of the new financial perspectives , but also in terms of future cohesion policy , post-2013 .
Cohesion policy is a key policy for the EU .
It is a horizontal policy which , through its instruments par excellence , the Structural Funds , finances projects and programmes in the Member States , seeking to reduce disparities in development levels between the different regions .
Experience has , however , shown us the difficulties , in terms of efficiency and results , that arise from the fragmentation and complexity of this policy .
Therefore , a single strategy for the different funds , with an integrated and results-oriented approach , should be the starting point for more and better synergies between the different instruments , and for increasing their effectiveness .
This is also essential in order for the various sectoral policies to be better coordinated , and for resources to be used more efficiently .
We need to make use of the risk of crisis by looking for new alternatives .
All the reports being debated today will certainly present us with enormous challenges , and we know that in order to respond to these challenges we also need a sound budget , but we must make a clear distinction between budgetary aspects and policy objectives .
The policy objectives are well known .
Indeed , it is only by consolidating these objectives that we will be able to offer the regions a future .
That being the case , we have to put the budget at the service of the future of the regions and the public , rather than putting the regions and the public at the service of the budget .
( FR ) Madam President , I welcome this debate a few days from the final deliberation of the College of Commissioners on the next financial perspectives and the revision of the regulations governing the Structural Funds , including the European Social Fund .
The Structural Funds are one of the main tools for implementing the economic and social policy of the Union .
With pressure on the Community budget that we are all aware of and national budgets squeezed by austerity , it is essential to use these Structural Funds intelligently and efficiently .
To achieve this , the review of the Regulation on the European Social Fund will be the opportunity to ensure that this tool is set up for the benefit of the Union 's strategy , but also within this strategy of the Union , of course , particularly the objectives for employment and social inclusion .
This requires an allocation of funds according to indicators other than GDP on its own and an increased percentage allocated to the European Social Fund .
Regarding the Pieper report , Madam President , allow me to say a word on paragraph 55 relating to the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the content of which I dispute and which should not have a place in our debate .
This Fund provides assistance to employees suffering from the effects of globalisation and of the crisis .
The point in hand is the responsibility of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , it is put to you on the initiative of the Committee on Regional Development , and it should be possible to reject it during the separate vote that will take place later on .
I am counting on the intelligence and efficiency of my fellow Members .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent and important reports on cohesion policy .
It is good that we should be having this debate together here now .
These reports show an understanding of the importance of regional policy as something that builds Europe as a whole and that creates unity , both of which phenomena they deal with excellently .
Regional policy has definitely been a success story , having been able to narrow differences between the Member States and , in this way , create stability across Europe generally .
The challenges of the future are changing constantly , and regional policy must be able to adapt to this change , as is evident from the discussions here .
We need to recognise the problems that there have been with cohesion funds over the years , and that is why regional policy in the forthcoming period must also be made far more effective in terms of its implementation and also made more results-oriented .
As has been said , it must also be possible to ease the administrative burden in the next period .
In this way we will certainly be in a better position to respond to the challenges that cohesion policy also faces .
On the subject of the Europe 2020 strategy , we should remember that cohesion policy is one of the most important and tangible tools for implementing it .
For that reason , it is vitally important that in this report Parliament adopts a strong position in favour of budget levels similar to what they are now .
On the other hand , it is important that the report also takes account of the special challenges that exist .
One example is the areas which , unfortunately , have sparse populations , which also need their own separate aid under Article 71 in the forthcoming period .
Much has been spoken of a category of intermediate regions today in connection with these reports .
With respect to this , however , I myself would like to ask the Commission this : does creating a new structure always solve the problem itself , or could we in this case respond to similar challenges by developing the existing ' phasing in , phasing out ' system ?
( PL ) Madam President , there is no doubt that cohesion policy should , after 2013 , continue to serve its current function of creating equal development opportunities for the regions , ending poverty and stimulating Europe 's development .
Therefore , the level of funding in the new budget should be significantly higher , simply to accelerate the development of Europe , the development of the regions and the sustainable development of the European Union .
The fact that the Commission 's plans include objectives which are slightly different from those which were in the current financial perspective must certainly be disturbing .
I am thinking of objectives directed at the fight against climate change and at innovation .
These are , of course , important matters , but the new Member States , such as Poland , still need funds for infrastructure development .
Without infrastructure , it will simply be very difficult for us to compare with the European Union in terms of level of development .
There is one final matter : I think that in future budgetary programmes after 2013 we should very strongly direct our attention to the Carpathian region - one of the poorest and most highly populated regions in the European Union .
It seems to me that greater involvement of the European Union in this region will both be profitable for the Union and help raise the level of development of the countries of the Carpathian region , which simply need greater and more intensive European Union action .
( FR ) Madam President , cohesion policy must ensure harmonious and above all fair development between all territories .
It is for this reason that we support the introduction of a new category of intermediary regions for the allocation of funds , as well as the application of new development indicators and indicators for social justice , well-being and environmental justice .
We regret that this does not appear in the Pieper report .
For the sake of fairness , cohesion policy must also tackle sub-regional development inequalities to restore meaning to the word ' cohesion ' , that is to say this solidarity which is the added value of the European Union .
To achieve this , it must focus on inequalities , especially within urban areas , which are particularly affected by new challenges - social , environmental - and that is a huge task .
Enhancing the attractiveness and the environment of these discriminated-against territories is to restore confidence among those living there .
It will also promote a new sustainable city , desirable for all , a model that meets the environmental , energetic and socio-demographic challenges , but one which places the living environment and the well-being of its inhabitants at the heart of our concerns .
I will end with a clear message : after 2013 , cohesion policy must have at its disposal much-needed and stable resources to be able to exist .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of the intermediate category , I would definitely also have been able to imagine other solutions in the beginning , Mr Pieper , for example a transitional regulation for the regions which have received the highest levels of subsidies until now and which will no longer do so after 2013 .
However , it emerged from the discussion that we need to take into consideration other regions , in particular those hit by the crisis .
We are currently talking about 51 regions .
When confronted with so many regions that have been affected , it would be negligent not to establish an intermediate category .
This is the only way in which we can create a reliable framework for providing responsible subsidies to these regions which have to compensate for their slow progress in development themselves .
In other respects , Mr Pieper 's report contains a great deal of light and shade .
Among other things , we are critical of the fact that there is no clear commitment to a much more decisive approach to combating poverty .
We believe that the wording of the report which makes cohesion policy subject to conditions that force the Member States to implement reforms is unclear and liable to misinterpretation .
It goes without saying that cohesion policy must remain an instrument for social balance and solidarity throughout all the regions .
( LT ) Madam President , today we are debating one of the most important areas of European Union policy , ensuring the well-being of our citizens and the competitiveness and growth of the entire Union .
Previously , cohesion policy contained some decisive factors in ensuring greater integration and growth of the poorer regions of the European Union , and significantly reducing economic and social disparities .
Today we have the Europe 2020 strategy , which envisages an even greater role for structural and cohesion policy in order to exit the crisis and contribute to the well-being of our citizens .
Clearly we have many obstacles to overcome , relating to globalisation , demographic change and the preservation of resources .
However , to achieve this we will have to realise the potential of all the regions of the European Union without exception .
I believe that future regional policy should be linked to basic European objectives in the areas of innovation , research , environmental and energy challenges , and should , of course , help to create European added value , but only with follow-ups that are as transparent and effective as possible .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Hahn , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of regional policy has been highlighted today .
Our cohesion and consolidation policy must cover all European regions .
By regions , I also mean the people that live in these regions .
That is a very important point .
In the course of some of our delegations to the regions we have seen how valuable European funding is for regional development , for achieving social cohesion and also for women 's policies and gender equality .
I can only encourage the European Union to offer more of the programmes in future which are received very positively by the people and which are aimed at precisely these objectives , just as we have established in the process of investigating the implementation .
We need people in the European regions to have a feeling of ownership .
We are now in a phase where we are discussing intermediate regions .
This is very important because Europe has helped to ensure that jobs have been created in these regions .
My understanding of growth is that it is primarily sustainable growth if it brings social justice .
Cohesion policy lies at the heart of European policy .
( PL ) Madam President , there is no doubt that cohesion policy helps to improve the social and economic environment and stimulates the development , above all , of the regions which receive aid .
However , let us also remember that the wide range of investment opportunities also allows the wealthy Member States to profit .
According to estimates , the value of all benefits arising from the realisation of cohesion policy in my country of Poland for countries of the ' old ' Union may reach as much as EUR 38 billion by 2015 .
I am hoping that the fact that the deciding phase of the debate on the future of cohesion policy will take place during the Presidency of my country of Poland will help to ensure that the proposals for significant reductions to be made in the area of this policy will not be put into effect .
Unfortunately , my region of Mazowsze , because of the very strong economic position of the capital of the country , Warsaw , exceeds the ceiling of 75 % of EU GDP .
It is , therefore , threatened with the loss of support .
There are 35 European regions which are in a similar situation .
I would like to appeal for adoption of their proposal to create a category of intermediate regions , enabling the withdrawal of aid to be slowed down .
If we analyse Mazowsze 's economic situation without including the city of Warsaw , we see that the gross domestic product of a significant part of the region is a long way from the established 75 % level , and what is more , it is even as low as that of the poorest regions of the European Union , which shows that further assistance is essential .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , cohesion policy is the soul of the European Union 's policies , the one that expresses the solidarity effort between its Member States , without which there would be no real Union .
Its track record in the last 30 years has been excellent .
It demands priorities for the future .
Firstly , no reduction in budgetary commitments for cohesion policy .
To build his 2014-2020 programming , Mr Hahn must be able to rely on the same budgetary amounts as in the past .
Secondly , we need a renewed framework for this policy , one that is adapted to the new situations and challenges .
The creation of intermediate regions is essential for that .
They must be eligible for aid that is better targeted and funded , so that each region can remain at the European average , whatever its structural handicap , however far behind it is because of the past , or whatever its exposure to current or future crises .
It is a long-term objective of territorial balance that we are pursuing with these objectives of intermediate regions , to prevent too big a gap between developed regions that are completely saturated and regions that are remote , lagging behind and even threatened with depopulation in tomorrow 's Europe .
Thirdly , Mrs Sanchez-Schmid 's own-initiative report has the great merit of showing how much Objective 3 is likely to generate considerable European added value .
In the new cohesion policy , by relying on the macro-regions ' impetus , Objective 3 must be considerably strengthened , as called for in Mrs Sanchez-Schmid 's report .
Madam President , in recent years the Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament have been working closely on how to further improve the effectiveness of the EU 's cohesion policy , its results and the quality of its interventions .
We have come to the conclusion that to achieve this , well-designed conditionality and incentives within the policy could be an effective tool .
Today , I am convinced that we are well-prepared to introduce into the policy framework conditionality instruments that would increase the return on the investments made .
Conditionality commitments should address the link between policy interventions and progress on institutional , administrative and structural efficiency .
In the context of the upcoming negotiations , we should ensure an adequate regulatory framework that will identify success factors for effective growth stimulation through cohesion policy .
I expect ex ante conditionality to be fully integrated into the programming process .
I also expect ex ante conditionalities to be directly linked to the policy and to programme effectiveness , that their number will be limited , and that they will be tailored to the specific context and respect agreed criteria .
We must also see to it that conditionality procedures do not generate additional burdens , but rather seek to reduce burdens , and that they produce no delays in the implementation of policy , programmes or projects .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the structure of the cohesion policy we are debating today is very commendable .
I would like to focus these few comments on three issues .
Firstly , I consider cohesion policy to be one of the fundamental tools for reducing imbalances between and within Member States .
It is therefore also one of the fundamental policies for combating the long economic and financial crisis that we have been experiencing for some years now .
Secondly , I think the idea of involving new regions and citizens in cohesion policy is a sound one .
However , we would do well to discuss these issues with a clearer idea of how much this new policy will cost , what effects it will have on general cohesion policy , and how we are going to distribute the resources in the context of the reform of the financial perspective from here to 2020 .
Finally , I think the central role of the urban issue in cohesion policy is decisive .
It is important to have made some progress in this direction with Mr Vlasák 's report , with which I strongly agree , and I believe that this report will allow us to better define the legal framework of the urban issue and also to introduce tools such as the municipal operational programmes as operational programmes capable of giving a new quality to cohesion policy .
( EL ) Madam President , the purpose of the report is to establish if the Member States have transposed European legislation into national law .
What we want is a first real analysis of cohesion policy programmes for the period 2007-2013 .
I shall focus on transparency , on which I drafted a report .
The rapporteur , Mr Mikolášik , referred to the question of transparency when allocating funds , as a basic prerequisite for achieving the overall objectives of cohesion policy .
How can we get an overall picture at European Union level , when only 19 countries have provided the basic indicators needed for the purposes of comparison ?
Although we have asked the Commission to improve the consistency and quality of the information obtained , there is a transparency vacuum , a lack of available data .
We need to send out a clear message .
Total appropriations for projects selected cannot correspond on average to 27 % of total funds available ; 9 States cannot take up over 40 % and 4 States below 20 % .
We cannot have a two- or three-speed cohesion policy .
The information required therefore needs to be diffused and used .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , cohesion policy is the most transparent European policy , which means that its successes can be seen very well and very quickly , but that also very quickly visible are its failures and difficulties , which are a result of the weakness of the Brussels administration as well as very often the weak administration of Member States .
In relation to this , it is very easy to come to conclusions and very easy to use different external conditions - such as the crisis , for example - to justify a reduction of spending on this policy in favour of other European policies , which is clearly a mistake .
We need to realise that if we were to assume that cohesion policy is a policy only for the poorest , then it should slowly come to an end , which means it should slowly disappear completely from the list of European policies .
However , it is not that kind of policy which we are talking about , today , is it ?
This policy is a policy of reducing disparities - disparities will always exist , and there will be new disparities which we are not yet aware of today .
Furthermore , it is a pro-investment policy and a pro-development policy .
In relation to this , it is a policy which requires action to be taken which is provided for in the Treaties , but which also requires this action to take new forms .
In relation to this , I would like to express my approval of the European Commission 's decision to rebuild the internal structure of the policy and adapt it to new conditions .
In this regard , I would also like to express my approval of the European Commission 's proposals for new measures , including , among others , proposals for creating a category of intermediate regions .
I think that work on a new structure will increase effectiveness and allow the policy to be pursued in a way which measures up to the challenges we currently face .
( RO ) Madam President , cross-border cooperation in a Europe without borders is beneficial to local and regional authorities because it plays an important role in the ongoing development of the European Union 's single market .
However , cross-border areas have an important feature , characterised by common multicultural traditions and ethnic diversity , aspects which usually provide a solid foundation not only for interactions between people but also between communities in various areas .
We are all aware that one very frequent feature of cross-border areas is a higher than average unemployment rate , however , with significant interregional differences , as well as a high level of hidden unemployment caused by the lack of people out of work signing on .
Therefore , I think that an integrated approach to the labour market in cross-border areas may be conducive to finding solutions to the structural problems and would bring demand closer to supply .
This is why Objective 3 must be significantly enhanced , just as the rapporteur has also maintained .
( RO ) Madam President , cohesion policy is an effective instrument for tackling the current major challenges which Europe 's regions are faced with , such as globalisation , climate change or demographic trends .
Significant progress has been made at EU level in terms of the regions ' balanced development , but it is not sufficient .
This is why we need an ambitious cohesion policy made available to all EU regions , which will reduce the current inequalities .
I think that supporting the convergence requirements of less developed areas must remain a priority in the forthcoming programming period so that fair access to the cohesion policy instruments can be guaranteed .
This will allow us to apply the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , which emphasise that under Objective 1 ( convergence ) a suitable share must be allocated to the regions most in need , according to the severity of their development problems .
The European Union will only be able to compete against its rivals at a global level if cohesion policy can fully tap the development potential not only of urban regions but also of rural areas , with their endogenous potential , and if it can offer a sufficiently flexible response to the challenges and difficulties identified by the Europe 2020 strategy .
With this in mind , innovation , education and training , energy , environment , employment , competitiveness , qualifications and combating poverty are and must remain an integral part of structural and cohesion policy .
The new cohesion policy must be clearly results-oriented and specify the necessary reforms , while at the same time reducing the constraints imposed by red tape and simplifying the management of the funds .
I come from a country which will be dependent , especially during the 2013-2020 period , on how we understand the Union 's uniform development .
In practical terms , the funds allocated now and in the next 10 years in Romania will provide a long-term investment which is needed for the balanced development of the entire European Union .
I congratulate my colleague Mr Pieper and all the rapporteurs for the excellent report that was presented .
( SL ) Mr President , at a time of financial and economic crisis , cohesion policy has proved to be the most important tool in reducing the economic and social disparities between regions in the European Union .
It is one of our fundamental policies , the positive effects of which can really be seen everywhere ; in all corners of the European Union , in all Member States , in virtually every urban or local community of the EU .
This is a policy which enables structural reforms and progress .
In fact , it offers a solution to the current difficult economic situation , and at no cost at that .
The success of the Europe 2020 strategy , too , will largely depend on the success of the EU 's cohesion policy , which is why it is extremely important that , in the next seven-year period , these funds remain a priority for the European budget .
Since the most important issue , that of integrating what is commonly known as the new intermediate category of regions , remains to be resolved , in that regard , I would like to call on the Commissioner and the European Commission as a whole to provide us , as soon as possible , with all the details that remain unclear regarding the creation of this category of region , especially the financial aspects and effects , as this issue concerns the future development of regions throughout the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting the Garriga Polledo report , Parliament has asked for a 2014 multi-annual financial framework equal to the budget challenges that await us .
In this regard , regional policy must retain financial resources at least equivalent to those of the current period .
That is a priority .
All European regions should continue to have access to the Structural Funds .
We should of course focus our efforts on helping the most underdeveloped regions to catch up through Objective 1 .
For the sake of fairness , we should also provide appropriate support to regions that do not qualify for Objective 1 but are nonetheless faced with structural difficulties .
I am therefore glad that the European Commission has proposed creating an intermediate category for regions where GDP per capita is between 75 and 90 % of the EU average .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Hahn for this work .
This new instrument will enable us to better cater for the specific characteristics of many regions that are neither poor nor rich .
This intermediate category will also be fairer for it will provide similar support to regions which have a comparable level of development .
However I wish to reassure the regions that would have qualified for the phasing-out mechanism : there is no question of abandoning them .
They will be fully eligible for the intermediate category and will certainly even be the main beneficiaries .
Finally , I should like to point out that creating this new category will not involve any additional expenditure , thanks to the savings expected by several regions no longer being under Objective 1 .
It is also out of the question to reduce the aid for those regions eligible for Objectives 1 , 2 and 3 .
However , if we do not create this intermediate category , we can be sure that the budget for cohesion policy will be cut .
By creating it , we will preserve this budget .
I think that no one here wishes to see this budget reduced .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pieper , for his work .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , economic cohesion , along with social cohesion and also territorial cohesion , have always been the fundamental principles for defining all the policies of the European Union since its inception .
It is therefore very important that these objectives should be emphasised as they are in the texts we are discussing , and it is right that the structural funds should be reviewed and amended to make them more effective in achieving the results they are intended to bring about .
Of these , in my view the European Social Fund is fundamental , for a very simple reason , which is that we are in an acute phase of the economic and social crisis that is not yet over , and that is having its most serious effects precisely on work and employment .
It is very important that Europe should uphold its social model , and at the same time reiterate the fact that work has an unquestionable social value and that employment is one of the main reference points in the use of resources that economic development should make available .
For this reason the Social Fund must be strengthened , its autonomy retained and the available resources increased .
Knowledge is the focal point and driver of any model of competition .
All of this cannot happen unless there is a significant increase in the quality of jobs .
This is why the European Social Fund is as valuable as it has ever been , if not more so .
Mr President , more than ever , the EU needs cohesion policy that promotes real convergence and stimulates growth and employment , while also making a contribution to achieving environmental goals .
In view of the current financial situation and the ongoing implementation of the programmes , the Commission should make every effort to promote simplicity and flexibility in rules on the implementation of programmes , and should allow cofinancing rates to be renegotiated within the current regulations , whenever this is necessary and sought by the Member States .
Cohesion policy should be geared towards results by setting clear and measureable objectives and results indicators .
Cohesion policy should also promote transparency .
In order to monitor this , and so that we have this transparency , I would argue that information relating to the adoption and implementation of projects should be made available in real time by the most detailed classifications of territorial and statistical units possible , so that the entire public is able to access it .
( PL ) Mr President , at the outset , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on an excellent job .
As the rapporteurs have stressed , cohesion policy has proved its importance , including during the crisis , as a policy for development which supports investment and brings benefits directly and indirectly to all regions .
For example , for every euro invested in my country of Poland , almost half , or 46 cents , returns to the countries of the 15 ' old ' Member States .
Support for development as well as investment and the importance of cohesion policy for achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy are the reasons for which this policy should retain at least its current significance , but also its financial support .
However , improvement is needed in the integration of the funds and achievement of full synergy between them .
In view of the dangers associated with unemployment among young people and with demographic changes it is crucial to achieve full use of the potential of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , and that requires the creation of conditions to achieve better coordination of the ESF with other instruments at regional and local level .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the current economic and financial crisis that we are experiencing highlights the need for regional policy as the best means of reducing disparities in development between regions and Member States .
At the same time , we can restore the positive image of Europe , which recently citizens associate only with tough adjustment programmes and spending cuts .
Future cohesion policy , the pillar of solidarity of the European project and of social justice , must take into account the following priorities : firstly , reinforcing social cohesion and incorporating the challenges posed by the Europe 2020 Strategy ; secondly , providing for the needs and geographical characteristics of the regions , especially the most disadvantaged regions ; thirdly , maintaining a gradual approach to the collection of funds so that the regions do not abandon the objective of convergence , avoiding sudden changes in the receipt of aid ; and fourthly promoting an equitable system .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , the authorities are applying harsh fiscal adjustment policies .
Therefore , EU support is necessary .
I hope that the Council will take note of this .
Mr President , the Development and Cooperation DG is responsible for managing the European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument ( ENPI ) cross-border cooperation programmes , and this has led to quite an absurd situation when it comes to cross-border cooperation with Russia - which is neither an ENPI target country nor a recipient of EU development assistance .
I agree with the rapporteur that overall responsibility for the ENPI should be returned to the Regional Development DG and that the cross-border cooperation programmes should be implemented in a framework similar to that for the Interreg programmes .
Regardless of the external dimension , cross-border cooperation programmes should not be pursued under the regulations for development aid .
Their nature requires application of the EU territorial cooperation rules .
( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy is the best tool for creating equal opportunities for development of the European Union 's regions and stimulating economic growth .
In order to achieve the objectives of cohesion policy , it is important not only to make the fullest use of available means , but above all to use them effectively , reduce bureaucracy and achieve the correct synergy between funds .
Something which is very important is effective use of the European Social Fund in a way which gets the unemployed back into work and does not just train them , which is a very common practice .
Money for innovation , research and development is important , because this allows for businesses and regions to be more competitive .
An important objective of cohesion policy is European cross-border cooperation .
So it is important to have harmonious implementation and promotion of cooperation in border areas , both in respect of internal border areas but above all of areas along the European Union 's external borders .
Finally , macroregions are very effective , and here I would like to suggest to the Commissioner that , following the example of other strategies , we create a strategy for the Carpathians , one of the largest regions of the European Union and one of the best endowed in terms of natural riches .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to highlight Parliament 's support for the creation of a category of intermediate regions and I would point out that this will in no way - contrary to what some have said - be an additional burden on the Community budget .
What we are proposing here is a revolution in the concept of transition with an unchanged budget .
Our desire is to move towards a fairer system which helps those regions that have substantial difficulties .
This transitional zone between 75 and 90 % of European GDP is a real commitment towards a consolidated cohesion policy for the years to come .
Furthermore , I am delighted that our resolution has confirmed Parliament 's commitment towards the outermost regions .
The latter are subject to specific and permanent disadvantages which justify this solidarity effort , in order for them to effectively be the Union 's interface with the world .
( FI ) Mr President , regional policy and cohesion policy are necessary for evening out differentials in development .
It is of major importance for people 's well-being and also for European competitiveness .
Regional policy at EU level needs , above all , to create added value and produce new enterprises , and , consequently , employment for people .
We need to ask whether it is sensible to recycle all current regional aid through Brussels , or whether the money could be spent more effectively if it was allocated directly to the regions in the Member States .
The EU 's regional policy is dogged by red tape and abuse .
There is a good deal of red tape both in the EU and in the Member States , and this has resulted in a situation in which many innovative businesses , new or old , do not apply for money or support because one or two people would have to be employed to deal with the application , and it would take up too much time .
We need to think about whether Europe 's innovation policy even has a future , if regional policy does not support it .
( PT ) Mr President , cohesion policy is one of the EU 's most emblematic policy areas , and the one that best symbolises the ideal of building the European project .
It therefore requires and deserves all the aspects being debated here today to be covered in greater depth , and the participation of this many rapporteurs , all of whom I would congratulate .
I would like to stress the need for a budget adapted to this policy , with greater flexibility and control , so that European funds really boost development projects that are capable of being sustainable .
In view of this , it is important that the regions that are already out of Objective 1 be able to go through an intermediate phase that consolidates the development of which they have already shown themselves to be capable , instead of being abruptly abandoned , thus jeopardising the progress made in the meantime .
( HU ) Mr President , we are now discussing a topic that is essential for the new Member States , including Hungary .
There is some alarming information indicating that some of the decision-makers in the Commission intend to cut the cohesion policy budget drastically from 2014 .
This would be a suicidal step .
Such a move would not only make the alignment of the poorer regions impossible , it would also jeopardise the Europe 2020 strategy .
The proposal that we should establish a transitional support category is indeed correct and socially fair .
However , attaching cohesion support to a system of macro-economical conditions is unacceptable , because we would be punishing the regions for a governmental policy on which they have no influence .
Finally , the operational mechanism of cohesion policy is successful and basically sound , transparency must be increased and bureaucracy must be decreased .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of interregional cooperation will continue to grow in future .
Cross-border collaboration and macro-regional cooperation are immensely important for the achievement of the Europe 2020 objectives in a Europe which is becoming more cohesive .
Border regions are still faced with particular challenges .
Cross-border concepts and projects in areas such as infrastructure , business cooperation , research collaboration , the development of the labour market and training act as the engine for large parts of the European Union .
We need clear , simple structures for interregional projects .
Different national requirements for the project partners often make cooperation and the implementation of specific , sustainable projects more difficult .
The call in Mr Pieper 's report to extend the proportion of interregional cooperation , Objective 3 , to 7 % is an important step forward and I strongly support this .
( PT ) Mr President , cohesion policy is the key policy area for the future of the European project .
In order to function , the establishment of a common area with an internal market and a single currency requires a certain level of convergence between the Member States and their regions .
The current disparities in competitiveness and the asymmetries in development have inevitably led to Europe being weakened and to the crisis affecting the euro area .
This is why this crucial need for convergence absolutely requires a robust cohesion budget , which cannot be weakened to fund other policies .
In order to do more , the EU needs to have more , and this can be achieved by increasing its budget , rather than reducing the cohesion budget , even slightly .
I would therefore like to ask you , Commissioner , if it is possible that , without any increase in the Union budget , the creation of the infrastructure fund and new innovation policies - which will be linked to cohesion and to regional development , which I support - will become a Trojan horse brought into the cohesion budget ?
( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy plays an important role in facilitating development of the regions - regions which bring together urban and rural areas and create unity between them .
It is a fact that urban areas have an important influence on the acceleration of regional development .
They should be given the necessary support in this role .
However , we must remember to strive for balanced development of rural and urban areas .
I would like to observe that cohesion policy is not very visible in rural areas , despite the declarations which have been made on this matter .
It is necessary to allocate funds to rural development under cohesion policy , because the second pillar of common agricultural policy is moving its activity to greening , ' ecologicalisation ' , environmental matters , agricultural development and processing .
However , there is a lack of funds for the development of enterprise and technical and social infrastructure in rural areas , and this should be the role of cohesion policy .
The construction of technical infrastructure is fundamental for development , but we cannot forget the development of enterprise or of social infrastructure and science and research , which fundamentally affect modern , intelligent and innovative development .
( RO ) Mr President , today 's debate provides the best argument in favour of the need for a robust , well-financed cohesion policy in the future financial framework .
I am inspired by the excellent speech made by Mrs Hübner , the chair of our committee , and by an excellent report from Mr Theurer on the lessons from absorption capacity .
I would therefore like to ask you , Commissioner , from the European perspective of the future funding cycle , how Romania , the country with the lowest absorption rate , can commit to a so-called administrative reform which has nothing to do with the regional reform , without there being any impact study , without at least going through the motions of consultations with the Directorate General for Regional Policy , which found out about this project in the press , and without having consultations with political actors , local actors and civil society , thereby jeopardising the whole project 's stability and predictability .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise two points in relation to cohesion policy and regional policy .
The first is the dispute regarding the so-called intermediate category , which runs very much along national lines .
I believe it is essential for us to consider the following points in relation to this discussion : regional policy and economic development policy must offer an incentive system so that the relevant regions can develop .
If the system is set up in such a way that a dependency on continuous subsidy develops without requiring effort among the regions to obtain the relevant resources , then I believe that such an intermediate category would be an unmitigated disaster because it will always be a bone of contention and offers no rationale .
However , I do believe that it makes sense for Objective 1 regions that lose their Objective 1 status to continue to receive special support .
I also believe it makes sense that a region that is experiencing financial and economic difficulties for specific reasons should also receive support .
What we do not want is a continuous subsidy mentality ; instead we should offer help and support to the regions that need it .
( RO ) Mr President , cohesion policy is , without a doubt , fundamental to the European Union 's development .
I believe that its structure underpins European competitiveness .
I think that regions must continue to be supported in their aim to fulfil the economic and social cohesion objective .
Financial support must be provided , taking into account primarily regional GDP .
Ordinary citizens must be guaranteed access to the social , educational , health and transport infrastructure .
This will enable us to back up the economic development efforts with a high quality of life , which will make our citizens stay at home in Europe .
Fellow Members , SMEs are key to boosting economic competitiveness .
They must be given greater encouragement by making the rules for accessing funds more flexible and by promoting them .
Therefore , I advocate that equal access to the infrastructure and quality services , as well as support for SMEs are basic guiding principles in the regional development policy 's structure and that this is the path towards achieving global competitiveness .
( ES ) Mr President , cohesion policy has undoubtedly contributed to increased productivity in all regions of the EU and to eliminating regional disparities and there is no doubt that it has proved fundamental for all citizens and that it is helping - and will continue to help - to combat the economic and financial crisis Europe is suffering .
This is why the fifth cohesion report is so timely .
There are three key ideas .
The first is that gross domestic product should be supplemented by other indicators on the part of national and regional authorities .
The second idea is that there should be an intermediate category so that all regions that do not come under convergence and do not manage to achieve competitiveness can be treated in a similar way when similar situations arise and so that these regions do not ever suffer a sudden change .
The third idea is to reinforce Objective 3 .
I wish to make two requests .
The maximum distance of 150 kilometres should be removed to enable many regions such as , for example , the Balearic Islands to access cross-border cooperation .
My second point is that the report says that the working languages of the EU are French , English and German .
That is not so .
The 23 languages of the EU are what make us rich and diverse .
( BG ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for their work on this particularly important subject .
As a Bulgarian politician , I am following with particular interest the developments concerning the intermediate category of beneficiary regions , which is planned to be created in the new 2013-2020 budget framework .
As has been emphasised on several occasions today as well during the debate , I think that this issue requires further discussion because , at the moment , a precondition is being established for new divisions and exclusions in the treatment of individual regions , which goes against the European principle of solidarity .
The intermediate category contradicts the principle of converging European regions whose development is below the average European Union level .
It is not sufficiently clear what basis has been used to select even the 75 % and 90 % limits or why , for instance , a category was not created for particularly underdeveloped regions .
I will vote based on the rapporteur 's suggestion in paragraph 34 , with a reservation about mentioning regions falling under these limits .
I will also vote in favour of Amendment 5 for clear , strict criteria , which we regard as being of paramount importance in order to avoid difficulties when implementing the new framework .
Mr President , honourable Members , firstly I would like to express my thanks for the commitment you have shown in this comprehensive debate involving a large number of speeches .
This is evidence of the need to address the issues relating to regional policy and cohesion policy in detail in this House .
I would like to begin with something very important to me .
It was very important to Parliament in terms of timing , and something that I welcomed myself , that Parliament should have the opportunity to form a detailed , multilayered opinion prior to the publication of our draft regulations , and that this opinion should then also find expression in the relevant regulations .
For this reason , I would crave your understanding that at this point I am unable to offer comprehensive proposals in writing because these will be based in particular on the reports now being presented .
It is very important that we place greater emphasis on the quality of the work with the regions , particularly when we look at some countries that are experiencing genuine structural problems .
In this case it is necessary not just to address the allocation of resources and the identification of objectives , but also to help with the definition of the programmes for identifying objectives and to assist with the formation of clusters in individual regions and parts of regions in order to generate sustainable economic growth .
At the risk of repeating what some speakers have already mentioned , I would point out that our proposal will contain a separate chapter on multi-level governance , setting out our stall and calling on all stakeholders to cooperate in the drafting of operative programmes in the regions .
At this point , I would also call on those in positions of responsibility in the regions to ensure that local administrations are included .
This is because I , like many of you , have heard complaints from the regions that national authorities are not included , while local administrations bemoan the fact that the regional level fails to include them .
If we look at the idea of ownership , which has been mentioned several times already , then it is certainly necessary for all of you to lend a hand .
Simplification is a much-used , if not to say over-used , word that provides a challenge to us all .
However , simplification cannot simply mean that controls are just relaxed .
We must use suitable means to try to simplify our business .
I place great hope in the work being done by Mr Barnier in the area of public procurement , simplifying the process by further standardising procedures , reducing the margin for error and thereby making a meaningful contribution to simplification . We must play our part in this by making further proposals in relation to flat rate amounts , etc .
Here , too , it will be important for the Member States to follow our lead .
One of the speakers suggested that the European Structural Fund might perhaps be split away from the structural fund family , but we have no plans in this direction .
Much of what needs to happen in rural areas should also be covered by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development , the purpose of which is not just to support farmers , but also to support rural areas .
As we know there are several players and participants in this sector .
Here , too , the task is to achieve better coordination between the various funds , which is a general objective for the joint strategic framework .
Conditionality will help us to improve the quality of our work .
A lot has been said today about the transitional regions , most of it proper and important .
The point is to aid development in these regions , which do not yet reflect the European average .
This is the whole point of regional policy .
The crux of the matter is as follows : to contribute to growth in qualitative and quantitative terms and to ensure that Europe 2020 objectives are achieved , for example in the areas of energy , climate change , innovation , research , education and training , employment and the campaign to combat poverty .
I should like to thank everyone for this highly committed debate , and also for the enormous support that the House has shown for our policies .
rapporteur . - Mr President , implementation of the programmes is a continuous and dynamic process that can be influenced by means of identifying frequent shortcomings in the whole process and areas where reforms are needed .
In this context , strategic reporting , as a new instrument , increases accountability in delivering policy objectives and shows that cohesion policy should address all European regions and societal challenges in order to achieve smart , sustainable and inclusive growth in the whole EU .
Cohesion policy relies upon good governance at European , national , regional and local level .
Smooth cooperation at all these levels is as highly desirable as the simplification of the whole process .
The funds must not , of course , remain unused owing to superfluous bureaucracy or onerous rules and procedures .
Well-financed cohesion policy should be closer to EU citizens and should continue to address all European Union regions and societal challenges , both helping the poorer to catch up and delivering smart , sustainable and inclusive growth in the whole European Union .
The strategic report 2010 constitutes a strong incentive to improve the current implementation of the cohesion policy programmes .
It also encourages the Member States to correct delays in investing EU funds and to develop more efficient action plans to deliver the agreed results .
Therefore , I hope that the result of today 's vote on the strategic report 2010 will send that message to the Member States and the Commission .
Welcome
I have the pleasure of informing you that members of a delegation from the National Assembly of Mauritania have taken their seats in the official gallery .
I would like to extend a warm welcome to this delegation led by Mr El Arbi Ould Sidi Ali .
They are here to meet with Members of the European Parliament .
Once more , welcome to Brussels and to our Parliament .
Relations between the European Union and Mauritania are very important for the European Parliament .
I am convinced that the fruitful dialogue between Members of the European Parliament and Members of the Mauritanian Parliament can contribute to enhancing these relations and also to developing new areas of cooperation between the EU and Mauritania .
5th cohesion report and strategy for the post-2013 cohesion policy - Implementation of cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 - European urban agenda and its future in cohesion policy - Objective 3 : future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation - Increased effectiveness between ERDF and other structural funds ( continuation of debate )
We now continue with the debate on the reports on cohesion policy .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking all of my fellow Members for the excellent cooperation and for a very constructive debate .
I would like to conclude by making two rather provocative comments on the discussion as a whole .
The structural funds were set up mainly to even out differences between individual regions , and they should therefore be directed particularly towards the most backward parts of the EU , in other words towards convergence Objective 1 .
The richer regions will benefit from this through increased market opportunities for their products and services .
On the other hand , we should reject all proposed attempts to boost investment in the Objective 2 regions , or to create a strong transitional category of regions without financial expertise .
I see no reason for the endless redistribution of money from the rich to the rich .
I do , however , regard a specific transition mechanism between Objectives 1 and 2 as an appropriate addition .
Secondly , I think it is vital for us to stop market distortions through the funds .
The fact that one businessman obtains a grant to construct a factory building and the other does not , will logically lead to a distortion of the market .
The other will then have to include the cost of constructing the factory building in the price of the products he sells , and he will therefore logically have higher prices or lower profits .
It would be far better if the only final beneficiaries were public administration bodies , in other words the state , the regions , prefectures , towns and villages , which would invest the money in growth measures .
It is clear to me that such a radical change is impossible .
It is , however , possible at least to try this way out , and to take a small step in this direction .
In the words of Neil Armstrong , it would be a small step for European funds , but a giant leap for the European economy .
Mr President , Europe is currently in crisis : there is a financial crisis , a macroeconomic crisis , a social crisis and a moral crisis .
Citizens perceive Europe as an enemy who regulates and imposes drastic austerity .
They do not see what the Union does to invest , to support growth , to integrate those with fewer opportunities and to make up for development imbalances between regions .
In a short while we will be voting on the package on economic governance , which sets out responsible measures in order to adhere to the Stability and Growth Pact , clean up public finances and allow growth to pick up .
Cohesion policy is the second pillar on which this growth must rely , a sustainable , intelligent and inclusive growth .
Economic governance and cohesion policy are two sides of the same coin and it is important to point out that one cannot go without the other .
That is why we must fight to defend this policy , to defend its budget , to convince the Member States that regional policy is not a luxury but a necessity .
There is a lot at stake in the budget negotiations for the next programming period .
We must continue to take action in favour of a policy of European cohesion that is integrated and ambitious , simpler and more visible , one which enhances territorial cooperation and which is fairly directed at all regions .
Thus , I particularly support the proposal , put forward in the Pieper report , proposing the creation of an intermediate category for regions where GDP is between 75 and 90 % of the EU average .
This category will enable many regions facing structural growth problems to receive fair and balanced treatment .
Moreover , I naturally wish to insist once again on the importance of developing European territorial cooperation .
It is the practical embodiment of Robert Schuman 's saying : Europe will not be made all at once or through overall integration ; it will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity .
This was true 60 years ago and it is still true today .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their reports , which have given us an opportunity today to debate basic dimensions of future cohesion policy and to express our main positions on them .
However , I should like to comment on Mr Pieper 's report , for which I was the shadow rapporteur , because it sets out the detailed positions of the European Parliament on the post-2013 architecture needed for cohesion policy .
I should like to point out that the European Parliament 's main positions have already been formulated and approved by plenary in a special chapter of the resolution on the future financial perspective of the European Union as regards cohesion policy .
We shall not be making concessions on those positions .
Future cohesion policy must have an appropriate budget , so that it can effectively meet the new challenges , support all the regions of the European Union , with particular emphasis as always on the regions with the most development problems , include thematic objectives and , at the same time , a degree of flexibility , rely on simplified rules which have been unified to the maximum possible extent between its funds and ensure that all citizens of the Union will be able to enjoy its benefits , even if they are living in the most remote parts of the European Union , on islands and in mountain areas .
Finally , as regards , in particular , the proposal to create an intermediate support category , which both I and my political group and a large majority in Parliament have always supported , I should like to stress that I absolutely agree with the opinion expressed today by Commissioner Hahn .
Its creation is absolutely justified and we want the future regional support system to address regions at the same development level in a fair , simplified and transparent manner .
I believe that we must send out a clear message that the European Union looks behind the statistics , especially in the present economic crisis .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.45 and resumed at 11.50 )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( BG ) Improving the business climate is also part of cohesion policy .
However , an efficiently operating judicial system is required to do this .
The lack of action from the legislative authority regarding the extremely urgent changes in the judicial system is noticeable .
We have obligations to our European partners to undertake large-scale reforms in this area , which need to cope adequately with the numerous cases in Bulgaria 's courts , especially with those involving corruption at high levels and the indications of it .
The numerous negative assessments , as a whole , from the European Commission and the European courts regarding the reforms to the judicial system and the spreading corruption have not changed the government 's criminally negligent attitude towards any kind of reforms in this area .
Why do people who have the right to initiate changes to the law not do it , yet , at the same time , justify their mistakes with the lack of reforms ?
Why are double standards being protected ?
In whose interest is it to delay reforms ?
It is shocking that in the 21st century citizens in Bulgaria do not have the opportunity to bring an individual complaint before the Constitutional Court , a right which is taken for granted by citizens in Germany , for instance .
Why are senior judges elected in an extremely dubious , obscure way and why do very grave doubts remain about interference from the executive ?
in writing . - ( LT ) As we prepare for the new financial period post-2013 , we must put forward specific proposals for the European Union financial perspective ( 2014-2020 ) on a single strategic framework to ensure the implementation of the EU cohesion policy objectives and the effectiveness of the structural funds .
At this difficult time , in order to overcome the consequences of the financial and economic crisis , we have a good opportunity to use the future negotiations on the next Multiannual Financial Framework to achieve more effective governance and implementation of the EU structural funds and programmes .
The European Commission should increase the technical assistance given to Member State , regional and local government bodies and organise more training for them , in order to increase their capabilities and broaden their knowledge of the rules applied to address issues related to implementation .
In addition , the Member States themselves should give priority to investment in institutional capacity , and simplify administrative provisions in order to reduce the administrative burden .
I agree with the European Parliament 's call for the Commission to draft a European handbook on multi-level governance and encourage the Member States to follow it , taking into account specific local and regional objectives , to extend the application of cohesion policy governance measures ( that is , programming , funding and implementation on the basis of national , regional and local partnership ) and to apply them to funds that will be included in the planned common strategic framework , in order to ensure greater public expenditure efficiency .
in writing . - ( HU ) Cohesion policy has proved its indispensability , efficiency and flexibility in combating the crisis .
Furthermore , it contributes significantly to achieving the Europe 2020 goals , although it is important to emphasise that cohesion policy is only one of the means of achieving these goals , and every policy field must contribute to an appropriate extent to the success of the new growth strategy of the European Union .
I would like to highlight the fact that the error rate has decreased substantially in recent years , and the majority of errors derive from fields outside cohesion policy ( e.g. public procurement ) .
The financing of cohesion policy should not be reduced because there are still imbalances that can only be tackled by cohesion policy .
The most impoverished regions need more support , but in return they should be more efficient .
At the same time it is important that the conditions applied in the field of regional policy should relate to fields which cohesion policy can influence , and Member States should not be required to implement essential social and economic reforms in the name of conditionality .
Simplification of the currently extremely complicated regulation system , uniform interpretation of rules and obligations , consistency of the legislative environment and a clear delineation of responsibilities are essential for increasing the efficiency of cohesion policy .
Cohesion policy is not an aid policy ; rather it involves investment in the alignment of less developed areas , the positive consequences of which will have effects on the more affluent regions as well , due to an increase in demand .
Cohesion policy is vital for eliminating the disparities between Europe 's regions , exiting the crisis and achieving smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
In spite of what has been achieved , there are still regions whose development is lagging behind .
This creates the need for more and better targeted measures aimed at reducing the social and economic imbalances in Europe and combating poverty and social exclusion .
What is required to increase the effectiveness of cohesion policy is better interaction between the Structural Funds , as well as better coordination with the other EU financial instruments and domestic assistance .
Making the operational programmes sufficiently flexible would also play a key role in ensuring that they are as relevant as possible to the surrounding conditions .
We need to move towards reducing the administrative burdens faced by beneficiaries , including by making wider use of eGovernment facilities , and towards strengthening the role played by local and regional authorities , as well as socio-economic partners .
By way of conclusion , I would like to emphasise that , in order to achieve genuine social , economic and territorial cohesion and ensure that every European citizen has a good place to live and work , the size of the cohesion policy funds in the next programming period must be at least the same as in the current period .
in writing . - ( ET ) In future , the European Union 's cohesion policy must be bolder in taking macro-regional strategies such as the Baltic Sea Strategy and the Danube Region Strategy into consideration more than has hitherto been the case .
Macro-regional strategies are well-placed to take advantage of transnational potential , to improve cooperation between different levels of government , to make use of a common approach in order to tackle common problems , and to increase regional competitiveness and the capacity for innovation .
In preparing cohesion policy for the upcoming period , it is necessary to specify more clearly how to implement the macro-regional strategies in the upcoming period and what their role and place within cohesion policy should be , as well as how they should be financed in the upcoming period .
It is important that macro-regional strategies be examined in the context of the objective of European territorial cohesion prescribed in the Treaty of Lisbon and the EU 's territorial development plan for 2020 .
The European Commission must provide more precise guidelines for Member States , such as a specification of particular courses of action or areas that have macro-regional relevance : for example , transport corridors , the free movement of services and environmental issues .
Through better coordination of existing support mechanisms , it will become possible to make more purposeful use of the EU 's structural funds without requiring a greater allocation of resources to those inter-regional areas of cooperation .
I also believe that it is extremely important to provide for additional resources to coordinate macro-regional strategies and increase cooperative synergy .
Coordination requires continuous improvement , and the responsibility of Member States in this area should certainly be increased .
Cohesion policy is the best proof of the solidarity which exists in the European Union .
Poland , and in particular poor regions like the one I represent - Lubelskie Voivodship - have used these funds for rapid development .
Today it is hard to imagine what our region would be like without EU support .
It is a pity that there is a lack of information about the specific effects of spending this money , because in fact it is research evaluating the way in which the whole region has used a variety of programmes , and not evaluation of individual programmes , which should suggest the way forward for cohesion policy in future years .
Cohesion policy is a pillar of the Europe 2020 strategy , so the money allocated to cohesion policy in the next common financial framework should not be less than the amounts made available in the current programming period .
We are currently looking for resources for new objectives which are to increase Europe 's competitiveness .
We should not , however , look for these at the cost of cities and regions .
In the report of the Policy Challenges Committee and in the Pieper report the European Parliament has sent a strong message to the governments of the Member States and the Council : do not tamper with cohesion policy .
In its report on the future strategy for the post-2013 cohesion policy , the European Parliament proposes a balanced position which is favourable to the European Union .
The Union continues to need a strong cohesion policy which will also be financed accordingly .
At the same time , regulations need to be improved .
Other requirements include projects with large European added value , fairness , responsibility and a commitment from Member States , based on a contract with the European Commission , to use the total amount of allocated funds .
During a period of economic decline , investments are needed to preserve jobs and foster development .
Cohesion policy is targeted exclusively at investments .
For the future financial year , the budget allocated to cohesion policy must be at least equivalent to the current level .
Cohesion policy after 2013 should continue to be an important factor in the development of Europe .
It must guarantee infrastructure development and correct the imbalances in development between individual regions .
The financial crisis has further exacerbated regional differences .
Europe is confronting large-scale unemployment .
At present , when there are more than 23 million unemployed , cohesion policy is one of the policies that can also contribute to creating new jobs .
There is perhaps not a single MEP who doubts the need for cohesion policy to continue after 2013 .
The question of efficient use of funds , transparency and improvement of the overall process , and return on investment is becoming topical .
The successes of cohesion policy are measurable and are very much noticed and applauded by inhabitants of the EU .
It is therefore also important that cohesion policy is given sufficient funding when the Multiannual Financial Framework is approved .
Investments in regional development are investments in the future and the development of the EU .
Pursuit of the objectives of European cohesion policy is undoubtedly moving in the right direction in many areas , although at this stage there are already some lessons which can be learned from its progress to date for the construction of the future priorities of European cohesion policy .
The relatively poor take-up of funds for infrastructure and the environment has given rise to the need for a review of the tools which offer encouragement to begin projects in this area .
This is particularly important for the countries of Eastern Europe , in which spending of funds allocated for this purpose is lower in comparison with other strategic areas .
Furthermore , additional support is required for transnational and cross-border cooperation , which is needed from the point of view of development and European convergence , and for the accomplishment of joint regional projects in the area of infrastructure and the environment .
Another important element is the strengthening of development based on small and medium-sized enterprises .
What is important here is not only to stimulate the establishment of new enterprises , but to create suitable conditions for them to survive in the market .
This gives rise to the need to achieve greater integration of the principles of the Small Business Act with cohesion policy .
Consideration given to these areas in the construction of post-2013 strategy and cohesion policy can contribute to the lasting and harmonious economic development of the European Union .
Interinstitutional Agreement on the Transparency Register ( signing )
Ladies and Gentlemen , dear colleagues , let us take our seats for the official signing of a very important agreement between the European Parliament and the European Commission : the ' lobbyists register ' .
We voted on the Casini report at the last plenary session in Strasbourg and now we will have the official signing .
We voted on 11 May 2011 .
For the official signing , I should like to welcome Minister Győri and Maroš Šefčovič , Vice-President of the European Commission , and our colleagues Diana Wallis , Vice-President of the European Parliament , who was in the negotiator 's team , Vice-President Isabelle Durant , Vice-President Rainer Wieland and Carlo Casini , Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and also the rapporteur .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to read out the Council 's political statement on the transparency register .
' The Council considers transparency as a principle of paramount importance for the European Union .
The treaties provide that , in order to promote good governance and ensure the participation of civil society , the Union 's institutions , bodies , offices and agencies shall conduct their work as openly as possible and that decisions shall be taken as openly and as closely as possible to the citizens .
' In line with these provisions , the Council remains committed to giving the fullest possible effect to the principle of transparency .
It also recognises that citizens expect that those who act on their behalf at the EU level respect the highest possible standards .
' The Council therefore welcomes and supports the initiative undertaken by the European Parliament and the Commission to establish a joint " Transparency Register ” .
' The Council considers that transparency should guide relations with interest representatives and that the Register provides a useful basis on which to build and interact with them in an open , inclusive and consistent fashion .
' The Council has received the invitation of the European Parliament and the Commission to join the Register .
The Council is ready to consider having a role in the Register and looks forward to discuss the possible modalities with the two other institutions . '
It would be the best solution if all the European institutions were to have the same register for outside interests .
Now I would like to invite my colleagues and the Vice-President of the Commission to join me in front of the podium for the signing of the document .
Other business
As some of you may know , four days ago I was appointed to become the new Foreign Minister of Greece .
( Applause )
Thank you .
The interesting part of this job was that on Sunday and Monday in Luxembourg , when I officially met for the first time my other foreign minister colleagues from each of your countries , no one said ' Congratulations ' .
Everyone said ' Good luck ' .
( Laughter and applause )
I just wanted to say a brief goodbye .
I will miss this Parliament tremendously . I will miss all the friends I have made here tremendously .
I do not think there is a better place in Europe for the passion and the compassion that this Parliament can bring to bear .
I am deeply grateful and , because I do not want my last goodbye to be a goodbye in English and because I do not want you to forget the Greek that you have learned in the past year and a half , I will tell you what I suggest we do .
Let me hear again how we say ' in favour ' .
( Members : ' Υπέρ ! ' )
How do we say ' against ' ?
( Members : ' Κατά ! ' )
How do we say ' abstention ' ?
( Members : ' Αποχή ! ' )
Very good .
I want Socialists and GUE to say ' Υπέρ ' ; PPE and ECR , you say ' Κατά ' ; Greens and ALDE , you say ' Αποχή ' .
Simple !
Let us go .
( S & D and GUE / NGL Groups : ' Υπέρ ! ' ; PPE and ECR Groups : ' Κατά ! ' ; Verts / ALE Group and ALDE Group : ' Αποχή ! ' )
( Loud applause )
Fantastic .
Thank you very much .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I have asked to be allowed to speak because I am sure that my fellow Members will understand me when I say on behalf of my group , and I am sure my other fellow Members will agree , that you are taking on a difficult role - you are better aware of this than we are - and that you have our complete solidarity in your new position because , whatever our political opinions , we all share the same desire .
That desire is that the wonderful country that you serve as Foreign Minister should overcome its serious crisis as quickly as possible with our help .
We need Greece .
We stand shoulder-to-shoulder with your country and with you .
Mr Vice President , Foreign Minister , Stavros , what I would like say at a personal level is : you have not only been a good friend and a great colleague , but have also enriched all our lives in every possible way .
Thank you for our many years of work together and good luck , Stavros .
( Applause )
Composition of Parliament
As we know , Mr Stavros Lambrinidis has communicated to me his appointment as Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Greek Government with effect from 17 June 2011 .
Parliament hereby takes note of this communication and , pursuant to Article 7 ( 1 ) of the Act concerning the election of the Members of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage , and Rule 4 ( 1 ) and ( 4 ) , establishes the vacant seat with effect from 17 June 2011 .

We will continue with our work , wishing our former colleague very best wishes and good luck .
The competent Greek authorities have informed me of the election of Mr Dimitrios Droutsas to replace Mr Lambrinidis .

Pursuant to Rule 4 ( 1 ) , Parliament takes note of this replacement with effect from 22 June 2011 .
I welcome this new Member ...
( Applause )

... and point out that , pursuant to Rule 3 ( 2 ) , until such time as his credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , and provided that he has previously signed the declaration that he does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament , Mr Dimitrios Droutsas shall take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights attaching thereto .
I am sure we wish good luck to our new colleague also .

Madam President , on a point of order , I see over on the other side of the room that there are political posters displayed in the Chamber .
I believe this to be against the rules .
It does not bother me personally , but what I have asked for many times in this Chamber is that there is an even application of the rules to everybody .
If the ladies and gentlemen over there are to display their political posters , then I wish to have the right to permanently display my ' Vote UKIP ' poster on my desk and for anybody else to display their posters .
Can we have a ruling one way or the other please ?
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Batten , for drawing my attention to the posters .
I would ask those displaying them to now take them down .
Madam President , whether we agree or disagree with demonstrators , it is absolutely wrong that demonstrators should be allowed inside Parliament to stop MEPs getting in to vote .
It is immaterial whether we agree or disagree with the cause ; something has to be done to make sure that MEPs are allowed to get in to vote without hindrance .
( Applause )
The services were made aware of the problem and it should not happen again .
( NL ) Many thanks , Madam President .
I want to make a point of order .
Specifically , I want to make a happy announcement , namely that my party leader , Geert Wilders , was this morning cleared of all charges against him in relation to insulting Islam .
Freedom of expression in the Netherlands has been guaranteed .
This has nothing to do with our work here .
Voluntary system of labelling in Braille format on the packaging of industrial products ( written declaration )
Written Declaration No 14 of 2011 submitted by Konstantinos Poupakis , Richard Howitt , Ádám Kósa , Eva Lichtenberger and Cecilia Wikström on a voluntary system of labelling in Braille format on the packaging of industrial products has been signed by more than the majority of Parliament 's component Members and , in accordance with Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published in texts adopted by the current sitting and the names of the signatories will be in the minutes .


( EL ) Madam President , I should like , both personally and on behalf of my colleagues , Mr Kósa , Mrs Wikström , Mr Howitt and Mrs Lichtenberger , to thank everyone who supported the written declaration which we tabled , in the belief that the blind and hard of hearing are entitled to live independently and to participate fully in society .
We hope that this initiative will lay the foundations for further and immediate action in this direction and thank you all .
1 .
Appointment of the President of the European Central Bank : Mr Mario Draghi , candidate (
2 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : General Motors Belgium (
3 .
Amendment of Rule 51 : joint committee meetings (
4 .
Request for waiver of parliamentary immunity of Mr Adrian Severin (
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , the case is relatively complex , and I just wanted to underline that while there is a request for authorisation to proceed against someone presumed to have been bribed , there is no procedure against the persons presumed to be the bribers .
5 .
Fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for by the EU-Seychelles Fisheries Partnership Agreement (
6 .
Fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the EU-São Tomé and Príncipe Fisheries Partnership Agreement (
7 .
EU-Andorra Protocol on customs security measures (
8 .
EC-Canada agreement on civil aviation safety (
9 .
Implementation of cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 (
10 .
European urban agenda and its future in cohesion policy (
11 .
Objective 3 : future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation (
12 .
Increased effectiveness between ERDF and other structural funds (
13 .
Prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances (
on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Madam President , on behalf of the committee , I would like to request the adjournment of the final vote , under Rule 57 ( 2 ) .

As you know , this was the view of the committee expressed on Tuesday , and we think that we can now proceed to have further discussions with the Council with a view to achieving a satisfactory outcome .
I therefore ask for the adjournment in order that we can conclude this or leave the door open to concluding it , with a first-reading agreement in July .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament already voted against this amendment at the committee stage .
We believed that this report was ready to be put to a vote now , and the overwhelming approval for this report would seem to prove us right .
We are familiar with the arguments put forward as to why we should re-enter negotiations with the Council , which is why I would like to state my position on the motions for a postponement that will follow the other parts of this package .
We can see this as an indication that the German and French governments need to move once again on two significant points .
However , we know from the Council that this is not going to happen .
That is why one question is of decisive importance for us : what do the groups who support this motion plan to do if the Council fails to make any changes that reflect our decisions ?
Will they vote in favour or against the packages ?
This is an important issue for us .
Madam President , I would like to underline what Mrs Bowles has said : we are hoping to find a final agreement on the report before our plenary session in July .
Right from the beginning , we have taken the position as a Parliament - including the Socialist Group - that we treat this as a package .
So let us treat this as a package and now support Mrs Bowles ' proposal to postpone the vote to July .
14 .
Implementation of excessive deficit procedure (
15 .
Requirements for budgetary frameworks of Member States (
16 .
Budgetary surveillance in euro area (
17 .
Surveillance of budgetary positions and surveillance and coordination of economic policies (
18 .
Enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in euro area (
19 .
Consumer rights ( final vote ) (
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I want to keep my remarks short .
The vote actually took place in March and what we are now witnessing is the final vote .
Since we took three years to reach this compromise , I would like to point out that the Council and Commission cooperated particularly effectively here .
In particular , the Hungarian and Belgian Presidencies did some really excellent work .
My fellow Members from the other groups , Mrs Gebhardt , Mr Rochefort , Mrs Turunen , Mr Triantaphyllides and Mr Wieland and above all you , Madam President , as fellow rapporteur , have made an enormous contribution .
I would like to thank you warmly for this .
I believe that this directive will represent a significant step in developing the internal market in the interests of both consumers and businesses .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , as we know , this is a democratic institution , and from time to time we need to apply the rules of democracy .
That is why I have chosen to speak again now that this package is to be concluded because I have an important question to ask about this package on behalf of my group .
You have a clear majority for the line you are taking here .
There is no doubt about this and we have accepted this situation , even though we do not agree with you .
However , because the process is not yet concluded , I have one question .
The answer to this question will have a major bearing on how our group approaches further procedures .
We have now raised two important points in the form of questions to the Council in the Wortmann-Kool report and the Ferreira report , setting out the position of Parliament and asking the Council now to change its position .
That is all well and good .
I would now like to ask you the following question : what do you intend to do if the Council does not change its position ?
Will you reject the package ?
Will we have a second reading ?
If so , then we are ready to fight this all the way with you .
Or will you approve the package nonetheless ?
In the light of this postponement I believe that this is an extremely important question for Parliament .
Mr Schulz , I have given you the floor but I do not want to open what is clearly a political debate on the file that we have just voted on .
( Applause )
This could take some time .
We have an enormous number of votes to get through .
The political debate will continue .
( Protests )

I will give the floor briefly to Mr Daul and Mr Verhofstadt and then it is finished .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , you know that I am always very brief .
Martin , we are proper Democrats - you respect democracy and so do we .
It is true that it is easier to win than to lose .
We will continue the negotiations and at the beginning of July , we will take a final vote on the report after negotiation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I simply want to say to Martin , on behalf of my group , that we shall continue the fight for this important package and for the vote by Parliament , including all the elements of the package .
And we will continue these negotiations and continue this fight , so he can count on us .
But , after this vote , I also now count on the constructive help of the Socialists to win this battle .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning I read a moving appeal for the future of the European Union by three of my fellow Members in a German daily newspaper .
Such a show of unity is generally always very moving .
However , it is evident when it comes to the regulation of the financial markets and the balancing of social justice that this unity is weak on detail .
I believe that we should not try to conceal political dissent at this point , but rather that we should argue and debate in a transparent way on the direction of policy , even in times of crisis , as a service to the citizens of Europe .
The Commission has sent us the following statement on the amendments adopted by Parliament .
' The Commission recalls its commitment towards ensuring that Member States establish correlation tables linking the transposition measures they adopt with the EU directive and communicate them to the Commission in the framework of transposing EU legislation , in the interest of citizens , better-law making and increasing legal transparency and to assist the examination of the conformity of national rules with EU provisions .
' The Commission regrets the lack of support for the provision included in the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on consumer rights , amending Council Directive 93 / 13 / EEC and Directive 1999 / 44 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 85 / 577 / EEC and Directive 97 / 7 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council , which aimed at rendering the establishment of correlation tables obligatory .
' The Commission , in a spirit of compromise and in order to ensure the immediate adoption of that proposal , can accept the substitution of the obligatory provision on correlation tables included in the text with a relevant recital encouraging Member States to follow this practice .
' However , the position followed by the Commission in this file shall not be considered as a precedent .
The Commission will continue its efforts with a view to finding together with the European Parliament and the Council an appropriate solution to this horizontal institutional issue . '
20 .
Tractors placed on the market under the flexibility scheme (
21 .
Spent fuel and radioactive waste (
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , unfortunately we submitted the request for roll call votes too late for this paragraph .
Nonetheless , I would ask for your indulgence and that of the House in permitting a roll call vote in the split vote .
rapporteur . - ( SL ) Madam President , it could be that I was not paying enough attention , but according to my voting sheet , we have not voted on part 2 of Amendment 62 .
If you had been listening you would have heard that it fell .
22 .
2012 draft budget trilogue (
Madam President , on behalf of our group , I would like to propose an oral amendment to the last sentence of Amendment 27 .
The words ' must not ' should be replaced by ' should not ' .
23 .
The CAP towards 2020 : Meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future (
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the European Parliament is a very hard-working body , however we need to pay more attention to a balance in the voting times , so that we do not have a situation where there is nothing to vote on one day and an enormous number of votes the next .
That is why I am now proposing that we should stop voting now and defer the remaining business to the next plenary sitting .
( Applause )
There are no issues on the agenda that are so pressing that a vote is absolutely necessary today .
We have already voted on the legislative points . I believe that this was the most important thing for now .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Weber 's motion makes good sense .
We have completed a truly enormous programme with some major , significant reports .
We now no longer have any legislative reports to vote on .
It is already after half past one .
It would be best to postpone the non-legislative reports to the July part-session .
This would be no great loss .

Madam President , let me be very brief : we have two reports to go , and the climate debate is a crucial one because we are sending a signal to the Council , which is starting tonight .
Therefore I propose having a vote now on this report and on the other one .
There are two left .
Let us do it - and fast .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
The next item is the explanations of vote .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to vote for this report because it sets out some fundamental elements for cohesion policy and for funding .
These are , firstly , leaner procedures for national funds , and , secondly , the provision that sport and culture are also an element of cohesion that is both important and decisive .
Perhaps the only negative element of this report is that it envisages only the three working languages of English , French and German as the languages that need to accompany the request in addition to the original language .
For this reason , in any case , and for more general reasons I voted in favour and I congratulate the rapporteur .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the significance of this report , only 19 Member States reported on core indicators .
This situation does not allow us to have a clear picture of the impact of cohesion policy on the ground .
I agree with the measures and good practice proposed by Mr Mikolášik , and I believe that the proposal for broader application of core indicators is a particularly useful one , as is the preparation of reports on the results and synergies between national policies and European Union policies .
The organisation of public debates and consultations with stakeholders , together with the submission of reports to national parliaments for opinions are further positive measures in this sense .
We have to make efforts to prevent a reduction in the funding made available for cohesion policy in the next programming period .
For this reason , I supported this report .
( SK ) Madam President , allocations from EU funds in the new Member States , Slovakia included , are negatively influenced by over-complexity , excessive bureaucracy , unclear rules and also hidden unfair interests .
Many of those who want money from European funds complain about the long drawn-out bureaucratic torture with an uncertain end .
The bureaucracy and many of the obstacles come not from Brussels , but directly from the individual Member States .
Unless European rules are simplified , under pressure from the European Parliament and others , the rules implemented in the individual Member States will often complicate the situation considerably .
While the original European rules are relatively simple , the national implementation complicates them .
The adage applies that the lower you go down the ladder , the more complex the system is .
There is also a considerable problem in that officials do not help with the allocation of EU funds , but focus only on controls , which far exceed anything required by the law .
The problem is therefore mainly in the EU Member States .
( DE ) Madam President , there is a reason why we have cohesion policy , and such policy has a clear beginning and it must also have an end .
I believe that the reason cohesion policy exists is to balance living standards and economic development throughout the European Union .
That is why it is right to subsidise and support regions that find themselves below the general economic standard .
However , it is equally important to ensure that these financial resources are being correctly deployed , in other words that they are having the desired effect .
This report is very important to me because it also contains an analysis , thus providing the basis for conclusions for the next two support periods .
I would like to mention one example : in my particular region in Eastern Germany , cohesion policy has had a significant effect since 1990 .
We have witnessed development there and I see it as a definite success when we reach a point where we can say that these regions now need a phasing out programme because this means that living standards have risen there .
( PL ) Madam President , cohesion policy in its present form is evaluated well , as are its results .
In the Member States we have tangible benefits from the pursuit of this policy , which in conjunction with EU agricultural policy is reducing disparities in development both in the Union as a whole as well as between regions and within regions .
I share the view that the objectives of cohesion policy and the funding made available should be maintained in their current form , but this will of course be modified to accommodate the intermediate regions .
We should note that this policy is evaluated well by Member States and local governments , and I would also like to point here to the favourable position of the Committee on Regional Development .
There are expectations regarding a reduction of the bureaucracy involved in cohesion policy .
These expectations are often also the result , as has already been pointed out here , of additional restrictions introduced by Member States .
However , the current economic crisis can be overcome by a number of measures , including a continuation of this policy , as it is one which brings sustainable growth .
It is something which is essential for the entire Union .
Madam President , ' you can evade reality ' , wrote Ayn Rand , ' but you cannot evade the consequences of evading reality ' .
We have reached the limit of trying to move markets with public money .
Everyone can now see that a default in Greece is coming , except the euro zone finance ministers who , 13 months after uselessly committing EUR 110 billion , now seem set to commit a further sum almost as large .
Actually it is not uselessly . It is not just useless .
It is actively harmful , because what we are ensuring is that when the default comes , it will be much bigger and the hit will be taken by all of us as taxpayers rather than by just a small number of bankers and bondholders .
Thus are the interests of Greek workers and the interests of European taxpayers alike sacrificed to the ambitions of a small number of the gilded princelings of the eurocracy .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the idea of setting up horizontal multi-fund programmes with clearly defined aims and streamlined access mechanisms is something I fully support .
I agree with Professor Barca 's report , according to which an approach based on local development is the way to improve efficiency and effectiveness and to operate in a more integrated manner .
We need to focus attention on the urban dimension and to ensure coordination between the funds and the other financial instruments of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) and European Investment Fund ( EIF ) .
In a situation in which the budget is tight , these instruments , together with revolving funds , would allow results to be monitored .
This would multiply the available resources and increase the number of beneficiaries , which in turn would deliver more results .
( DE ) Madam President , we need to achieve greater efficiency between the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the other structural funds .
I believe that it is extremely important that we should have different funds .
Naturally , these funds should have different objectives and targeted approaches .
I believe that it is extremely important that we have included the regions here and that the European Union is setting down guidelines that can be implemented in the regions and applied accordingly .
However , it is just as important that this targeted approach should also look at how matters are implemented in the regions , so that these funds do not impede one another , so that we do not duplicate subsidies , so that we do not promote nonsensical programmes - in other words we must coordinate the objectives pursued with these funds .
I regard this as increasing efficiency .
I expect that we shall continue to work in this area and that more reports and results will be presented to us .
( LT ) Madam President , I am pleased that today we are talking about making cohesion policy simpler and more efficient .
I have repeatedly said that Member State development , supported by European Union money , and improving quality of life would be more effective if we used the planning method more efficiently and ensured that horizontal objectives are achieved using money from different funds .
However , reviewing the rules regulating the funds themselves is equally important .
It is often the case that a problem is impossible to address due to a lack of money .
Another programme , financed from a different fund , cannot be used , even when it is striving for similar objectives .
Unfortunately , in such a case , transferring money between funds is impossible , due to different rules .
While welcoming the resolution 's call for the introduction of a coordination mechanism that has even greater impact , I therefore also urge you to change the rules on transferring fund money , making them as flexible as possible .
- ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the reports , with the exception of Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report , on which I abstained despite supporting my group 's amendments .
Therefore I did not vote following the overall indications of my group , because I believe that we are facing such serious problems that we must at this point demonstrate the cohesion of European institutions and our ability to deal with the problems we are confronting .
Despite a certain timidity and arrogance on the part of the Council with regard to this crisis , I believe we need to show this cohesion .
I did not agree with the postponement either , because we are in a position in which we need to give our citizens urgent responses to the economic crisis , which is not just the result of financial speculation , but also of our inability to deal with the problems of recovery and growth .
We have a duty to heal Europe 's public finances and we have a duty to set out responses , which have to begin with the involvement of businesses and the world of work , and have different and more open rules in order to complete the single market and be in a better position to compete on the global market .
That is why I voted for the reports with the exception of Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report .
( SK ) Madam President , the first decade of economic and monetary union has shown the need to improve the economic governance framework .
The new framework should be based on the greater responsibility of individual Member States for jointly agreed rules and policies , as well as a more reliable surveillance framework at EU level over national economic policies .
The experience of the past two years in particular has confirmed that the achievement of strong competitiveness , sustainable economic growth and job availability requires a sustainable level of government deficit and debt , reforms to eliminate macroeconomic imbalances and a decisive EU strategy for growth and employment .
I have to confess to a certain personal embarrassment over the introduction of administrative elements into the economic mechanisms .
On the other hand , experience to date shows that market mechanisms are incapable of reacting quickly and flexibly to negative developments , the result of which is that a financial crisis turns into a debt crisis .
Madam President , I want to salute my friends in the Communist and Green Groups .
They are right about one thing .
If we adopted a tenth part of their policy we would be in serious trouble , but they have got one thing right - which is that these bail-outs are punishing the majority of people in order to reward some very wealthy individuals .
If we want to rescue banks that are exposed in Greece , particularly French and German banks , it would be much cheaper just to give them the money directly rather than routing it scenically through Athens .
But I have to stand back and question the premise .
Why , yet again , given the failure of the first round of bank bail-outs , are taxpayers being expected to come forward and rescue some very wealthy individuals from the consequences of their own error ?
We in our generation look back at ancient régime Europe and we wonder how such a system could have existed .
We say , how could it possibly have been constructed so that only the nobility had exemption from taxation ?
How could we have tolerated a system where only the little guys were paying taxes ?
But - you know what ? - we are recreating exactly that system by shovelling around this public money in order to save some vested interests .
So ' hasta la victoria siempre ' .
( ES ) Madam President , the package as a whole is going in a direction that I support as a pro-European and federalist , notwithstanding that it does so in a timid fashion and with large gaps .
Moreover , it contains wise precepts for the political management of Spain .
Therefore , I have voted in favour of four of the reports on economic governance .
I have voted against the Feio report because it advocates procyclical policies which , at best , would not help with getting out of the crisis and , at worst , would encourage stagnation and unemployment .
I have not voted in favour of the Wortmann-Kool report either - I have voted against it - because it does not take into account the Stability and Growth Pact , the European Employment Strategy or the Europe 2020 strategy objectives , which are a source of hope for millions of Europeans , particularly the young .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that the approach to excessive deficits is a bit like a football match : if a set of rules is established , then these must be adhered to .
It is not enough to look each other straight in the eye and say ' we promise to obey all the rules ' .
Life has changed .
In other words , if the rules of the game are broken , then penalties and punishments must be handed out .
Of course , this cannot be achieved with a democratic decision .
Let me come back to the image of the football match .
Just imagine that a foul has been committed .
The referee makes a decision here .
Imagine what would happen if the referee were to hold a vote among the players each time to determine whether this really was a foul .
This would be impossible .
That is why we need a clear decision-making process .
What do we do when someone breaks the rules ?
Finally , I would like to emphasise that of course we also need solidarity .
Rather than simply punishing the one who has broken the rules , we also need to help them to get back on the straight-and-narrow .
Mr Hannan , you are due to speak on the Feio report , but you are also next and the only one on the list for the Goulard report , so I give you two minutes to use as you wish on both .
Madam President , you are exceptionally generous as well as being a very good chair .
I would like to pick up on some of the clumsy vocabulary that we have heard in recent weeks in discussion of these financial rescue packages .
The talk in our media is about rescuing Greece , giving assistance to Portugal , and helping Ireland , but that is not how the peoples in the recipient countries see it .
The reason that Greeks are on the streets protesting is that they understand perfectly well what the consequence of this EU / IMF takeover will be .
The money is not going to ordinary Greek people , it is going to those financial institutions which hold Greek government debt .
However the repayment will come from the ordinary taxpayer : in other words , Ireland , Portugal and Greece are being sent the bill for propping up the entire European banking system .
Why ?
Because we cannot bring ourselves to admit that monetary union was a mistake .
We cannot bring ourselves to see the logic : that jamming together countries with widely divergent conditions and needs into a single currency was bound to cause precisely the strains that some of us were predicting 10 years ago when the project was launched .
So we exacerbate the crisis by having yet more integration , and all of the things that we heard about in the debate yesterday on this report - ' we need fiscal union ' , ' we need economic governance ' .
You can see the flaw in the logic there , my friends .
European integration has failed , so let us have more of it !
Monetary union is not enough , we need more economic union .
The reality is that this is about saving face : saving the faces of those eurocrats who launched the project in the first place and who are prepared to sacrifice the peoples of the peripheral countries and the taxpayers of the poor countries in order to sustain their conceit .
Surely theirs must be the most expensive faces since that of Helen of Troy which launched a thousand ships .
Madam President , I voted in favour of postponing the final vote because I think there may be some possibility that we can reach agreement with the Council .
The economic governance reports on the whole are not , in my view , the best option , but in the situation in which we find ourselves , they are probably the least worst .
We are in a position that we have an inherently fragile structure supporting the euro .
The Stability and Growth Pact has not worked ; even from the very beginning it was a failure .
Now we are in a position where we either give up on the currency or we try to put in place some form of economic governance that will strengthen its foundations and in some way rebuild the infrastructure .
I agree with Mario Monti , who said that excessive deference to large Member States contributed somewhat to the current economic crisis , and our proposals might at least stop that happening in the future .
I just hope it is not a case of closing the stable door after the horse has bolted .
( FR ) Madam President , this morning , after three years of work , we voted on a very important text with regard to advancing the protection of consumers in Europe .
It focuses , and rightly so , on online purchases , which in 20 years ' time could well represent 25 % of all trade in Europe , which is a significant amount .
Some of these purchases will be cross-border .
They will offer consumers a broader choice as well as lower prices .
This is real progress .
For SMEs and for craftspeople as a whole , it is also a very important opportunity to find new outlets .
Among the main advances , I would like to mention two : the cooling-off period , which has been extended to 14 days , and provision of the summary containing all the information and the total price to pay before the last button or click which confirms the order .
Finally , I am proud , in the context of these explanations of vote , to say that I , all fellow Members and political groups voted unanimously , because on such a subject we obviously needed consensus and not controversy .
We achieved that consensus .
( ES ) Madam President , allow me to comment briefly on what I have heard here in the speeches of those who have spoken before me .
It is not a question of saving the reputation of the founders of the EU but rather of building Europe and working in favour of European citizens .
I move on now to explain my vote on the Directive on Consumer Rights .
I welcome the adoption of this directive , which constitutes a step forward in European integration and in the protection of consumer rights but , at the same time , I regret that the adoption of a number of articles of the directive involves taking protection away from many Spanish consumers and users who are going to find themselves deprived of certain rights that were already enshrined in Spanish law .
For this reason , the Spanish socialists voted against a number of articles today : Article 9 , in relation to the full harmonisation of information requirements for distance contracts ; Article 17 ( 2 ) , the possibility of the consumer being liable for normal use of the goods during the withdrawal period ; and Article 22 ( 2 ) , the introduction of an additional deadline for delivery of the goods when the trader fails to deliver the goods within the time period envisaged in the contract .


( FI ) Madam President , a short while ago , Mr Hannan , speaking about other matters , referred to the need for less integration and not for more , whatever happens .
This proposal on consumer protection , however , was specifically about more integration , and is completely relevant .
We support the rights of citizens and consumer protection when we engage in international , European trade .
We know that online shopping is a contemporary phenomenon , but that the laws that govern it are behind the times , and now it is time to move on .
In my country , Finland , this legislation is now at a fairly advanced stage , and sometimes , obviously , it makes you wonder if we are not going backwards when we make common laws .
Nevertheless , trade is European , so the laws have to be European , and this is the path we need to continue along .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a Directive on Consumer Rights presented by the Commission has the merit of combining the four previous directives on the subject in a single legislative instrument .
I agree with the report 's objectives .
It is essential to guarantee a high level of protection for consumers in the 27 Member States and at the same time take into due account the need for manufacturers , regardless of their size , to provide their goods and services to European consumers without having to deal with unnecessary legal barriers .
As things currently stand , the elimination of legal fragmentation is a difficult result to achieve .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report also rightly expresses doubts as to whether full harmonisation could produce different effects to those expected .
I therefore voted in favour , because I am convinced that it would be useful to make an amendment to the Commission 's proposal , achieving minimum harmonisation and at the same time guaranteeing a high-level service to consumers .
( PL ) Madam President , with today 's vote , we have brought to an end the lengthy process of over three years ' work on the draft of a Directive on Consumer Rights .
The document gives a guarantee of a high level of consumer protection in all the Member States and will help clarify areas of confusion in retail trade conducted between businesses and consumers from different countries .
The horizontal nature of the directive allows EU legislation which is currently in force in this area to be brought together as a whole .
The provisions of the directive should play a particular role in matters relating to all types of online transaction . I hope the proposed legislation will increase consumers ' confidence in this form of making purchases .
Of special importance to the consumer is also the establishment of the right to withdraw from a contract within a 14-day period without giving a reason and the related right to obtain reimbursement of all payments which have been made .
I also have a positive opinion of the final version of the provisions of Chapter 5 on prohibited contractual terms .
I am certain that the directive will significantly improve consumer rights in the European Union , so I endorsed the report .
( DE ) Madam President , please forgive me for demanding your attention so often .
Unfortunately , this was not my week with the catch-the-eye procedure .
I kept missing out .
There were a couple of things I wanted to say about this point too , however I am happy overall that we have passed this directive . I also voted in favour .
I am also pleased that we have been able to strengthen consumer rights and have included so-called door-to-door selling , because a lot of shady practices are to be found there .
However I would once again ask that we should remember the problem of bureaucracy when implementing this law .
In Germany we have a particularly large number of small and medium-sized businesses .
Although these businesses are not involved in door-to-door selling , they naturally make frequent deals with customers that are concluded with a handshake .
This has been the practice for hundreds of years .
We need to take care that we do not overburden these SMEs with excessive bureaucracy .
To restate the point , I am happy and voted in favour of the directive .

- ( CS ) Madam President , I very much applaud the fact that Mr Schwab has reached a compromise with the Council strengthening the rights of consumers , and that the compromise will also include my proposals for online commerce .
I voted in favour of the report , of course , but I regret to say that the Hungarian Presidency blocked my proposal - supported by the whole of Parliament - to give consumers the right to the supply of goods from another state under agreed conditions .
Unfortunately , one third of cross-border orders are rejected in this way , according to Eurostat .
Internet stores such as iTunes and others do not supply their goods or services to the new Member States .
In this way , Czech customers are discriminated against , compared to customers from , for example , France or the Netherlands .
The internal market is thus still not a single market as far as the digital environment is concerned , and the Council has thus missed a great opportunity .
( LT ) Madam President , the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste is particularly important , both for the safety of the environment and people and for that of society .
I therefore urge the Council , when adopting the directive , to also focus on the opinion of the European Parliament , which is playing an increasingly significant role in addressing environmental issues .
Regrettably , sometimes when we are playing our political games we want to insert various provisions in documents that may be counterproductive .
When they joined the European Union , certain Member States brought with them the burden of nuclear power plants that had been imposed on them against their will .
The decommissioning of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant was one of the conditions of Lithuania 's accession to the EU .
In turn , the European Union made a formal commitment to fund the decommissioning .
Above all , this commitment was made by the EU because it would be impossible for a country like Lithuania to fund all the power plant decommissioning work on its own . The decommissioning work includes dealing with spent fuel and radioactive waste .
Therefore , calls to place this burden on the shoulders of the Member States concerned would be counterproductive .
If Lithuania did not receive the necessary funding , it would be impossible for it to effectively guarantee security .
Instead , in the forthcoming financial perspective , the decommissioning of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant must remain a concern for both Lithuania and the whole of the European Union .

Madam President , I strongly supported paragraph 25 of this resolution which ' regrets that with the limited increase foreseen for the Progress programme ... ' , because the Commission committed back in 2010 to reinstate the EUR 20 million that was going from Progress to microfinance and that obviously is not going to happen .
The microfinance facility itself , although it is very small , plays a really important role in ensuring access to credit for micro-enterprises in the social economy and it is crucial , now that financial institutions are not lending money .
However , that should not happen at the expense of the Progress programme .
As far as I am concerned , it is a question of robbing Peter to pay Paul .
But also I just want to say that I strongly support the increased support for the lifelong learning programme Grundtvig , and I particularly also welcome increasing support for the Life + Programme .

( FI ) Madam President , this extremely important report was adopted , and , firstly , we should thank and applaud the rapporteur , Mr Dess , who has worked very hard indeed to achieve these compromises , so that this reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) could be taken forward in such a significant way .
I realise how difficult it is when in every Member State there are very different calls for what should be incorporated into the CAP reform , but one important matter is relevant here , and that , of course , is this matter of greening .
It is important that agricultural producers are involved in the sustainable environmental policy , but how will this greening system be established ?
It must be done in the way that Mr Dess has described .
It should not create more red tape and it should not increase costs for producers .
Moreover , we need to take into account the different situations in the Member States .
If it is successful in this way , and when the Commission makes detailed proposals afterwards , then we will be on the right path , and we can all rejoice that farmers are involved in volunteer moves to protect the environment .
( ES ) Madam President , I voted in favour of this initiative because Europe needs a strong common agricultural policy without cuts , a policy focused on promoting profitable farms and ensuring food security , sufficient supply and quality of production .
Furthermore , agriculture needs support in order to innovate and focus effort on a more efficient use of energy , water and soil .
All this must be combined with other forms of management that permit a fairer reward for the work carried out by professionals in this sector , a group of people who need to progress and continue learning throughout their working lives .
These people need to be provided with simpler procedures , less bureaucracy and greater transparency in terms of objectives and tools .
Accordingly , the new CAP must strengthen its commitment to active farmers , and to the contributions that they make in terms of production and a balanced development of rural areas .
Moreover , profitability involves alignment of policies in this sector with the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
For this reason , budgetary effort must also be maintained .
( SK ) Madam President , the current European Commission proposal to reform the common agricultural policy is just a cosmetic change , and not a reform directed towards improving the market and the competitiveness of European agricultural output .
In this context , I have also supported the numerous findings and critical opinions of the European Parliament .
I am fundamentally opposed to the continued application of the historical approach to the subsidy system , and I support the introduction of additional objective criteria which take account of the conditions for agricultural funding within the expanded Europe of 27 states .
In my opinion , the so-called subsidy ceiling is a complication which will not improve conditions for farmers in the new Member States .
The common agricultural policy should be based on two pillars , the first one being full funding from EU sources .
The second pillar must be focused on the modernisation of agriculture , on competitiveness and on rural development cofinanced from national sources .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Parliament has adopted the report on the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) towards 2020 .
I voted against it , because the measures it proposes are not real reforms , but only cosmetic and minor changes which support and maintain the current unfair CAP .
After 20 years of stagnation in food production in Europe and low incomes for farmers we have had enough .
We have forgotten that seven and five years ago the Union was enlarged by new Member States , which were given a low level of support and which were promised that after 2013 the payments would be equalised .
I want to underscore this clearly : a strong second pillar should be maintained , and this should include retention of the current criteria for distribution of funds , which take account of differences in the level of development of individual Member States .
Finally , greater coordination is needed between regional policy and the common agricultural policy in rural areas .
Some of the responsibilities of the second pillar of the common agricultural policy should be transferred to cohesion policy .
Rural areas have the right to pursue their own development using money available under regional policy .
I would like to say one more thing , and that is that Mr Barroso 's statement about the possibility of cuts to the second pillar means that he does not have a real knowledge of the seriousness of the problem .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Dess .
If agricultural policy is to remain competitive and become more environmentally sound , it must be financed in an appropriate way .
I would emphasise the word ' appropriate ' .
' Appropriate ' applies just as much to the farmers as to the taxpayers .
I believe that the establishment of competitive structures in the agricultural sector is something to be expressly welcomed .
Taken in this context , capping direct payments is a counterproductive measure .
It is not our job to destroy competitive structures .
I grew up in what was formerly East Germany , where the politicians dictated operating structures and all production data to the farmers in detail .
This ended in state bankruptcy .
We must never allow such a situation to be repeated ; I wish to spare the European Union such a catastrophe , which is why I am against capping and also why I ultimately abstained from voting on this report .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the Dess report , but I must say I was disappointed that Amendment 4 was not successful .
It was supported by my group because it would have allowed specific aid under the first pillar to compensate for natural handicaps and also to ensure that agricultural activity was maintained in mountainous areas , in environmentally sensitive areas and in Natura 2000 regions .
I voted against Amendment 23 not because I support GMOs - I do not - but because I support subsidiarity and I believe that Member States should be able to make their own choices on GMOs .
I was particularly pleased that we supported Amendment 27 , which sensibly rejected the introduction of burdensome and unclear requirements derived from the Water Framework Directive into the cost-compliant system until we have a much clearer picture with regard to its implementation in the various Member States .
I was also pleased to see Parliament support a multi-tiered safety net in the event of market disruption and , indeed , emergency situations .
This is a reasonable and a proportionate response .
Finally , I was pleased that we overwhelmingly voted that the budget be maintained at least at the 2013 level .
Without that , all the rest of it is just talk .
- ( CS ) Madam President , the European Parliament has today adopted the report on the common agricultural policy towards 2020 .
I subscribe to the report 's long-term objective of trying to introduce fair conditions for all farmers in the EU , which means abandoning the historic criteria for direct payments .
Despite this , I did not vote for the report , as I want to express my fundamental disagreement with the adoption of the proposal for a ceiling on payments based on farm size .
This will discriminate against Czech farmers , for example , or will oblige them to break up farms artificially into smaller units in order to get a subsidy .
I personally favour the development of small farms , but this is a measure that will reduce the competitiveness of European farmers in some countries .
( GA ) Madam President , I was happy to back this report and I commend the rapporteur , Mr Dess , for the good work he has done .
I attended the debate last night from start to finish but failed to ' catch-the-eye ' and was sorry about that as I wanted to put two questions to the Commissioner .
At the same time , I was glad that Parliament was almost unanimously happy to keep the budget at least at the same level as it is now .
The two points I wanted to raise with the Commissioner were regarding the historical reference years and the milk quota .
Both of these are supposed to be abolished .
We want to know when , and what will replace them ?
Without that knowledge it is very difficult for farmers to plan for the future .
The sooner we have answers to those questions
( GA ) the better it will be for all the farmers of Europe .
Thank you .
( LT ) Madam President , the common agricultural policy is one of the biggest and at the same time most sensitive areas of European Union policy , and it is relevant to all Member States .
Above all , agriculture is an area that has a significant and direct impact on the environment .
It is therefore important that , when establishing direct assistance models and supporting rural development , priority must be given to sustainable agriculture and various environmental aspects , including ecological farming .
The rural development dimension is also relevant to those countries that recently joined the EU .
Unfortunately , the number of workers migrating has been highest in rural areas .
It is therefore necessary to make them more appealing to live and work in , and to attract young people to them .
To achieve this it is necessary to use rural development instruments , to support promising and dynamic development of rural communities and to further develop the implementation of the LEADER method .
Attracting young farmers and young people in rural areas into agricultural production and rural development processes is equally important for addressing land abandonment , rural depopulation , the ageing of the rural population and other issues .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have two observations to make with regard to the own-initiative report on the common agricultural policy .
The first is that the consumer prices of agricultural products must be commensurate with the costs , effort and work , but also with the production costs , if we want European consumers to be able to eat healthy products of European agriculture , of the traditional agriculture that must be preserved .
The second comment concerns a signal to the competent European authorities .
Are they aware of the report by the Italian Carabinieri of the Ministry of Agricultural , Food and Forestry Policies concerning milk quotas ?
This report clearly shows that the milk production quota , which was supposed to have been exceeded , thus forming the legal basis for the fines levied on Italian dairy farmers , was not in fact exceeded .
This is very serious , because these fines could bring thousands of farms in Padania to their knees and drive them to bankruptcy .
Free Padania !
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for this nomination for the President of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , given the candidate 's skills and the extensive experience that he has gained over the years .
I should like to express my pride at the European Parliament 's broadly favourable view in support of the appointment of the new President of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , Mario Draghi .
This appointment will also be confirmed by the Council meeting of the Heads of State and Government , but it is already very prestigious for Italy , not just because of Mr Draghi 's extremely high professional profile , competence and experience in European economic affairs , but also because his investiture for the next eight years was given the full support of all the European leaders .
I wish Governor Draghi every success in his work .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the candidature of Mr. Mario Draghi as next President of the European Central Bank for his great competence and his progressive view on the governance of the global financial system .
At the hearing held in the Economic Affairs Committee last week he stresses that more European economic governance is now necessary and that under his presidency the ECB would keep on focusing primarily on the fight against inflation .
For all these reasons I am proud to give him my full support .
Members of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) Executive Committee are appointed by the Heads of State or Government , following a proposal by the Council and following consultation with the European Parliament .
In this instance , the Council is therefore consulting Parliament for the appointment of Mr Draghi for President of the ECB from 1 November 2011 .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , of which I am a member , has conducted a hearing that turned out to be most satisfactory .
Consequently , I support Mr Draghi 's candidacy .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of Mario Draghi 's nomination to the post of President of the European Central Bank as I think that he possesses a high level of professional expertise .
During the hearing conducted in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mr Draghi gave full answers to all the questions the MEPs asked him .
In this regard , I welcomed his constructive approach to the consequences of the financial crisis in Greece .
Furthermore , Mario Draghi has demonstrated a genuine desire to implement an enhanced economic governance model at EU level to avoid sovereign insolvencies .
This is precisely why he gives priority in his application to fighting inflation as part of the European Central Bank 's stability objective , as well as to strengthening the supervision mechanisms .
To ensure a strong economy , a really effective Stability and Growth Pact is required , equipped with automatic penalties .
As an Italian Member of the European Parliament I welcome the candidature of Mario Draghi as President of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) .
I listened to his hearing at the European Parliament on 14 June .
His prestigious career , ranging from his academic appointments to his position at the highest levels of the economic and financial world as chairman of the Financial Stability Board , makes him a top-drawer candidate for the office of President .
At a particularly complicated time for Europe , Mr Draghi will certainly be capable of responding to the needs of the European financial system and guaranteeing financial stability and support for economic growth .
His candidature is an important political signal for Italy , after his brilliant experience as Director-General of the Treasury and Governor of the Bank of Italy from 2006 , during which time he successfully promoted Italy on the European and international scene .
in writing . - Mr Draghi should be congratulated on his appointment , and I believe he is a very able candidate .
However , I trust that he recognises the mandate which he has been given by MEPs , and accordingly entertains their views as Governor of the ECB .
I voted for this recommendation , and my reasons go far beyond the candidate 's nationality .
In fact , I do not think that it is Italy rather than the EU that will benefit from the appointment of Professor Draghi .
Quite the opposite .
Italy is losing a Governor of the Central Bank who is highly competent and very aware of economic , monetary and real problems .
We are talking about someone with an impeccable curriculum vitae and significant international experience in public and private institutions , someone who has always been extremely proactive ( as for instance in his chairmanship of the Financial Stability Forum ) .
His publications are testimony to an academic profile that is undoubtedly on a level with the tasks he has to carry out , and his experience in the monetary field must cast aside any doubts about his abilities .
It is no coincidence that the consensus on his appointment has been so unanimous .
He has all the requisites for being an excellent President of the European Central Bank .
He faces some significant challenges , given the current situation .
I therefore sincerely wish him good luck .
In this period of economic and financial crisis , it is imperative to have leaders and people in charge who can show composure and independence .
Jean-Claude Trichet , President of the European Central Bank , has managed during his mandate to resist pressure from Heads of State or Government .
His successor will have to show the same qualities and be just as uncompromising .
I voted in favour of Italian Mr Draghi 's candidacy , since he enjoys an excellent reputation and he made a good impression during his hearing before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
His career path , especially his experience as Governor of the Italian Central Bank , will enable him , I hope , to manage in the best possible way the many challenges that await him at the helm of the European Central Bank .
The academic and professional background of Mr Draghi , as well as his hearing before Parliament , have shown that he has a deep understanding of , and clear ideas about , the necessary deepening of economic governance in the EU , and also about the importance of the stability of the euro for the resumption of growth .
Given this and the importance of the office of President of the European Central Bank , I believe that Mr Draghi fulfils all the conditions to perform the mandate for which he has now been nominated with skill and dedication .
in writing . - ( SK ) In May 2011 , the European Council , together with Parliament , proposed the appointment of Mario Draghi as President of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) for an eight-year term of office , starting on 1 November 2011 .
The parliamentary Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs interviewed the candidate , and he answered questions put by committee members .
He spoke , for example , about the Greek debt , and among other things expressed the opinion that the ECB should not rest in its efforts to maintain currency stability .
The committee subsequently recommended the appointment of Mr Draghi .
Since the candidate meets the requirements set for filling the post of ECB President , I would also like to express support for his appointment to this role .
Although the vote on appointing certain European oligarchs is , according to regulation , a secret ballot , I am keen to let it be known that I voted against Mr Draghi , . because there is really something deeply unhealthy and perverse , in the middle of the sovereign debt crisis , about appointing a former European director of Goldman Sachs .
The period during which he carried out his duties , as well as the nature of the latter , cannot escape your attention .
Unless he was just a mediocre director , and even if he was not the instigator , Mr Draghi could not have been unaware that the company he was working for orchestrated the massaging , seemingly legally yet dishonestly , of the Greek debt to justify Greece 's joining the euro .
Moreover , you cannot ignore the role of Goldman Sachs in the current speculation on sovereign debt , any more than its responsibilities in the economic and financial crisis , and the investigations it is undergoing in the United States .
The fact that Goldman Sachs appears on Mr Draghi 's CV puts him beyond the pale , thereby disqualifying him for this role .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am very pleased with the result achieved today , with the broad majority voting in favour of the Council 's recommendation for the appointment of Mario Draghi as the next President of the European Central Bank .
In fact I believe that it is an honour for our country to have an illustrious representative at the head of a strategic institution such as the European Central Bank ( ECB ) .
It is an important recognition of the commitment and competence of a man who represents our country and who will have the difficult and , at the same time , prestigious task of leading the ECB at a time like the present , in which Europe is having to deal with the effects of a serious economic and financial crisis .
I hope that the forthcoming European Council will officially confirm his appointment and that Mario Draghi will be able to lead the ECB from November for the next eight years with the same high-level and unquestionable professionalism that he has shown in the past , and accompany the economy of the European Union towards a phase of recovery that will guarantee stability and strength in Europe 's finances .
We are pleased with the nomination of Mr Mario Draghi as the future President of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , as he has shown that he has a professional profile of the level required for this prestigious office , as well as long-standing and recognised experience in the international financial and banking sector .
We congratulate the former Governor of the Bank of Italy on his candidacy and for having been capable at the European Parliament hearing of demonstrating his abilities and potential in tackling the problems he will have to face .
We believe that his nomination is a success for Italy , which he will be able to represent at a high level in one of the most prestigious European institutions .
We offer him our best wishes in his work .
in writing . - The European Parliament - having regard to the Council 's recommendation of 16 June 2011 ( 10057 / 2011 ) , having regard to Rule 109 of its Rules of Procedure , having regard to the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , whereas by letter of 20 May 2011 the European Council consulted the European Parliament on the appointment of Mario Draghi as President of the European Central Bank for a term of office of eight years with effect from 1 November 2011 , whereas Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs then proceeded to evaluate the credentials of the nominee , in particular in view of the requirements laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 283 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) and in the light of the need for full independence of the European Central Bank pursuant to Article 130 TFEU , and whereas in carrying out that evaluation , the committee received a curriculum vitae from the candidate as well as his replies to the written questionnaire that was sent out to him - delivers a favourable opinion on the Council recommendation to appoint Mario Draghi as President of the European Central Bank .
I am against his appointment .
in writing . - ( DE ) Mr Draghi is a completely unsuitable candidate for the top post at the European Central Bank .
He was a Vice-President and Director of US investment bank Goldman Sachs , where his responsibilities included Europe and contact with the national governments there .
This was at precisely the time when Greece supplied the EU with the falsified figures in relation to its deficit and budget .
In this context , Goldman Sachs is accused of having advised the Greeks in this falsification .
In addition to these shady dealings , Mr Draghi is also particularly open to criticism for his uncompromising stance against a debt haircut in Greece and in favour of the bail-out .
As a representative of a southern euro area Member State which is faced with enormous financial problems , his appointment will also send out completely the wrong signal to the markets and our citizens , who do not want a transfer union , but rather a stable currency .
The right candidate would have been Germany 's Axel Weber .
However , he did not even put his name forward for the post because he recognised the wrong-headedness of the measures now being taken with the blessing of Mr Draghi .
The nomination of Mr Draghi can be seen as yet another nail in the coffin of the euro and a threat to the EU as a whole .
After the excellent hearing held at the parliamentary Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I hereby put forward with conviction my vote in favour of the nomination of Mario Draghi to the European Central Bank ( ECB ) .
My vote is confirmation that , in this time of difficulty and crisis , the person most suited and qualified to direct the ECB has been elected .
I am convinced that Mario Draghi will know how to manage this future role as President of the ECB , as he has proved in his time at the Bank of Italy , and that he will do so by offering to Europe his wealth of experience and great competence .
In expressing my contentment at the progress of the Bank of Italy , that elite Italian institution which has attained the highest levels of development , I would like once more to stress the high technical profile of Mario Draghi , the next President of the ECB .
Confident that the Council will confirm Parliament 's vote in favour , I guarantee Mario Draghi , in my capacity as a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the utmost readiness to take part in a fruitful collaboration with the ECB , particularly at this time of difficulty for the euro and the EU .
Based on the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and following the processes of consultation and evaluation of the credentials of the nominee , specifically in light of the requirements set out in Article 283 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , and in view of the need for the European Central Bank ( ECB ) to be fully independent , I voted in favour of the report on the appointment of the President of the ECB , and I welcome Mr Draghi 's appointment .

I can only be in favour of the choice to put Mario Draghi forward as the new President of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) for an eight-year term beginning next November .
This candidate 's curriculum vitae certainly indicates a profile of the highest level of professionalism and life experience , and presents an image of one of today 's most illustrious Italians in the global economic landscape .
In this time of difficulty , I believe it is fundamental to have a person of the very highest calibre at the helm of the ECB , and Mario Draghi is a perfect representation of this profile .
The main strategic goal of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) is to maintain price stability in the EU , thus making a key contribution to resolving the economic and financial difficulties that the Member States are experiencing .
With a degree from Sapienza University of Rome and a PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Mr Draghi is the Governor of the Bank of Italy , a member of the Governing Council and General Council of the ECB , a member of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements , Governor for Italy on the Boards of Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Asian Development Bank , and Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum .
I am voting in favour of the appointment of Mr Draghi as President of the ECB as I believe that he has an extensive academic background and wide professional experience , and because I advocate a strong commitment from the European institutions to combating inflation , to strengthening the single currency and to sustainability in the sovereign debt crisis .
I also believe that the new President of the ECB will implement a culture of honesty and rigour , as well as helping to set out robust and consistent economic policy , sending a clear signal of confidence to the international markets .
The appointment of Mr Draghi at the helm of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) is , to my mind , a completely justified decision , since it confirms the desire of the European Union to continue the work started by its current president , Jean-Claude Trichet .

In a context where the economic situation of some countries like Greece is weakening the euro , the will and determination shown by Mr Draghi for steering a steady course for a strong currency are indispensable for ensuring the credibility of our economy .
I also welcome the appointment of a man who has all the qualities required to fill such a post .
His experiences within the European Financial Stability Board and at the head of the Bank of Italy are sizeable assets for the visibility of the institution at international level and hence for the European Union 's place as the world 's largest economic power .
Faced with the challenges that we need to take up in order for our economy to pick up , I am delighted at the appointment of someone who has managed to create a consensus and who has proven capable of paving the way for a stable , strong and competitive monetary union .
I am voting for this report , as it sends a clear signal of EU solidarity with the crisis that the European public is facing at present .
In this case , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) will be used to support former workers of General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers operating in the motor vehicle sector between June 2010 and October 2010 .
All workers who were made redundant will benefit from personalised measures , supported by funding to a total of EUR 9.59 million .
This is the third time that the EGF has been mobilised in 2011 .
I therefore believe that it is fair and appropriate to apply the Fund in this case .
I have voted in favour of this initiative to help the 2 834 people made redundant by General Motors Belgium reintegrate back into the labour market because , as a result of the world economic and financial crisis , this company has not been able to expand the Antwerp production plant .
I welcome the agreement reached by the social partners regarding the package of proposed measures .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Matera because the features of the issue presented by Belgium on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) correspond to the conditions required to access this Fund .
The EUR 9 593 931 requested for the 2 834 redundancies that took place at ' General Motors ' and four of its suppliers operating in the motor vehicles sector during the four-month reference period ( June to October 2010 ) will be used solely for the reintegration of these workers who have lost their jobs as a result of the ongoing globalisation of world markets , and will in no way be paid out to the enterprise which orchestrated these dismissals .
in writing . - The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is instrumental in alleviating the strains on workers that result as a consequence of changes in global work trade patterns .
In the context of General Motors Belgium I believe that the conclusions that have been reached by the rapporteur are justified and have hence decided to vote in favour of this dossier .
I welcome the work carried out on the basis of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , not least in supporting the automotive industry , which has been affected by the economic and financial crisis .
I am also voting for the decision to mobilise the EGF in favour of Belgium , for the benefit of workers in the automotive sector , through measures that form a coordinated package of personalised services intended to reintegrate them into the labour market .
in writing . - It is important that this Chamber represents the huge potential of the EGAF .
After the huge wave of redundancies by General Motors Belgium and four of its subcontractors working in the motor vehicle sector , last year , Belgium requested , on 20 December 2010 , aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to help retrain the 2 834 workers made redundant .
This European fund was set up to provide additional support to workers who lose their jobs because of changes in world trade .
I am delighted that Parliament today approved this aid which will enable the workers made redundant to receive help , especially in their job search and for training .
This is good news for the thousands of families concerned .
in writing . - ( SV ) Once again we have chosen to support the mobilisation of the EU 's Globalisation Adjustment Fund - this time to help a total of around 2 800 people who have lost their jobs in Belgium - because Europe is still suffering the effects of the economic crisis and exceptional times require exceptional measures .
However , we believe that in future we should instead use instruments that already exist - in particular the European Social Fund - in order to increase the employability of those who have been given notice or have been made redundant .
There will probably be no need for the Globalisation Adjustment Fund in the next budgetary period .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) to be necessary following the redundancies in the enterprise General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers .
The efforts made by the Belgian authorities should be stressed : they have tabled a series of important measures for helping the affected workers to seek employment .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created in 2006 with the objective of providing additional support for workers suffering the consequences of major structural changes to the patterns of world trade , in order to enable them to re-enter the labour market .
It was expanded in 2009 to include workers made redundant as a result of the economic and financial crisis .
This is the third application to be examined under the 2011 budget and refers to EUR 9 593 931 from the EGF for the reintegration into the labour market of 2 834 workers from General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers from Antwerp .
According to the Commission , the application meets the eligibility criteria for EGF assistance , and that institution recommends that the budgetary authority approve its mobilisation .
The Fund will need to be mobilised quickly and effectively so as not to keep the workers who should actually be benefitting from it waiting .
This report is on the proposal for a decision of Parliament and the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , in accordance with point 28 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management .
The EGF , created in 2006 , aims to support workers who lose their jobs due to structural changes in world trade patterns as a result of globalisation .
On 20 December 2010 the enterprise General Motors Belgium , in the automotive sector , submitted an application for the EGF , having been forced to make 2 834 workers redundant from the main company and four of its suppliers .
The current economic and financial crisis gives the EGF a crucial role in mitigating the social impact of the bankruptcy of many companies , often caused by the aggressive economic policies of emerging markets .
This is the third application to be examined under the 2011 EU budget .
Given that the application fulfils the eligibility criteria , I agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations and am voting in favour of this proposal for a decision .
There have been requests for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in cases of mass redundancies across Europe .
This case concerns the mobilisation of more than EUR 9 million for Belgium to provide assistance to about 2 800 workers made redundant in the automotive sector .
This is the third proposal for the mobilisation of the Fund to be examined under the 2011 budget .
Therefore , deducting the current amount requested from the appropriations available , EUR 489 628 679 of the EUR 500 million maximum remains available until the end of 2011 .
Although we support this mobilisation , as it is essential to support these workers , we would like to reiterate our reservations and critical position on this fund , as we believe that it would have been more important to have taken measures to prevent unemployment in the first place .
To this end , the neoliberal policies in force in the EU must be changed , including the insistence on international trade deregulation and liberalisation .
Although we maintain our critical position regarding the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , since we believe it would have been more important to have taken measures to prevent the unemployment in the first place , we voted in favour of the mobilisation of this fund in order to provide further assistance for workers affected by the consequences of companies restructuring or of the liberalisation of international trade .
This case concerns the mobilisation of more than EUR 9 million for Belgium to provide assistance to about 2 800 workers made redundant in the automotive sector .
This is the third application for mobilisation of the Fund to be examined under the 2011 budget .
Therefore , after deducting the amount currently requested from the available appropriations , EUR 489 628 679 of the EUR 500 million maximum remains available until the end of 2011 .
It is utterly symptomatic that little more than EUR 10 million of the planned amount has been used during a period when the social and financial crisis is worsening , and that in itself demonstrates the need for a review of the regulations governing the Fund , at the very least .
in writing . - ( SK ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was set up with the aim of providing sufficient support to workers feeling the effects of major structural changes in global trade .
Under the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management , the Fund cannot exceed a maximum annual sum of EUR 500 million .
In April 2011 the Commission adopted a proposal to mobilise the Fund to assist Belgium , in order to support the re-entry onto the labour market of workers previously made redundant due to the financial and economic crisis .
The Commission assessment was based on an evaluation of the connection between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade or the financial crisis .
In accordance with the Commission assessment , the request fulfils the criteria for entitlement to request financial support , and in my opinion it is right to support the request .
The European Parliament , the Council and the Commission confirmed in a joint declaration from a meeting in 2008 that , with regard to the Interinstitutional Agreement , it is important to ensure a rapid process for decisions on mobilising the Fund .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this report , because Belgium has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 2 834 redundancies ( all targeted for assistance ) in the primary enterprise General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers operating in the motor vehicle sector in the NUTS II region of Antwerp in Belgium .
On 20 December 2010 , Belgium submitted an application to mobilise the EGF , in respect of redundancies in the enterprise General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers , and supplemented it with additional information by 24 January 2011 .
This application complies with the requirements for determining the financial contributions as laid down in Article 10 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 .
The Commission , therefore , proposes to mobilise an amount of EUR 9 593 931 .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Belgium because I believe this instrument represents a valuable resource to support workers who find themselves in difficulty on account of the economic crisis .
As stated on a number of occasions , since 2006 the EGF has provided practical support to European workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to facilitate their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 2 834 redundancies , all of which are targeted for assistance , in the enterprise General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers operating in the motor vehicle sector in the NUTS II region of Antwerp , during the four-month reference period , from 14 June to 14 October 2010 , amounting to a total of EUR 9 593 931 financed by the EGF .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created to provide additional support to workers who are suffering the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
With a view to supporting the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis , which has affected in particular the enterprise General Motors Belgium , the Commission has adopted a new proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of Belgium .
In connection with this , particular reference has been made to the unforeseen nature of the redundancies and to the impact of the redundancies as regards local , regional and national employment .
Let us remember that the EGF was created as a separate specific instrument with its own objectives and deadlines , and as such deserves a dedicated allocation superseding transfers from unused budget lines which could be detrimental to the achievement of the various policies ' objectives .
We believe that the application satisfies the criteria of eligibility as established in the regulations of the EGF and we advocate its approval by putting forward our positive opinion of it .
What remains crucial , however , is a revision of the regulations of the EGF to deal with the problem of multinational organisations that trigger redundancies through restructurings and transfers and , consequently , trigger the intervention of the EGF .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Belgian workers of the Opel plant in Antwerp who have been sacrificed in the name of sacrosanct globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could vote against the beggarly sum that the European elites are granting them .
However , the little which is being given may relieve their hardship .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the relocations implemented by US firm General Motors .
It sanctions the appetite for profit of multinationals and their billionaire bosses .
It should be these profits they reap , rather than money from European taxpayers , that are used to help the employees .
in writing . - It is known that the mobilisation of the adjustment fund concerns 2834 redundancies ( all targeted for assistance ) in the primary enterprise General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers operating in the motor vehicle sector in the region of Antwerp , during the four-month reference period from 14 June to 14 October 2010 .
Thus , redundant employees will get assistance as personalised measures supported by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , which will mobilise EUR 9.59 million for these measures .
I am not against mobilisation of financial assistance for redundant Belgian workers .
But I think that the rules for application of the Fund should be changed in order to make the assistance available for less developed Member States of the European Union .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) receives annual funding of EUR 500 million with the aim of providing financial support to workers affected by major structural changes in world trade patterns .
Estimates indicate that between 35 000 and 50 000 employees could benefit from this support each year .
The money can be used to pay for help in finding new jobs , tailor-made training , assistance in becoming self-employed or starting up a company , mobility and support for disadvantaged or older workers .
Because 2 834 redundancies have occurred at car-makers General Motors Belgium , also leading to further redundancies in four supplier companies , a total of EUR 9 593 931 is to be provided from the EGF for Belgium .
I voted in favour of the report because this is precisely the purpose of the Fund .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was set up to support workers who suffer disadvantage as a result of redundancies or other changes as a consequence of globalisation in international competition .
I welcome the fact that the repeated calls from Parliament have resulted in payment appropriations totalling EUR 47 608 950 being identified in the budget for the EGF budget line .
It is for that reason that I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) Money from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) must be used in a targeted and purposeful manner .
Financial assistance must be allocated as soon as possible , particularly in cases where a single company has made thousands of employees redundant .
Delays in providing financial assistance may have particularly painful and difficult consequences , and it is therefore crucial to mobilise the EGF and respond promptly to the Member State 's request .
It should be noted that those who have been made redundant and their families experience incalculable moral and material damage .
Above all , they experience major difficulties trying to return to the labour market , and they do not have opportunities to study or retrain .
It is therefore very important to ensure that these people are given timely financial assistance , so that they are able to properly integrate into the labour market .
Given the importance of this financial assistance , I welcome the proposal to allocate financial assistance from the EGF to Belgium following the mass redundancies at the enterprise General Motors Belgium .
I also call on other Member States , where companies are making employees redundant due to the financial crisis , to immediately seek financial assistance in order to mitigate the negative consequences , address employment issues , and encourage job retention and creation .
Unfortunately , we are called on once again to vote on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
I say unfortunately , because an intervention of this nature presupposes a situation of serious difficulty .
On the other hand , however , we ought to applaud this body that allows for the vital breath of life to be brought to situations of grave crisis which would otherwise be at risk of placing industrial sectors and above all the destiny of many workers in serious danger .
I agree with the allocation and use of the Fund but this can be no more than a temporary measure .
This solution must be supported by a long-term strategy aimed at sustaining the European economy to ensure that it can keep pace with the globalised market in which we live .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created to provide additional support to workers affected by the consequences of major structural changes in the patterns of world trade .
On 14 April 2011 , the Commission adopted a new draft decision on the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of Belgium , with the aim of supporting the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the global economic and financial crisis .
This is the third application to be examined under the 2011 budget , and relates to the mobilisation of a total of EUR 9 593 931 from the EGF for Belgium , based on 2 834 cases of redundancy , all of them potential beneficiaries of intervention , at the primary enterprise General Motors Belgium and at four of its suppliers .
Given that the application fulfils all the necessary requirements for mobilising this financial aid mechanism , I voted in favour of this report .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was established to provide additional support to workers who are suffering the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
On 14 April 2011 the Commission adopted a new proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of Belgium with a view to supporting the reintegration into the labour market of 2 834 workers made redundant in the primary enterprise General Motors Belgium and in four of its suppliers in the motor vehicle sector in Antwerp .
The Commission 's evaluation is based on examinations of several aspects of this issue , such as : the link between the redundant workers and major structural changes in world trade patterns ; the financial crisis ; the unforeseen nature of the redundancies in question ; demonstration of the number of redundancies ; explanation of the unforeseen nature of these redundancies ; identification of the dismissing enterprises and of the workers targeted for assistance ; the territory concerned with its respective authorities and stakeholders ; the impact of the redundancies as regards local , regional or national employment ; and the coordinated package of personalised services to be funded .
To ensure that these persons are reintegrated into the labour market , I vote in favour of the proposal in question .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of this report because it supports the proposal of the Commission to mobilize the EGF in favour of Belgium in order to help 2834 workers made redundant in the primary enterprise General Motors Belgium to find jobs , which is in line with my position and the position of EPP group Moreover , the report reasonably indicates that the 2011 budget for the first time shows payment appropriations ( EUR 47.608.950 ) on the EGF line .
This means that EGF has been recognized as a separate specific instrument with its own objectives and deadlines and therefore it deserves an appropriate allocation in order to fulfil all the attributed to it goals and objectives while superseding transfers from unused budget lines , which could be detrimental to the achievement of the various policies objectives .
I also support Rapporter 's call on the need to address , in the forthcoming revision of the EGF Regulation , the issue of how to treat multinational companies , which restructuring or relocation during major changes in world trade patterns affects , especially in times of financial crisis , common workers who suffer the most from the consequences of it , and hence need the intervention of the EGF .
The aim of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is to help workers who suffer the consequences of major changes in the structure of international trade and to help them re-enter the labour market .
It is precisely with this in mind that swift support must be offered to the 2 834 workers made redundant by General Motors in the Antwerp region .
We need to back Parliament 's proposal to mobilise EUR 9 593 931 , which will provide specific personalised services such as assistance with job search , training for job interviews , assistance with self-employment and individual vocational training .
Confronted with the consequences of the economic and financial crisis , Europe must be united and show solidarity , and so should respond to Belgium 's call .
Nevertheless , European aid should not relieve companies of their responsibility and their necessary efforts towards adapting their strategies to current challenges .
in writing . - In favour .
We request the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF ; appreciates in this sense the improved procedure put in place by the Commission , following the Parliament 's request for accelerating the release of grants , aimed at presenting to the budgetary authority the Commission 's assessment on the eligibility of an EGF application together with the proposal to mobilise the EGF ; hopes that further improvements in the procedure will be reached in the framework of the upcoming review of the EGF ; Thus , we recall the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have been made redundant as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis ; points out the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market ; however , calls for an evaluation on the long-term integration of these workers into the labour market as a direct result of the EGF-funded measures ;
On 14 April 2011 , the Commission adopted a proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Belgium , with a view to supporting the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
The view expressed today concerns the 2 834 redundancies , all targeted for assistance from the Fund , in the primary enterprise General Motors Belgium and four of its suppliers operating in the motor vehicle sector .
On the basis of the Commission 's evaluation , the application satisfies the criteria for eligibility as established in the regulations of the EGF and the institution has advocated its approval to the budgetary authority .
Parliament has taken a favourable view of the matter today .
in writing . - ( NL ) The former employees and the four suppliers of Opel Antwerp are still angry at the way they were treated by GM .
Opel Antwerp was a modern and successful car assembly business .
Yet GM very arrogantly decided to scrap 2 834 jobs .
Antwerp was not given a chance , despite the many attempts to find a buyer .
Belgium quite rightly applied for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , which was set up in order to provide additional support to workers faced with the consequences of major structural changes in global commercial trade .
Following a favourable opinion from the Commission , the European Parliament today rightly decided to make a total sum of EUR 9 593 931 available from the EGF in order to mitigate the impact on these workers , who had been made compulsorily redundant .
I am pleased that this House is today explicitly stating that there was a lack of willingness on the part of the Opel management to adapt to the challenges of the day .
Parliament is also rightly critical of the way in which the Opel crisis was tackled by the Member States in question .
There was a lack of coordination of long-term measures to support this sector in the various national recovery plans .
All of this leaves a particularly bad taste in the mouth .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council , of 20 December 2006 , established the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) with the aim of supporting workers who lose their jobs due to structural changes in the context of the global economy .
With a budget of EUR 500 million for 2011 , the Commission believes EUR 9 593 391 should be made available for Belgium , so that it can address the redundancies at General Motors Belgium and its four suppliers and producers in the Antwerp region respectively .
I believe the EGF should finance active measures towards reintegration into the labour market , enabling new skills to be learnt and these to be adapted to the new work situation that the 2 834 workers will have to face .
I also believe that the European institutions should expedite the mobilisation of the EGF for Belgium , as the Member State is guaranteeing the integration into active life of the workers made redundant as a result of globalisation .
I would also stress that the EGF should not be a substitute for the legal and financial responsibilities of General Motors Belgium , but rather an additional support granted by the EU in order to reduce the social difficulties that these workers will face .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) with regard to the enterprise General Motors Belgium , located in the Antwerp region , which is involved in machinery and equipment production .
Following the 2 834 redundancies made on 20 December 2010 , Belgium submitted a request to mobilise the EGF .
The request referred to the redundancies within the enterprise General Motors Belgium and in four of its suppliers .
During the period from 14 June to 14 October 2010 , 1 336 redundancies were made , while another 1 498 redundancies were made prior to and after the period in question .
As a consequence of the economic and financial crisis , Europe has been faced with a sharp fall in demand for commercial and passenger vehicles , thereby resulting in a considerable decline in motor vehicle production .
A 23.8 % drop in the assembly of motor vehicles and a 34.8 % fall in the production of passenger vehicles were recorded in Belgium in 2009 , compared with 2008 .
I should stress the important role played by the EGF in reintegrating redundant workers into the labour market .
I call for an assessment to be carried out of the long-term integration of these workers into the labour market , as a direct result of the measures funded by the EGF .
The EGF should be used equitably by all Member States .
A very wide majority of the European Parliament approved Mrs Matera 's report calling for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to the tune of EUR 9.5 million for the closing of the General Motors ( GM ) - Opel plant in Antwerp ( Belgium ) .
I voted against this report because it finances the laying-off of 2 834 employees of a company that received a USD 5 billion loan from the US authorities during the summer of 2010 .
Moreover , the sale of many brands enabled it to turn around its financial situation as early as the autumn of 2010 and to regain its listing on the stock market in November 2010 .
The authorities , whether European , national or regional , by accepting the mobilisation of public money to mitigate the closing of a plant , which achieves nothing except market redundancies , are surrendering their powers .
This decision is all the more unacceptable given that it is taken at a time when the European Union and its Member States are adopting austerity and budget reduction measures that will sustain the economic recession , the dismantling of public services , unemployment , job insecurity , wage cuts and social inequalities .
I am voting for this report , as the new version of the proposal for Rule 51 aims to achieve three important objectives : firstly , making the provision more readily understandable and therefore easier to use ; secondly , laying down new conditions governing the application of the procedure ; and thirdly , clarifying the objective of the procedure .
My colleague Mr Casini 's report confronts and makes a positive contribution towards resolving the problems associated with interpreting and applying Rule 51 of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
I fully share Mr Casini 's view that it did not suffice to refer to a sole interpretation and to the guidelines intended to facilitate implementation .
The conditions for the application of the procedure with joint meetings of committees and a joint vote - and I am referring in particular to the criteria of ' competence and major importance ' of the matter in question - are clear and suited to eliminating the legal uncertainties that have existed up until now .
I offer my congratulations for the good work accomplished , and I hope that this report is able to facilitate the work of Parliament by means of greater use of this procedure .
I have voted in favour of this report because the amendment that is being considered for Rule 51 , apart from being an innovative collaboration method between various committees , will make the Rule easier to understand and apply .
It clarifies the conditions that must be met for its implementation and determines the normative content .
This report proposes the amendment of Rule 51 , after the Conference of Presidents had raised the problem relating to the limitations of the Rules of Procedure with regard to joint meetings of committees .
The report presents a proposal for an amendment to the Rules of Procedure according to which the conditions for the application of Rule 51 would be verified more closely and according to more stringent criteria , including by the Conference of Presidents .
The fact that joint meetings can take place only if the matter in question is one of major importance ensures that there will be no unfairly extensive application of a procedure that is , by its very nature , exceptional .
I vote in favour of Mr Casini 's report .
I voted in favour of this report as it significantly improves cooperation between committees , as part of the necessary parliamentary reform .
This proposal responds to underlying questions about the competence of a committee in cases where a legislative dossier is of particular importance , whilst adhering to the principles of equality and cooperation .
Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , which were amended in May 2009 , now provide for a new procedure for joint meetings of parliamentary committees whenever an issue does not fall clearly within the competence of a single committee .
Despite the full integration of this new rule , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has been charged with clarifying and consolidating the content of this provision so that it is more readily understandable , particularly in the context of the ordinary legislative procedure .
It is clear that dividing the competences of the committees creates some areas of overlap between which it is difficult to distinguish , so I believe that this clarification is a positive step and that the proposed new wording will enable greater consistency in using Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure .
This draft report concerns amendments to Rule 51 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , following both the creation of a working party to undertake a review of the Rules of Procedure and a decision by the Conference of Presidents .
On 6 May 2009 Parliament carried out a review of its Rules of Procedure and introduced , under Rule 51 , a new ' procedure with joint committee meetings ' , in order to streamline procedures regarding the approval of matters that go beyond the competences of a single committee , so that only one report is submitted to plenary , which would reflect the position of all the committees involved .
The examination of draft guidelines for cooperation under Rule 51 carried out by the Conference of Committee Chairs has led to a request by that body 's Chair for its consideration by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
This proposal clarifies the issues involved and refers its adoption to plenary , bearing in mind the Rules of Procedure in force .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's recommendation that the ' joint committee ' should be considered the ' committee responsible ' , within the meaning of the Rules of Procedure .
in writing . - ( SK ) During the previous parliamentary term , the Conference of Presidents set up a Working Party on Parliamentary Reform , which was to review the functioning of Parliament and suggest improvements .
In the chapter on cooperation between committees , the working party proposed not only strengthening the position of an associated committee involved in an associated committee procedure , but also developing a new form of cooperation between committees , introduced on the basis of Rule 51 .
This proposal was justified on the grounds that , in specific cases , when a legislative document of fundamental importance clearly does not belong within the scope of one committee , it may also be split between a number of committees .
Disputes over competence must be resolved in accordance with the principle of equality and the principle of cooperation .
The members of the relevant committees can then make a joint declaration on the amendments tabled to the legislative proposal .
A more balanced report will then be submitted to plenary .
In my opinion , facilitating the implementation of this process requires more than just an interpretation of the Rules of Procedure or guidelines .
It involves an important procedural issue , which must be decided by a majority vote in plenary .
We need to achieve more intelligible provisions , which will thereby have a greater chance of being implemented .
in writing . - ( LT ) The reasoning behind the proposal was that , in certain specific cases , where a legislative dossier does not fall clearly within the competence of one committee but is rather equally divided among two or more committees and is of major importance , the solution to a conflict of competence should be based on the principles of equality and cooperation .
The committees concerned should meet jointly so that arguments can be exchanged in advance and the majority and minority viewpoints can emerge more clearly .
The members of the committees concerned should then vote jointly on the amendments to the legislative proposal tabled .
The result would be the submission of a more balanced , single report to plenary .
I therefore welcomed this proposal .
We support this amendment to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament which allows the Conference of Presidents , in the case of a legislative matter of major importance , to take the decision to implement a procedure with joint meetings of parliamentary committees and a joint vote .
This , however , can happen only in cases where responsibility for the matter cannot be split between several committees , and the matter is one of major importance .
Such an amendment must truly aim to emphasise the exceptional nature of this procedure , and is justified , inter alia , by the administrative and technical workload that it entails .
We believe that all this is certainly able to facilitate , in an initial phase , an exchange of arguments between the committees concerned and that , in cases of major importance , it can also be useful in ' preparing the ground ' for votes in plenary .
in writing . - Every rule of procedure of the European Parliament should seek three objectives : make the provision more readily understandable and therefore easier to use ; lay down new conditions governing the application of the procedure ; determine the scope of the procedure .
I absolutely agree with the rapporteur .
I have voted in favour of Mr Casini 's report on the amendment of Rule 51 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure because this amendment is the result of work which summarises the stipulations that clarify the area in which Rule 51 can be applied .
The new text simplifies the Rule by taking out references to other Rules and by better regulating the standard procedure by which two committees can come together in a joint session to discuss important subjects that reflect mutual interests .
The aim of the amendment consists , therefore , in creating the possibility for the committees concerned to exchange arguments and ' prepare the ground ' for a debate .
For the duration of the procedure , the joint committees thus become responsible within the meaning of the Rules of Procedure .
During the previous parliamentary term , the Conference of Presidents created a Working Party on Parliamentary Reform , tasked with reviewing the functioning of Parliament and suggesting improvements .
As part of this process , a new form of cooperation between committees was developed and introduced by means of the new Rule 51 .
Some doubts were raised about the implementation of this new form of cooperation between committees , which were referred to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs believes that this is not a mere matter of interpretation , but an important procedural issue which should be decided by a vote in plenary by the majority applicable in cases relating to the Rules of Procedure , namely a majority of Parliament 's Members .
I agree with the tabled version , which makes the rule clearer and easier to use , so I voted in favour of its amendment .
The aim here is to create the opportunity for relevant committees to exchange arguments in an early phase and to ' prepare the ground ' for plenary in cases of major importance .
The amendment to Rule 51 proves to be indispensable , rendering the provision more readily understandable and therefore easier to use , laying down new conditions governing the application of the procedure , and determining the scope of the procedure .
In order to achieve these aims the two conditions must be set out in a clear and immediately understandable form .
Responsibility for the matter must not be split between several committees and , finally , the practical implications of applying the Rule for the ongoing legislative procedure must be determined .
For the duration of the procedure the joint committees thus become the ' committee responsible ' within the meaning of the Rules of Procedure .
In order that there may be an amendment to Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament on procedures with joint committee meetings , I express my vote in favour of the proposal in question .
in writing . - In favour .
During the previous parliamentary term , the Conference of Presidents set up a Working Party on Parliamentary Reform , tasked with reviewing the functioning of Parliament and recommending possible improvements .
In a chapter on cooperation between committees , the working party proposed not only that the position of an associated committee in the procedure with associated committees - Rule 50 ( formerly Rule 47 ) of the Rules of Procedure - should be strengthened , but also that a new form of cooperation between committees , subsequently introduced by means of the new Rule 51 , should be developed .
The reasoning behind the proposal was that , in certain specific cases , ' where a legislative dossier does not fall clearly within the competence of one committee but is rather equally divided among two or more committees and is of major importance [ ... ] the solution to a conflict of competence should be based on equality and cooperation .
The committees concerned should meet jointly so that arguments can be exchanged in advance [ ... ] and the majority and minority viewpoints can emerge more clearly .
The members of the committees concerned should then vote jointly on the amendments tabled to the legislative proposal .
The result would be the submission of a single , more balanced report [ ... ] to plenary ' .
This report supports the proposal to amend Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure on procedures with joint committee meetings .
To all intents and purposes , the textual conflicts in the Rule cannot be resolved through interpretation alone , given the importance of the matter of the procedure .
The new phrasing sets out in a clear and immediately understandable way the conditions for procedures with joint meetings , eliminating the need to refer to other provisions .
Moreover , the act of redefining these conditions is justified by the administrative and technical workload that this procedure entails .
Finally , the commonly recognised goal of joint meetings - that of exchanging arguments and opinions in advance to ' prepare the ground ' for plenary when the matter at hand is of major importance - is attainable only if committees remain jointly responsible in all stages of the procedure right up to the adoption of the act .
in writing . - ( DE ) The proposed version of Rule 51 of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure is an attempt to bring the future cooperation of several parliamentary committees within a single legal framework .
The proposal is based on the principle of equality and cooperation .
I voted in favour .
I am voting in favour for the sake of transparency and of acting without obstacles posed by the legal system .

The report and work of the Committee on Legal Affairs make it quite clear that there are no reasons to believe that the Romanian authorities are acting against Mr Severin with the intent of persecution ; notwithstanding that the position of the fake lobbying agency may generate doubts concerning the propriety of conduct on the part of information operators , the fact remains that the issue in question does not appear to fall into the category of cases in which immunity can legitimately be made to matter .
I vote in favour of the request for waiver of immunity .
The European Parliament voted in favour of waiving the parliamentary immunity of Romanian MEP Mr Severin and rightly so .
Indeed , after corruption allegations were made against him following articles published in the Sunday Times in March ( remember the corruption scandal that shook Parliament ) , the Romanian National Anti-Corruption Department instituted proceedings against Mr Severin on the grounds that he is alleged to have accepted a payment of EUR 100 000 from representatives of a so-called consultancy firm set up by the Sunday Times , in exchange for his supporting a draft amendment to the Directive on Deposit Guarantee Schemes .
Watch this space .
This report deals with the request for waiver of the parliamentary immunity of the Romanian Member Mr Severin , following proceedings instituted by Romania 's National Anti-Corruption Department on 21 March 2011 .
This case is based on information that Mr Severin is alleged to have received a payment of EUR 100 000 from the consultancy firm Taylor Jones Public Affairs in exchange for his support for an amendment to Directive 94 / 19 / EC on the time limit for the reimbursement of depositors in the case of a bank failure .
This company also promised him a paid role as a member of its International Advisory Board .
It has subsequently emerged that this was a fake company created by the British newspaper The Sunday Times , whose behaviour is objectionable .
However , although Mr Severin argues that everything happened with a fake company which deceived him , that no money changed hands and that no legislation was changed , Romanian law severely punishes this type of behaviour .
In view of this , and taking into account the recommendation of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which recommends waiving the parliamentary immunity of our Mr Severin , I am voting in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SK ) Adrian Severin , the former Deputy Prime Minister of Romania , was suspended from the Social Democratic Party in his home country after the European Parliament corruption scandal in which he was implicated came to light .
He was also expelled from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , but he remains in office as an MEP .
Together with two other Members of this House , he is facing a corruption charge , after he allegedly agreed to support a legislative amendment in return for money .
Despite this , he himself claims that all of the charges are fabricated .
I personally take the view that the behaviour of my colleague is deplorable , and that any case of - or even sign of - corruption is totally unacceptable .
We need the legislative means to tackle similar situations , and I also firmly believe that if anyone commits a similar transgression he should bear responsibility for his behaviour .
I also believe it would be right and proper in such cases to surrender one 's office as an MEP .
in writing . - The Committee on Legal Affairs , having examined the reasons for and against waiving the Member 's immunity , recommends that the European Parliament should waive the parliamentary immunity of Adrian Severin , while considering that , until a final sentence is passed , the Member should be immune from any form of detention or remand or any other measure which prevents that Member from performing the duties proper to the mandate .
I agree with such option recommended by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
However , as a matter of principle I am against the procedure of waiving immunity .
Parliament has been asked to waive the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Severin , as a result of criminal proceedings in which he is accused of defamation under the Criminal Code of Romania .
There are no indications that the case might be a case of fumus persecutionis on the part of the Romanian legal authorities ; that is to say , sufficiently serious and specific grounds for suspecting that the case has been brought with the intention of causing political damage to the Member .
Having considered the reasons in fact and in law for and against waiving the Member 's immunity , the Committee on Legal Affairs recommends that Parliament waive Mr Severin 's parliamentary immunity , but also believes that , until a final sentence is passed , the Member should be immune from any form of detention or remand or any other measure which prevents that Member from performing the duties proper to his mandate .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - In favour .
In the plenary sitting of 6 April 2011 , the President announced , in accordance with Rule 6 ( 2 ) of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , that he had received a letter from the National Anti-Corruption Department ( Prosecutor 's Office of the High Court of Cassation and Justice of Romania ) on 5 April 2011 requesting the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Adrian Severin .
The President referred the request to the committee responsible , pursuant to Rule 6 ( 2 ) .
On the basis of several considerations and pursuant to Rule 6 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the Committee on Legal Affairs , having examined the reasons for and against waiving the Member 's immunity , recommends that the European Parliament should waive the parliamentary immunity of Adrian Severin , while considering that , until a final sentence is passed , the Member should be immune from any form of detention or remand or any other measure which prevents that Member from performing the duties proper to the mandate .
I am voting for this report , given that the current partnership agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles has been in force since 2006 , and that the protocol for this agreement expired on 17 January 2011 .
A new protocol for the period 2011-2014 will be applied on a provisional basis , and I believe this to be sufficient at the present time .
The protocol provides for a Union contribution to the Seychelles of EUR 16.8 million over three years , of which EUR 2.22 million per year will go towards support for the Seychelles ' fisheries policy .
These amounts are appropriate .
I also welcome the fact that the new protocol includes a suspension clause in case of human rights violations .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour of this agreement as it will serve to spread sustainable fishing methods throughout the world .
It also ensures comprehensive control over the amount of fish fished and fishing techniques as well as the condition of fish that are taken from the sea and their traceability for food safety and commercial purposes .
Furthermore , the Seychelles are going to receive EUR 16.8 million that will promote and modernise the archipelago 's fishing industry and foster local development .
Finally , this agreement is going to allow 60 European tuna vessels that fish in the area , namely 48 seiners and 12 long-liners , to fish up to 56 000 tonnes annually .
This agreement should also allow us to leave behind the demagoguery that is heard in this House about European vessels fishing in third countries .
Our vessels in the Seychelles practise a regulated activity which is strongly controlled and completely respectful of the environment .
They do not exhaust resources and they support local development .
It is agreements of this kind that guarantee these principles .
Finally , the pirate threat over the past year has caused a 25 % reduction in fish catches in this fishing ground and the necessary measures must continue to be strengthened in order that vessels are able to fish in suitable conditions .
Mr Cadec 's report concerns the conclusion of the protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles .
I supported this report because the assessment of the agreement shows that it helps to maintain the presence of EU fleets in the region while also serving to generate jobs in the local area ; one of the reasons I wanted to support the agreement is that it makes a significant contribution to the stabilisation of the European canned tuna market .
I voted in favour of this document .
The previous Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Seychelles , which expired in January 2011 and has been renewed by the Commission for a period of three years , brought mutual benefits as regards their respective interests in the tuna fishing sector .
The agreement has in fact generated 230 crew jobs for the population of the Seychelles , 2 900 jobs in the Seychelles and 760 induced jobs in Europe in areas related to the sector .
The extension of this agreement , which facilitates the stabilisation of the European canned tuna market , is proving to be useful as it guarantees the presence of 60 vessels from the European tuna fleet in the region with the opportunity to create new jobs .
Furthermore , it is also proving to be effective because it has given the Republic of Seychelles the necessary instruments to develop responsible fishing , increasing its stock management and fisheries monitoring capacity .
I therefore believe it is right to proceed on the road of partnership agreements in this sector which is vital to the European economy .
I voted in favour of this report because the Fisheries Partnership Agreement negotiated between the EU and the Republic of Seychelles for a period of three years will benefit both parties .
The protocol will help to stabilise the European canning market and will also encourage a policy of sustainable fishing in the Seychelles .
This agreement represents 2 900 direct and indirect jobs in the Seychelles and 760 jobs in Europe .
I welcome the renewal of the protocol to the EU-Seychelles Fisheries Partnership Agreement , as it benefits the fisheries interests of both the EU and Seychelles .
This agreement has resulted in the creation of 230 crew jobs for the Seychelles population , 2 900 jobs in Seychelles and 760 jobs in various areas of the sector in Europe .
It also allows Seychelles to build the means to develop a responsible fishing industry .
The new protocol will strengthen cooperation between the two parties and promote a partnership framework in which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy .
I voted in favour of the report on the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles , since it provides for the provisional application of a new protocol so that the activity of European ships will not be suspended .
I approve of the fact that the new protocol includes a suspension clause in case of a breach of human rights .
The sustainability of fisheries resources is one of the Union 's main concerns when concluding or amending fisheries partnership agreements , as well as the impact that this activity will have on local development .
If we do not exploit these resources in a sustainable way , we will move quickly towards the extinction of fish species and increased maritime pollution .
The new protocol provides for more fishing opportunities for European fleets and has resulted in the creation of jobs both in Seychelles and in Europe .
I hope that the cases of piracy that have occurred in this region will not negatively affect this activity .
The report by Mr Cadec presents us with a proposal for a recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and related financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles .
A bilateral fisheries agreement was signed by the European Union and the Republic of Seychelles in 1987 .
A protocol was in force from 2006 , before expiring on 17 January 2011 .
The Commission , aware of the importance of renewing this partnership and on the basis of the mandate granted by the Council , negotiated a new partnership framework based on the development of a sustainable fisheries policy with the Government of Seychelles .
Given that the main economic activities in Seychelles are fishing and tourism , and that this agreement benefits both the EU and the Republic of Seychelles , in view of the creation of 3 000 jobs in Seychelles and 760 in Europe and the monitoring of catches through a multiannual sectoral programme which provides for scientific cooperation and the promotion of responsible and sustainable fisheries , I am voting in favour of this proposal for a recommendation .
This fisheries protocol ensures fishing opportunities in the Seychelles ' exclusive economic zone for various fleets from the Member States .
These include five Portuguese surface long-liners .
The renewal of this protocol aims to support the sustainability of long-distance fishing fleets from the Member States , a section of the fleets that has been particularly affected by the crisis in the fisheries sector in recent years .
This is a goal and a concern that we naturally share .
However , we cannot fail to point out some doubts that remain - arising from other fisheries partnership agreements - about the effectiveness of the stated objectives of cooperation on sustainable development in the sector for the third country in question , and on the sustainability and monitoring of their fishing activities .
These are issues that it is important to clarify in the future .
We note the fact that fishing opportunities have been reduced by half and that the cost of licences has been increased to EUR 40 000 for tuna seiners , although there has been an increase in the number of these ships covered by the agreement .
This fisheries protocol ensures fishing opportunities in the Seychelles ' exclusive economic zone for various fleets from the Member States , including five Portuguese surface long-liners .
We agree with the renewal of this fisheries protocol , which is important in order to ensure the survival of long-distance fishing fleets from the Member States , a section of the fleets that has been particularly affected by the crisis in the fisheries sector in recent years .
However , given that the term of this agreement is three years and that fishing opportunities have therefore been reduced by half , we are concerned about the fact that the cost of licences has been increased to EUR 40 000 for tuna seiners , although there has been an increase in the number of these ships covered by the agreement .
We also share the rapporteur 's concern about the problem of piracy in the Indian Ocean , which is increasingly affecting fishing .
For this reason , the partnership agreement provides for ' the possibility of applying a pro rata temporis payment ' to compensate for losses suffered by the shipowners if they are forced to leave the Indian Ocean should they feel their safety to be severely threatened .
in writing . - ( SK ) The bilateral fisheries agreement between the EU and Seychelles was signed in 1987 , and since 2006 a partnership agreement has been in force in the fisheries sector .
Seychelles ' economy is based mainly on tourism and fisheries , with the fishing industry , centred around canning , representing 15 % of GDP and employing 17 % of the local working population .
On the basis of a Council mandate , the Commission , on behalf of the European Union , negotiated with the Republic of Seychelles the renewal of the Protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Republic of Seychelles .
The agreement is mutually beneficial both for the EU and Seychelles , creating 2 900 jobs in Seychelles and 760 in Europe in fields related to the fisheries sector .
Within the framework of the agreement , there has been a qualitative improvement under a multiannual sectoral programme aimed at supporting responsible fishing and sustainable fisheries in Seychelles ' waters , and a suspension clause has also been incorporated into the Protocol , making it possible to suspend the agreement if either one of the parties ascertains a breach of human rights .
The agreement is making a substantial contribution to the stabilisation of the European market and to the development of a sustainable fisheries management policy and responsible exploitation of fishery resources in the Seychelles ' fishing zone .
It is therefore right to approve the draft of the new Protocol to the Partnership Agreement in the fisheries sector between the EU and Seychelles .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because it proposed approving the renewal of the protocol , which expired on 27 January 2011 .
An ex-post assessment of the agreement shows that it is relevant in that it helps to maintain the presence of EU fleets in the region while contributing to local job creation .
The implementation of the protocol has proved effective by providing Seychelles with resources to develop a responsible fishing industry .
The good results of seine fishing have enabled the agreement to be effective in ensuring that the cost of the fishing opportunities negotiated remains useful in economic terms .
Fishing by seiner is not a threat to the biological sustainability of the stocks exploited .
The agreement is making a substantial contribution to the stabilisation of the European canned tuna market .
The development of the fisheries sector in Seychelles is , to a significant degree , dependent on this agreement .
Thanks to the implementation of the financial contribution 's sectoral support , Seychelles has increased its stock management and fisheries monitoring capacity .
The new protocol is also in line with the objectives of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement aiming at strengthening the cooperation between the two parties and promoting a partnership framework in which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy and responsible exploitation of fishery resources in the Seychelles ' fishing zone .
In light of this , I believe that the proposed new Protocol for the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EU and Seychelles serves the interests of both parties .
With today 's vote we have approved the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles .
The first bilateral fisheries agreement was signed by the European Union and Seychelles in 1987 , while the Partnership Agreement came into force in 2006 .
As we all know , the economy of Seychelles relies essentially on tourism and fisheries ; in fact , the fishing industry accounts for 15 % of its GDP and employs 17 % of the working population .
I believe that the negotiations conducted by the European Commission , which permitted the extension of the protocol to the Partnership Agreement , have produced the draft of a document which is mutually advantageous in that it strengthens the level of cooperation between the EU and Seychelles , and promotes a partnership in which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy in Seychelles and responsible exploitation of fishery resources in the Seychelles ' fishing zone .
The new fisheries agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles will be valid for a period of three years and will facilitate the creation of jobs , sustainable exploitation of maritime resources and responsible fishing , based on the principle of non-discrimination between the different fleets fishing in the zone .
Contemporaneously , it will promote political dialogue on necessary reforms which aim to strengthen the cooperation between the two parties , by supporting a partnership framework in which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy and responsible exploitation of fishery resources in the Seychelles ' fishing zone .
However , fisheries partnership agreements should not simply be a legal way of allowing European vessels to have access to fish stocks in third countries ; they should also be a tool to promote sustainable exploitation of all maritime resources .
We believe that it is of fundamental importance to improve the transparency of the procedures used to identify total catches and guarantee the probity of all the mechanisms with regard to the corruption problem by reinforcing the accountability of the local government .
The European Union must receive regular reports on the implementation of the agreement in order to facilitate monitoring , transparency and policy coherence for development .
in writing . - Fishing by European vessels in Seychelles is governed by a protocol covering the period from 18 January 2005 to 17 January 2011 .
Seychelles has a 1 374 000 km ² exclusive economic zone for a land area of 453 km ² .
This archipelago of 115 islands has an estimated population of 80 000 , 88 % of whom live on the island of Mahé , whose capital is Victoria , the country 's main port .
Seychelles ' economy relies essentially on tourism and fisheries .
Its fishing industry , centred around canning , accounts for 15 % of its GDP and 17 % of the working population .
An assessment of the agreement shows that it is relevant in that it helps to maintain the presence of EU fleets in the region while contributing to local job creation .
The implementation of the protocol has proved effective by providing Seychelles with resources to develop a responsible fishing industry .
The agreement is making a substantial contribution to the stabilisation of the European canned tuna market .
The new Protocol will stay in force from 2011 till 2014 and is in line with the objectives of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement aiming at strengthening the cooperation between the European Union and the Republic of Seychelles .
in writing . - ( LT ) The Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EU and Seychelles serves the interests of both parties .
Above all , EU vessels are able to access Seychelles ' waters and engage in fishing .
These vessels are creating many new jobs for Seychelles seamen .
The agreement is strengthening cooperation and promoting a partnership framework , and scientific cooperation in the areas of responsible fishing and sustainable fisheries .
Furthermore , the Seychelles fishing sector enjoys favourable development conditions , by engaging in responsible fishing , combating illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing effectively , and fully using its vessel monitoring system .
It should be noted that the provisions of the renewed agreement will have a positive impact on the European canned tuna market and will undoubtedly help stabilise it .
It will promote compliance with conservation measures on the high seas and will create the conditions to stop vessels fishing illegally .
I welcome the fact that it was possible to reach a compromise between both parties and that the protocol on the renewal of the agreement includes a suspension clause on breaches of human rights and non-compliance with ILO principles .
Attention should be drawn to the fact that piracy still poses a significant threat to the security of vessels in the Indian Ocean .
Consequently , both parties must take the necessary measures and action to stop this magnitude of illegal activity .
On 17 January of this year the protocol regulating fishing and the respective economic partnership between the EU and Seychelles expired .
With a view to allowing European vessels to continue fishing in the Seychelles ' fishing zone in the Indian Ocean , the EU has negotiated the extension of the Protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement .
I have thus voted in favour of the Council 's recommendations for the conclusion of the new partnership agreement with Seychelles .
On the basis of the relevant Council mandate , the Commission has negotiated with the Republic of Seychelles , on behalf of the European Union , the renewal of the Protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Seychelles .
These negotiations concluded with the initialling of a new protocol on the 3 June 2010 , which was then amended by exchange of letters on 29 October 2010 .
The protocol covers a period of three years from the adoption of the Council decision on the signing of the protocol and its provisional application , and after the expiry of the current protocol on 17 January 2011 .
This agreement is of mutual benefit to the EU and Seychelles : on the one hand , is makes a substantial contribution to the stabilisation of the European canned tuna market through the granting of fishing licences for tuna , and thus promotes the creation of 760 jobs in Europe ; and on the other hand , thanks to the implementation of the financial contribution 's sectoral support , Seychelles is increasing its stock management and fisheries monitoring capacity .
I believe that the document in question serves the interests of both parties , so I recommend that it be adopted .
The conclusion of a new Protocol to the Partnership Agreement between the EU and Seychelles is important for the economy and development of the European fishing fleet .
The new protocol is in keeping with the aims of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement which seeks to strengthen cooperation between the EU and Seychelles , and to promote a framework for partnership to facilitate the development of a sustainable fisheries policy and responsible exploitation of fishery resources in the Seychelles ' fishing zone , in the interests of both parties .
The new protocol entails a financial contribution for a period of three years and annual authorisation to fish in Seychelles ' waters for 48 seiners and 12 long-liners .
These opportunities could be increased .
The new protocol covers a period of three years from adoption of the Council decision on the signing and provisional application of the protocol , and after expiry of the current protocol on 17 January 2011 .
For these reasons , and in order that the cooperation between the EU and the Republic of Seychelles may be strengthened for development , responsible exploitation and responsible fishing , I hereby express my vote in favour .
in writing . - Against .
On the basis of the relevant Council mandate , the Commission negotiated on behalf of the European Union with the Republic of Seychelles the renewal of the Protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Seychelles .
These negotiations concluded with the initialling of a new Protocol on the 3 June 2010 , which was then amended by exchange of letters on 29 October 2010 .
The Protocol covers a period of three years from the adoption of the Council decision on the signing of the Protocol and its provisional application , and the expiry of the current Protocol on 17 January 2011 .
The new Protocol has been applied provisionally since 17 January 2011 to ensure that EU vessels could continue fishing .
Our group believes however that those type of agreement are detrimental for the stocks and for the building of a social strcuture in the thirds parties which makes them too dependent of the EU .
I believe that this Partnership Agreement is mutually advantageous for the fisheries of both the European Union and Seychelles .
The old agreement has already generated numerous jobs both for the population of Seychelles and in Europe , where it has induced jobs in areas related to the sector .
Moreover , suspension clauses are included in this agreement , should either one of the parties ascertain a breach of human rights .
There is still a lot to do , above all with regard to the phenomenon of piracy in the Indian Ocean , which is increasingly detrimental to tuna fishing in particular .
However , the choice made today strengthens the cooperation between the two parties , and promotes a partnership capable of developing sustainable fishing and of exploiting the resources of Seychelles in a balanced way .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , I voted in favour of the Cadec report , which includes my conclusions .
Partnership agreements in the fishing sector should not merely be a legal way of granting European vessels access to the fishery resources of third countries .
They should also serve to promote the sustainable exploitation of maritime resources .
The amount paid by the European taxpayer should be exclusively used for development objectives , that is to say that it should be spent for the benefit of the fishing communities , so as to enhance their living conditions , to provide training programmes , to ensure safety at sea and to create new local jobs .
I voted for adoption of the agreement , because it is of mutual benefit to the interests of the parties in the fisheries sector .
The work of the Seychelles Fishing Authority , which has an effective vessel monitoring system , is of great significance for this cooperation .
This is particularly significant in the light of the problem being faced by the Seychelles authorities of illegal , unreported and unregulated catches .
The agreement governs many issues , including the presence of observers while fishing is in progress .
European vessels entitled to fish in Seychelles ' waters will take on board observers appointed by the Seychelles authorities , and during a trip each tuna seiner will take on board at least two Seychelles seamen , in agreement with the shipowner , from the names on a list submitted by the competent authority of Seychelles .
The arrangements concern not only purely pragmatic matters , but also the multiannual sectoral programme , which provides for cooperation in terms of responsible fishing , sustainable fisheries and joint scientific research .
The most important effect of the agreement is the creation of 230 crew jobs for Seychelles population , 2 900 jobs in Seychelles and 760 induced jobs in Europe in areas related to the sector , which will without doubt contribute to economic improvement in the sector .
I am voting for this report , given that the current Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and São Tomé and Príncipe has been in force since 2006 and that the protocol for this agreement expired on 31 May 2011 .
This new protocol with São Tomé and Príncipe of 15 June 2010 , for the 2011-2014 period , therefore makes complete sense , and Parliament must give its consent .
The protocol provides for a Union contribution to São Tomé and Príncipe of EUR 682 500 per year , of which EUR 227 500 will go towards support for São Tomé and Príncipe 's fisheries policy , which I believe to be appropriate .
I also welcome the fact that the new protocol includes a suspension clause in case of a breach of human rights .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour of this agreement because it fulfils the objective of maintaining the activities of the EU fishing fleet in collaboration with third countries with the aim of strengthening sustainable fishing whilst respecting the environment and social and economic aspects .
São Tomé will receive EUR 682 500 annually of which EUR 227 500 will be to support its sectoral fisheries policy .
The agreement will allow fishing for 28 tuna seiners and 12 surface long-liners .
I wish to stress that not all the fishing opportunities of the previous agreement were used and that in this new protocol the fishing opportunities for the long-liner sector are reduced .
I am voting in favour of this draft European Parliament legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe .
The draft is aimed at consolidating the role of the EU in tuna fisheries in the Atlantic Ocean through legal regulation of the activity of the EU 's fleet .
Bearing in mind the relevance of the tuna industry for the EU and for Italy alone , developing the operative framework of the EU 's fleet in the Gulf of Guinea is of primary importance .
On the basis of these considerations , I decided to vote in favour of this draft .
I voted in favour of the report presented by Mr Capoulas Santos .
The conclusion of fisheries partnership agreements certainly has the aim of conserving and safeguarding the activities of the European fishing fleet .
In particular , extending this partnership agreement contributes to the sustainability of the EU 's tuna fisheries in the Atlantic Ocean by setting down a stable legal framework .
The agreement , which should be supported , anticipates that EU vessels , of which there will be 40 in the geographical area , will take at least 20 % of their crew members from São Tomé and Príncipe or from other ACP countries ( African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ) , and also provides the opportunity for an observer designated by the fisheries ministry of São Tomé and Príncipe to be on board .
These provisions of the partnership thereby make it possible to operate in conjunction with local authorities , creating important jobs ; they also permit Europe to be present in otherwise prohibited areas , thereby facilitating the development of practices of ' good fishing ' and making it possible to monitor the presence and quantity of the fish stocks concerned .
I welcome the renewal of the protocol to the EU-São Tomé and Príncipe Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( FPA ) , as it benefits the fisheries interests of both the EU and São Tomé and Príncipe .
The EU-São Tomé and Príncipe FPA can help to support the viability of the EU 's tuna fleet in the Atlantic Ocean , offering the vessels and the EU areas dependent on them a stable medium-term legal framework and contributing to maintaining continuity in the fishing zones covered by agreements in the Gulf of Guinea .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted against these fisheries agreements , as there is no ceiling on the fishing quotas and because studies indicate that fish stocks in the world 's oceans are declining .
In several of the countries concerned there is widespread corruption , with the effect that the money from the agreements does not benefit the local population .
Moreover , there are often no checks on compliance .
The Commission 's negotiating position was based , among other things , on the results of an ex-post evaluation of the current protocols carried out by external experts .
These evaluations were declared classified by the Commission and we believe that they must be made available to the European Parliament as soon as possible .
I voted in favour of the report on the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe , since it provides for the provisional application of a new protocol so that the activity of European ships will not be suspended .
I approve of the fact that the new protocol includes a suspension clause in case of a breach of human rights .
The draft Council decision relates to the conclusion of a new protocol on the Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( FPA ) between the EU and the Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe .
The new protocol is seen as beneficial to both parties , and it can enhance the stability of the European tuna sector in particular .
I hope that the people of São Tomé and Príncipe , with which Portugal shares its history and language , will receive tangible benefits as a result of the fair application of the FPA , and that they can diversify their activities and see real progress and development .
I hope that the joint committee will meet more regularly so that both parties can monitor the application of the agreement at close hand .
Lastly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work that he has carried out .
The report by Mr Capoulas Santos presents us with a proposal for a recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and related financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( FPA ) between the European Community and the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe .
In 2007 the Council adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 894 / 2007 on the conclusion of a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe , which included a protocol setting out the fishing conditions and the respective financial contributions , which expired on 31 May 2010 .
Aware of the importance of renewing this agreement and following the mandate conferred upon it by the Council , the Commission has negotiated a new protocol , which was concluded on 15 July 2010 .
Its entry into force is subject to approval by Parliament , under the terms of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Given that this protocol serves the interests of both parties and that it promotes responsible and sustainable fisheries , I am voting in favour of this proposal for a recommendation .
This fisheries protocol ensures fishing opportunities off São Tomé and Príncipe for various fleets from Member States until 12 May 2014 .
Under this agreement , Portugal has three licences for surface long-liners , with a lower number of vessels than provided for in the previous agreement .
Given the current crisis in the sector , we believe that it is important that the fees payable by owners should not be changed in relation to the previous agreement , but should remain at EUR 35 , despite the fact that there has been a significant increase in catches per tonne : 25 tonnes for tuna seiners and 10 tonnes for long-liners .
However , according to an evaluation carried out while the previous agreement was in force , average annual catches in tonnes were lower than the reference tonnage .
According to this evaluation , and in line with the trends of recent years , there has been a reduction in the reference tonnage .
It was also found that there was a lower take-up of fishing opportunities by long-liners , which led to a reduction in this segment in the current report .
As with other cases , there remain concerns about the effectiveness of the development cooperation objectives ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
This fisheries protocol ensures fishing opportunities off São Tomé and Príncipe for various fleets from Member States until 12 May 2014 .
Under this agreement , Portugal has three licences for surface long-liners , with a lower number of vessels than the previous agreement .
We welcome the fact that the fees payable by owners should not be changed in relation to the previous agreement , but should remain at EUR 35 , despite the fact that there has been a significant increase in reference catches .
However , according to an evaluation carried out while the previous agreement was in force , average annual catches in tonnes were lower than the reference tonnage .
According to this evaluation , and in line with the trends of recent years , there has been a reduction in the reference tonnage .
It was also found that there was a lower take-up of fishing opportunities by long-liners , which led to a reduction in this segment in the current report .
in writing . - ( SK ) The negotiation and signing of fisheries partnership agreements is in line with the general objective of maintaining and preserving the activities of the EU 's fishing fleet , including the open-sea fleet . It is also in line with the development of relations with third countries in a spirit of partnership and cooperation , with a view to reinforcing sustainable fishing outside EU waters while taking account of environmental , social and economic factors .
In this context , in July 2007 , the European Council adopted a regulation on the conclusion of a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe and the European Community .
The fisheries agreement with São Tomé and Príncipe responds not only to the needs of the European fleet , but may also contribute to supporting a viable EU tuna fishing sector in the Atlantic Ocean .
The São Tomé fisheries are concentrated mainly on coastal resources , and about 15 % of the working population depend on fisheries for a living .
The proposal essentially serves the interests of both parties , and it is therefore right to approve it .
in writing . - ( LT ) The ex-ante evaluation concluded that , insofar as it corresponds to the requirements of the European fleets , the fisheries agreement with São Tomé and Príncipe can enhance the visibility of the EU 's tuna fleet in the Atlantic , offering the vessels and the EU areas dependent on them , in the medium term , a stable framework and contributing to continuity in the fishing zones of the Gulf of Guinea .
According to the ex-post evaluation , considerable progress has been made as regards means of monitoring and surveillance of fisheries ( the first steps have been taken towards a satellite vessel monitoring system , with a new legal basis established for the creation of a vessel database ) .
There is now greater participation and visibility on the part of São Tomé and Príncipe in regional and subregional bodies , such as the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) and the Regional Fisheries Committee for the Gulf of Guinea ( COREP ) .
The evaluation also concludes that more than 50 % of the EU 's financial contribution has been allocated to the administrative budget for the country 's fisheries sector : this is in line with the agreement taken on by the national authorities under the old protocol .
I welcomed this document , because it is clear from the evaluations submitted that this proposal corresponds to the basic interests of both parties .
The new fishing agreement between the European Union and the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe will be valid for a period of three years and will reinforce sustainable fishing outside Union waters while taking due account of environmental , social and economic factors .
We support the renewal of the exclusion clause which goes into greater detail both in the clauses concerning suspension and revision of payment of financial compensation , and in those concerning suspension of implementation of the protocol in certain circumstances .
We therefore believe that the Commission should forward to the European Parliament the conclusions of the meetings and activities of the Joint Committee , together with the sectoral fisheries programme referred to in the protocol and the results of the relevant annual evaluations .
The Commission should also submit to Parliament and the Council , prior to the renegotiation of the agreement , a full implementation report , and facilitate the participation of representatives of Parliament as observers in its meetings .
Finally , the Commission and the Council should , in the context of their respective competences , keep Parliament informed at all stages of the procedures relating to the protocol and its eventual renewal .
in writing . - The negotiation and signing of fisheries agreements is in line with the EU 's general objective of maintaining and preserving the activities of its fishing fleet , including the open-sea fleet , as also with the development of relations with third countries in a spirit of partnership and cooperation , with a view to reinforcing sustainable fishing outside Union waters while taking due account of environmental , social and economic factors .
In this context , on 23 July 2007 the European Council adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 894 / 2007 on the conclusion of a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Principe and the European Community .
This agreement , which is applicable for periods of four years , tacitly renewable unless either party rescinds it , entailed the repeal and replacement of the first agreement between the EC and São Tomé and Principe , concluded in 1984 .
The new protocol was signed on 13 May 2011 and the request for consent was forwarded to Parliament by the Council on the same day .
I absolutely agree with the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( LT ) The new protocol has undoubted benefits for both parties , strengthening partnership and cooperation in the fisheries sector , so that vessels engage in responsible and sustainable fishing .
Above all , it will develop fishing opportunities .
EU vessels will still have the opportunity to fish in the fishing zones of the Gulf of Guinea .
This will have a positive impact on the visibility of the EU 's tuna fleet in the Atlantic and will increase competitiveness .
Furthermore , it is crucial to ensure that fishing activities meet the same sustainability criteria as fishing activities in EU waters .
It should be noted that the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe is a least developed country and also qualifies as a highly indebted country .
Under the provisions of the agreement , greater financial assistance will be allocated to this country 's sectoral fisheries policy , which will create favourable conditions for the development of this sector .
Given the country 's particularly difficult position , thanks to this agreement we can at least make a minimum contribution to the country 's economic well-being , promote the creation of new jobs , environmental and social sustainability , and fish stock preservation and restoration .
The protocol regulating the fishing partnership between the EU and São Tomé and Príncipe expired on 31 May 2010 ; a new agreement was signed on 13 May and the request for consent was submitted to the European Parliament by the Council on the same day .
Fisheries partnership agreements have the aim of conserving and safeguarding activities in the EU 's fisheries and developing relations with third countries with a view to reinforcing sustainable exploitation of resources outside Union waters .
I have voted in favour of the Council 's recommendation for Parliament to support the conclusion of the agreement in question .
The negotiation and signing of fisheries partnership agreements is in line with the EU 's general objective of maintaining and preserving the activities of its fishing fleet , particularly the long-distance fleet , so the conclusion of this document is crucial to pursuing the foreign policy objectives of the common fisheries policy .
In the interests of both parties , in its recommendation Parliament has pointed out certain aspects of institutional communication that should be improved , namely that the Commission should send Parliament the conclusions of the meetings and proceedings of the Joint Committee provided for in the agreement , the multiannual sectoral programme referred to in the protocol and also the results of the annual evaluations .
Parliament also requests a full report on the implementation of the agreement and asks that its Members be kept informed during future renegotiation of the agreement so that they can have a positive bearing on the process of negotiation .
I am voting in favour of this recommendation .
This proposal refers to the conclusion of a new protocol to the Partnership Agreement between the EU and São Tomé and Príncipe .
The main objective here is to define the fishing opportunities on offer to the EU fleet on the basis of available surplus , as well as to determine the amount of financial contribution to be made separately for access rights and to support the sector .
Twenty-eight purse seiners and 12 surface long-liners will be authorised to fish in the region .
Allowing for annual evaluations of the state of stocks , these fishing opportunities can be revised upwards or downwards , entailing a consequent review of the amount of financial contribution due .
EUR 682 500 will be paid annually as a financial contribution .
The annual financial contribution will be increased by EUR 65 per tonne of additional catch , should the EU fleet 's total catch exceed 7 000 tonnes in any year .
The agreement lasts for three years .
For these reasons and in order to consolidate the sustainability of the tuna sector in the EU , I have voted in favour of the proposal .
in writing . - The negotiation and signing of fisheries agreements is in line with the EU 's general objective of maintaining and preserving the activities of its fishing fleet , including the open-sea fleet , as also with the development of relations with third countries in a spirit of partnership and cooperation , with a view to reinforcing sustainable fishing outside Union waters while taking due account of environmental , social and economic factors .
In this context , on 23 July 2007 the European Council adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 894 / 2007 on the conclusion of a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Principe and the European Community ( 1 ) .
This agreement , which is applicable for periods of four years , tacitly renewable unless either party rescinds it , entailed the repeal and replacement of the first agreement between the EC and São Tomé and Principe , concluded in 1984 .
However , our group has been traditionally opposed to that procedure for both , the form and the content .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I feel it corresponds to the best interests of both parties .
This Partnership Agreement can surely enhance the visibility of the EU 's tuna fleet in the Atlantic , offering the vessels and the EU areas dependent on them a stable legal framework in the medium-term and contributing to continuity in the fishing zones covered by agreements in the Gulf of Guinea .
It is , however , desirable that the Joint Committee reconvene more frequently in future , and that representatives of the European Parliament be permitted to participate at meetings as observers .
The negotiation and conclusion of fisheries partnership agreements is in line with the EU 's general objective of maintaining and preserving the activities of its fishing fleet .
I am voting for the adoption of the protocol on the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe as this relates to the development of relations with a third country in a spirit of partnership and cooperation , with a view to reinforcing sustainable fishing outside Union waters while taking due account of environmental , social and economic factors .
The new protocol provides for a financial contribution for access to the exclusive economic zone ( EEZ ) of São Tomé and Príncipe equivalent to fishing opportunities at a value of EUR 2 047 500 over a three-year period .
Authorisation to fish will be granted to 28 tuna seiners and 12 surface long-liners . These fishing opportunities may be revised .
I am voting for this report and welcome the provision aimed at ensuring that trade between both parties develops smoothly within a high level of customs security and that it includes a set of rules to ensure that the agreement and the EU acquis remain in alignment .
I have voted in favour of the agreement as it is intended to ensure that trade takes place with a high level of customs security and that a set of standards ever closer to the EU acquis is applied .
I voted in favour of this measure aimed at extending the existing agreement between the EU and the Principality of Andorra to customs security measures .
The need for this measure has steadily increased in the course of the last few years as the Principality of Andorra has taken on a central linking role in illegal trafficking of goods , specifically cigarettes , which are then introduced into the commercial network of EU Member States .
It is therefore fundamental that the EU and the Principality itself define a framework of cooperation in the matter of customs security .
Given that the safeguarding of border security has always constituted a key aspect of the Lega Nord 's political ideology , I can only express my approval of this measure .
I voted in favour of the report on the Protocol extending to customs security measures the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Economic Community and the Principality of Andorra , since it encourages trade between both parties while ensuring a high level of customs security and consistency between the agreement and the EU acquis .
The Principality of Andorra is historically linked to the EU in all manner of areas .
The customs union concluded in 1990 increased these already strong and natural ties .
This proposal relates to amendments to the Community Customs Code and its implementing rules , concerning customs security measures for goods that are exported to or imported from non-EU countries .
The proposal establishes a special regime between the EU and Andorra to ensure that trade runs smoothly between the two parties without jeopardising the necessary security for the traded goods , To this end it is necessary to ensure equivalent levels of security in their respective territories .
I hope that trade relations between the EU and Andorra will prove fruitful and that the proposal will make a significant contribution to this objective .
Lastly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work that he has carried out .
Mr Moreira has presented us with a proposal for a recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a Protocol between the EU and the Principality of Andorra extending to customs security measures the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the two partners concluded on 28 June 1990 .
A new Title IIA is to be added to the agreement in force , covering agricultural products .
Given that , in the already extensive relations between the EU and the Principality of Andorra , this is another positive step towards possible integration into the internal market and that , as well as including rules to ensure that the agreement and the EU acquis remain in alignment , it aims to ensure customs security and normal relations between both parties , I welcome the adoption of this recommendation , for which I voted .
This protocol is aimed at extending the customs security measures of the established agreement between the EU and the Principality of Andorra .
The EU-Andorra Agreement has been in place since 1990 .
However , it has now been decided to extend it to agricultural products , as part of this arrangement on customs security measures .
As such , the agreement ensures that bilateral trade between both parties runs smoothly and with a high level of customs security .
It also provides for the requirement of prior declaration of goods to be abolished , on condition that the EU and Andorra guarantee an equivalent level of security as provided for in the relevant acquis in their respective territories .
However , despite our vote in favour , we believe that the interests of the movement of capital should not be promoted at the expense of safeguarding the rights of people and workers .
This protocol is aimed at extending the customs security measures of the established agreement between the EU and the Principality of Andorra .
The EU-Andorra Agreement has been in place since 1990 .
However , it has now been decided to extend it , as part of this arrangement on customs security measures , to agricultural products .
The agreement aims to ensure that bilateral trade between both parties runs smoothly and with a high level of customs security .
It also provides for the requirement of prior declaration of goods to be abolished , on condition that the EU and Andorra guarantee an equivalent level of security as provided for in the relevant acquis in their respective territories .
At the time of this agreement 's review , we would like to reiterate that the interests of the movement of capital should not be promoted at the expense of safeguarding the rights of people and workers .
in writing . - ( SK ) The Council decision submitted to the European Parliament within the framework of the consent procedure represents a legal instrument for the conclusion of a Protocol between the European Union and the Principality of Andorra , extending the scope of the agreement to customs security measures .
The agreement has served as the basis for the customs union between the two parties .
The Community Customs Code can in principle be applied to trade with all non-member countries , allowing the application of other regulations in cases where international agreements establish special security measures .
The protocol should ensure that trade between the two parties carries on without complications and at a high level of customs security , and it should include a set of rules ensuring that the agreement continues to conform to the EU acquis .
I therefore think it is right for Parliament to approve this agreement .
At the same time , however , although EU-Andorra relations have developed , they are fragmented , as significant parts of the acquis applying to the internal market have not been incorporated into Andorran law , and thus cannot be applied .
We should therefore carry out an analysis in the near future of the possibilities and modalities of its possible progressive integration into the internal market .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because the proposal is related to the amendments to the Community Customs Code and its Implementing Rules , concerning customs security measures for goods that are exported to or imported from non-EU countries .
Most importantly , the changes contain a provision that traders should submit certain information prior to importing or exporting goods .
We believe that the conclusion of this protocol between the European Union and the Principality of Andorra , which extends customs security measures , will ensure that trade between both parties develops smoothly within a high level of customs security and will provide a set of rules to ensure that the Agreement and the EU acquis remain in alignment .
We have therefore voted for Parliament 's approval of the proposal .
We , however , maintain that the Commission should inform Parliament of the conclusions of the meetings and proceedings of the Joint Committee , together with the findings of the regular assessments , and should also commit to submitting an implementation review of the Agreement .
Given that relations between the EU and the Principality of Andorra are extended but fragmented , we recommend that an analysis of the possibilities and modalities of its possible progressive integration into the internal market be undertaken at the earliest opportunity .
This will be necessary to ensure that trade runs smoothly between the two parties , while maintaining a high level of security .
Finally , we anticipate the abolition of the requirement of prior declaration of goods on the condition that the EU and Andorra guarantee in their respective territories an equivalent level of security as set out in the relevant acquis .
in writing . - It is known that the protocol is aimed at ensuring that trade between both Parties develops smoothly within a high level of customs security and that it includes a set of rules to ensure that the Agreement and the EU acquis remain in alignment .
It is a very important initiative .
in writing . - ( LT ) Relations between the EU and the Principality of Andorra must continue to be extended effectively and consistently .
We need to create the appropriate conditions for this .
Above all , in order to facilitate trade between the EU and Andorra , it is important to properly implement customs security measures , concerning the declaration of goods prior to their entry into and exit from this customs territory , authorised economic operators , and customs security checks and risk management .
Furthermore , it is necessary to promote a further extension of the internal market beyond the EU based on common regulatory standards .
This would be to the mutual benefit of citizens and businesses in the EU and Andorra .
It should be noted that the protocol establishes a special regime between the EU and Andorra to help ensure that trade runs smoothly between the two parties while maintaining a high level of security .
I welcome the proposal that the protocol should contain a provision that traders should submit certain information prior to importing or exporting goods , so that customs security measures are properly implemented .
I believe that it is advisable to abolish the requirement of prior declaration of goods on the condition that the EU and Andorra guarantee in their respective customs territories an equivalent level of security as provided by the respective acquis .
in writing . - Promoting mutually-secure borders with neighbouring countries to the EU is necessary to maintain the sovereignty of our Union , to develop mutual cooperation .
Expedient control of the EU border with Andorra , a principality in between two large EU countries , France and Spain , will ensure a more profitable and amiable relationship in the future .
I voted for this protocol because it will encourage greater information exchanges with Andorra on security-related risk management and controls , as well as the standardisation of EU customs security measures , and will encourage the safe movement of goods between Andorra and other EU countries .
Increasing bilateral trade between Andorra and the EU in a more secure , standardised environment will benefit Europe as a whole .
I voted in favour of Mr Moreira 's report on customs security measures because I feel it is important that well-defined trade rules be established for a country which , while not part of the EU , is an enclave within it , and thus perfectly placed for commercial integration .
The protocol intends precisely to strengthen customs security measures in respect of goods imported from and exported to non-member countries . Border control ensures that commercial operators supply detailed information during trade operations , guaranteeing , at the same time , the right equilibrium between speed and security of trade flows .
I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Protocol extending to customs security measures the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Economic Community ( EEC ) and the Principality of Andorra .
Both the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection recommend the conclusion of this protocol .
The conclusion of this new agreement is another step towards greater cooperation between the Principality of Andorra and the EU .
It is important for both parties to ensure that the agreement continues to monitor the development of the EU acquis in this area .
This concern was expressed in the agreement .
As mentioned by the rapporteur , I would stress the need for the Commission and the Principality of Andorra to engage in further talks in order to take into account and if necessary to adapt bilateral agreements to the ongoing implementation of the Modernised Customs Code , which should be completed within the EU within two years .
With regard to the conclusion of the Protocol between the European Union and the Principality of Andorra extending to customs security measures the Agreement , which has until now been in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Economic Community and the Principality of Andorra and which was concluded on 28 June 1990 .
The Agreement was the basis for the customs union between both parties .
The present arrangement concerning customs security measures will be added to the 1990 Agreement under the form of a new Title IIA and , unlike the customs union , will apply to agricultural products .
The Community Customs Code is , in principle , applicable to trade with all non-member countries . Nevertheless , it allows for different rules where international agreements provide for special security arrangements .
Taking into account the changes in the relevant EU customs acquis , the proposal establishes a special regime between the EU and Andorra to ensure that trade runs smoothly between the two parties while maintaining a high level of security .
For these reasons , and in order to intensify trade between the EU and the Principality of Andorra , I am voting in favour of the new customs security measures .
in writing . - In favour .
The Council Decision referral for the European Parliament for consent procedure constitutes the legal instrument for the conclusion of the Protocol between the European Union and the Principality of Andorra extending to customs security measures the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Economic Community and the Principality of Andorra concluded on 28 June 1990 .
The Agreement was the basis for the customs union between both parties .
The present arrangement concerning customs security measures will be added to the 1990 Agreement under the form of a new Title IIA and , unlike the customs union , will apply to agricultural products ( Article 12b ( 2 ) of the Protocol ) .
in writing . - ( DE ) A customs union has existed between the Principality of Andorra and the European Union since 1990 on the basis of an Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters .
The current amendment proposes that the Joint Committee should define measures for implementing customs security provisions .
Prior declaration will no longer be required if the EU and Andorra each guarantee the level of security in their own sovereign territory .
The expansion of the internal market standard will bring benefits to the citizens and businesses of both the EU and Andorra alike .
I am voting for this proposal so that Parliament will approve the conclusion of the Agreement .
European and Canadian companies will be able to save millions of euro a year thanks to shorter and simpler , hence less costly , product-approval procedures and mutual acceptance of certification findings .
Furthermore , the Agreement constitutes a net benefit for the EU given that it will establish mutual acceptance of certification findings in all areas of airworthiness for all Member States .
The Agreement will not only make the Canadian and European markets more competitive , it will also make them safer for passengers and cargo flights , as it promotes cooperation in all matters of certification , inspections and enforcement .
Canada is a leading world producer of aircraft and aviation equipment .
At the present time , only six Member States have bilateral agreements on certification of aviation services .
The proposed Agreement on civil aviation safety , as with the Agreement with the US , will significantly improve cooperation between the Union and Canada and will govern this matter in all the Member States of the European Union .
The Agreement allows the certification system to be harmonised .
It is based on mutual trust of each other 's system and on a comparison of regulatory differences , and so will allow the duplication of tests and controls to be minimised .
It will also start a process of joint inspections , investigations and exchange of safety data .
Mutual acceptance of certification findings will allow significant savings to be achieved in the work of European and Canadian aviation companies .
The Agreement will on the one hand increase the competitiveness of aviation markets , and on the other hand - by bringing together regulatory authorities - will also improve their safety .
In view of the above , I agree to the Agreement being concluded .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour because this Agreement will benefit European and Canadian companies , airlines and passengers .
Millions will be saved through product approval procedures and mutual acceptance of shorter , simpler and cheaper certification findings .
It provides for the use and recognition of each other 's repair and maintenance facilities .
Above all it will make the market safer and more competitive .
I voted in favour of Mrs Ţicău 's report as Canada should be seen as a priority partner for agreements of this kind , given that both Europe and Canada have world-leading aircraft manufacturers .
This Agreement will enable duplication of procedures to be kept to a minimum and mutual certification to be accepted : consequently , the financial savings and simplification of bureaucratic procedures will be of significance and have very positive repercussions for our businesses .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because I believe that a bilateral Agreement on civil aviation safety between the EU and Canada , which is its aim , will bring benefits for Europeans by facilitating trade between both parties .
The objective of the Agreement is to minimise the duplication of assessments , tests and controls and to enable both the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's aeronautical product certification systems .
By approximating the two sets of requirements and regulatory processes , the importing authority will be able to issue its own certificate on the aeronautical product , part or appliance without duplicating all the assessments done by the exporting authority .
European and Canadian companies will save millions of euros a year thanks to shorter , simpler , and hence less costly , product-approval procedures .
Airlines will also benefit , and the Canadian and European aviation markets will become even safer .
The mutual acceptance of certification findings will ensure shorter and simpler , hence less costly , product-approval procedures , while it will also bring huge economic benefits for both European and Canadian companies .
I am voting for this Agreement as I believe that , besides the economic benefits it brings , it will also establish mutual acceptance of certification findings in all areas of airworthiness for all Member States .
It is therefore based on mutual trust of the systems in force , whether in the EU or in Canada , and provides for obligations and methods of cooperation so that the importing authority can issue its own certificate on the aeronautical product , part or appliance without duplicating all the assessments done by the exporting authority .
Airlines will also benefit from the Agreement , since it provides for the use of each other 's approved repair and maintenance facilities .
It thus represents a massive step forward for markets that are more competitive but also safer , since greater rapprochement and cooperation in matters of certification , inspections and enforcement should enable the parties to ensure a higher level of security for passengers and cargo flights .
I voted in favour of Mrs Ţicău 's report , which gives the European Parliament 's green light for applying an Agreement between the European Community and Canada on civil aviation safety .
This Agreement will bring the mutual recognition of certification systems for an aeronautical product , part or appliance in terms of airworthiness and maintenance .
This should save companies whose products have been certified in one country having to go through the whole certification process in another .
This simplification is good news for a market that is worth close to EUR 50 billion in trade between the two regions .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I approve of the conclusion of an agreement which , on the one hand , will benefit European and Canadian companies and airlines by saving millions of euro , thanks to shorter and simpler certification procedures , and , on the other hand , will ensure a higher level of security for passengers .
Ensuring aviation safety and harmonised rules for the various market players is the main objective of this Agreement between the European Community and Canada on civil aviation safety , henceforth ' the Agreement ' .
The Agreement is as important as the aviation industries of these two areas are , so the adoption of common rules will avoid duplication of processes such as tests , assessments and certifications .
It should also be noted that the rule of mutual acceptance and joint inspections , investigations and exchange of safety data will allow greater efficiency for all stakeholders .
Last but not least , the Agreement will allow important savings not only for the aviation industry , but also efficiency gains for the airlines themselves , as they will now be able to use repair and maintenance facilities approved by the parties to the Agreement .
Economic and political relations between the European Union and Canada date back a long time , and have given rise to several bilateral agreements in these areas .
On 6 May 2009 , an Agreement on civil aviation safety was concluded between the EU - then the European Community - and Canada , similar to that with the US , aimed at strengthening cooperation between the two parties and reducing duplication of checks for all controls and tests .
I voted in favour of this recommendation and welcome the strengthening of relations between the two parties .
This Agreement will make both the Canadian and the European markets safer and more competitive , as it represents an important step forward in terms of establishing international standards for civil aviation safety .
It will also benefit airlines , as it will be possible for them to use each other 's approved repair and maintenance facilities .
The Agreement that is the subject of this report concerns certain safety aspects of civil aviation and will replace the six existing bilateral agreements between the Member States and Canada , which include product certification .
As the rapporteur clearly states , the intention of creating a full Open Aviation Area between these two countries , an issue with which we have raised significant concerns , does not fall within the scope of this Agreement , but should be the subject of a separate recommendation .
The main objectives of the Agreement are to minimise the duplication of assessments , tests and controls , unless these reflect significant regulatory differences , and to enable both the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's certification systems .
Among other aspects , this will be achieved through progressive approximation of both parties ' sets of requirements and regulatory processes .
This Agreement should generate savings for European and Canadian aviation companies thanks to shorter and simpler , and hence less costly , product-approval procedures and the mutual acceptance of certification findings .
This Agreement concerns certain safety aspects of civil aviation , without getting into issues of creating a full Open Aviation Area between these two countries , which , according to the rapporteur , should be the subject of a separate recommendation .
The main objective of the Agreement is to minimise the duplication of assessments , tests and controls , unless these reflect significant regulatory differences , and to enable both the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's certification systems .
This Agreement should generate savings for European and Canadian aviation companies thanks to shorter and simpler , and hence less costly , product-approval procedures and the mutual acceptance of certification findings .
According to the rapporteur , the Agreement could also increase safety , as regulators and enforcement authorities are moving closer to cooperation in all matters of certification , inspections and enforcement , in order to ensure the highest level of safety for passengers and cargo flights .
in writing . - ( SK ) The recommendation applies to the Safety Agreement signed on behalf of the European Community in May 2009 .
From the perspective of concluding the Agreement on civil aviation safety , which supplements the Air Transport Agreement , Canada was properly regarded as a priority , because both Europe and Canada host manufacturers of aircraft , engines and avionics , occupying a leading position on the world market .
Just as with the similar Air Safety Agreement with the US , the main objective was to minimise duplication of assessments , tests and inspections , and to enable the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's certification systems .
The agreement thus generally follows the structure of the existing bilateral agreements on civil aviation safety concluded between the Member States and Canada .
It assigns obligations and sets out methods of cooperation , based on mutual trust in the systems of the other party , and on a comparison of regulatory differences .
European and Canadian companies will save millions of euro a year thanks to shorter , simpler and less costly product approval procedures and the mutual recognition of findings relating to certification .
It will also be of benefit to the airlines , representing a major advance in terms of establishing international standards in the area of civil aviation safety .
I therefore take the view that it is right for Parliament to approve the conclusion of the Agreement , as it will make both the Canadian and the European markets more competitive and at the same time safer .
in writing . - ( IT ) The recommendation in question concerns the Agreement of 6 May 2009 on civil aviation safety .
Given the climate of collaboration within the Agreement , I can confirm my vote in favour .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because the key objectives set out in the negotiating directives were to minimise the duplication of assessments , tests and controls ( unless these reflected significant regulatory differences ) and to enable both the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's certification systems .
This would be achieved by progressive approximation of the two sets of requirements and regulatory processes , by regular consultations between the parties to verify the continued fitness and ability of the regulatory bodies involved in the implementation of the Agreement , and by establishing a joint committee which would propose solutions to any problem arising from its implementation .
To maintain confidence in each other 's systems , the agreement foresees joint inspections , investigations , exchange of safety data ( aircraft inspections and accident-related information ) and increased regulatory cooperation and consultation at a technical level to solve matters before they can become disputes .
It provides for the creation of a joint committee and sub-committees in areas such as certification of airworthiness and maintenance .
There are also strong safeguard measures that would ultimately allow either side to suspend acceptance of the finding of the other competent authority or to terminate the Agreement in whole or in part .
Nevertheless the entire system of consultations , committees and sub-committees is intended to ensure that any differences are resolved well before reaching this stage .
The 2009 Agreement on civil aviation safety is a first step towards establishing a full Open Aviation Area between the EU and Canada .
In order to maintain confidence in each other 's systems , the Agreement foresees joint inspections , exchange of safety data , increased regulatory cooperation and consultation at a technical level to solve matters before they can become ' disputes ' .
Moreover , the creation of a joint committee and several sub-committees will permit European and Canadian enterprises to save millions of euros every year thanks to mutual acceptance of certification findings .
Importing authorities will be able to issue their own certificates on aeronautical products , parts or appliances without duplicating all the assessments carried out by the exporting authority .
Aviation companies will also reap the benefits of the Agreement in so much as it provides for the use of each other 's repair and maintenance facilities .
The Agreement will not only make the Canadian and European markets more competitive , it will also reinforce global security .
Finally , we feel that this Agreement is important in that it establishes international standards for civil aviation safety and should serve as a starting point for future negotiations with other significant producers of aircraft .
in writing . - This agreement is the most ambitious air transport agreement between the EU and an important global partner .
The Agreement will not only make the Canadian and European markets more competitive , it will also make them safer as regulators and enforcement authorities are moving closer to cooperation in all matters of certification , inspections and enforcement , to ensure the highest level of safety for passengers and cargo flights .
The Agreement represents an important step forward in terms of establishing international standards for civil aviation safety and should serve as a starting point for future negotiations with other significant producers of aircraft and equipment .
I support Silvia-Adriana Ticau .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Agreement between the EU and Canada on civil aviation safety , which is a supplement to the Air Transport Agreement with Canada , is intended to remove technical trade barriers .
In essence , the aim is to minimise duplicated assessments , tests and controls insofar as possible and to enable uniform certification .
A joint committee is to be established to find possible solutions to problems that arise during implementation .
Collaboration and mutual recognition of certification are to apply to the areas of airworthiness and maintenance .
For the future , there is potential for unlimited mutual recognition .
In addition to the joint committee , which is to deal with practical problems and disputes , there are also plans for joint inspections and investigations and the exchange of safety data .
It is to be welcomed that strong safeguard measures will allow the acceptance of the findings of the other competent authority to be suspended or the Agreement to be terminated should this become necessary .
The Agreement is to be supported provided the product-approval procedures become shorter and simpler without compromising on safety standards .
in writing . - ( DE ) This recommendation deals with the Agreement on civil aviation safety , signed on 6 May 2009 on behalf of the ( then ) European Community .
At present , only six Member States have bilateral agreements on product certification with Canada .
These will become redundant when the Agreement on civil aviation safety between the EU and Canada comes into force .
The strong safeguard measures allow the acceptance of the findings of the other competent authorities to be suspended or the Agreement to be terminated should this become advisable .
It would be possible to terminate the Agreement as a whole or just in part .
The Agreement is to be supported provided the product approval procedures become shorter and simpler without compromising on safety standards .
in writing . - ( LT ) An Agreement on civil aviation safety between the European Community and Canada has undoubted benefits for both parties .
It should be noted that the most important aviation technology manufacturers are located in the EU and Canada .
For both parties , the level of trade and exports in this area is enormous .
In order to achieve effective cooperation in the area of aviation safety , it is crucial to ensure that the certification systems meet the requirements of both parties .
I am pleased that , during negotiations , an agreement was reached on minimising the duplication of assessments , tests and controls .
I believe that it is advisable to give the importing authority the right to issue its own certificate on the aeronautical product , thus preventing the duplication of assessments carried out by the exporting authority .
Mutual acceptance in the areas of airworthiness , maintenance and maintenance licensing proves the confidence both parties have in each other 's systems .
This Agreement will facilitate improved cooperation between the regulatory bodies of both parties in all areas of certification , inspections , enforcement and consultation .
Carrying out joint inspections , investigations , and exchanging safety data will ensure the highest level of safety for passengers and cargo flights .
It should be noted that with this Agreement 's entry into force product approval and licensing procedures will become more flexible , shorter and cheaper .
This will lower costs for companies in this sector .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of the Agreement on civil aviation safety between the European Community and Canada because I feel it presents a clear advantage for the European Union in so much as it establishes mutual recognition of documentation supplied in all sectors relevant to aviation for all the Member States .
The Agreement foresees joint inspections , investigations , exchange of safety data , increased cooperation and consultations at a technical level .
Relying on each other 's certification systems means strengthening the security of the system , saving on time which would otherwise be lost through duplicating all the assessments carried out by the exporting authority , and guaranteeing benefits for aviation companies thanks to the possibility of using each other 's repair and maintenance facilities .
All this will make aviation markets more competitive and more secure .
I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of an agreement between the European Community and Canada on civil aviation safety .
Like the Air Safety Agreement with the US , the key objectives set out in the negotiations were to minimise the duplication of assessments , tests and controls and enable both the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's certification systems .
This would be achieved by progressive approximation of the two sets of requirements and regulatory processes , and by regular consultations between the parties to verify the continued fitness and ability of the regulatory bodies involved in implementing the Agreement .
These measures may result in savings of millions of euro a year for European and Canadian companies thanks to shorter and simpler , and hence less costly , product-approval procedures .
Mutual acceptance of certification findings constitutes a massive benefit for the EU , given that it will establish mutual acceptance of certification findings in all areas of airworthiness for all Member States .
The key objectives here are to enable the EU and Canada to rely on each other 's certification systems .
This would be achieved by progressive approximation of the two sets of requirements and regulatory processes , by regular consultations between the parties to verify the continued fitness and ability of the regulatory bodies involved in the implementation of the Agreement , and by establishing a joint committee which would propose solutions to any problem arising from its implementation .
The Agreement broadly follows the structure of the existing Bilateral Aviation Safety Agreements ( BASA ) between the Member States and Canada .
It is based on mutual trust of each other 's systems and on the comparison of regulatory differences .
Hence it places obligations and provides methods of cooperation so as to enable the importing authority to issue its own certificate on aeronautical products , parts or appliances without duplicating all the assessments carried out by the exporting authority .
So that the Canadian and European markets will become more competitive and more secure , and so that product-approval procedures will become shorter and simpler , I am voting in favour of the proposal in question .
, in writing . - ( CS ) I have no major reservations about the EU-Canada Agreement on civil aviation safety .
I nonetheless abstained from the vote .
The reason for this is the unresolved situation in the relationship between the EU , the Czech Republic and Canada regarding the lifting of the unilateral visa requirement for Czech citizens .
I have repeatedly warned that the Parliament of the Czech Republic will block ratification of the related aviation agreement for the same reasons .
I would like to call on the Commission finally to address this problem with full seriousness .
The lukewarm attitude of Commissioner Malmström is the reason why the situation remains unresolved after two years , and it has contributed to the deterioration in relations between the Czech Republic and Canada .
in writing . - In favour .
This recommendation deals with the Safety Agreement that was signed on behalf of the ( then ) European Community on 6 May 2009 .
The EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement , signed on 17-18 December 2009 and which will finally establish a full Open Aviation Area between the EU and Canada , will be the subject of a separate recommendation .
Only six Member States currently have bilateral agreements with Canada covering product certification .
These will lapse when the EU-Canada Civil Aviation Safety Agreement ( " the Agreement ” ) enters into force .
As the removal of technical barriers to trade in goods comes within the exclusive competence of the Union , the Agreement can be concluded by means of a Council Decision .
Unlike the Air Transport Agreement , it is not subject to provisional application and does not require ratification by the Member States .
It is appropriate that Canada was seen as a priority for an Air Safety Agreement to complement the Air Transport Agreement as Europe and Canada each have aircraft , engine and avionics manufacturers that are world leaders .
The combined exports of civil aviation technology exceed € 50 billion while European and Canadian overall trade in aircraft , spacecraft and parts was worth more than € 49 billion in 2008 .
This Agreement on civil aviation safety , concluded between the EU and Canada , follows the horizontal agreement already adopted by Parliament in March 2011 .
Canada is a strategic country in this area for EU Member States , as both parties are world leaders in the manufacture of aircraft , engines and avionics ; it is also currently the EU 's 11th-most important trade partner .
The objectives of this Agreement focus on making trade in goods and services easier by removing technical barriers , and on reducing duplication of regulatory airworthiness assessments , tests and controls by implementing the reciprocity principle .
The creation of an Open Aviation Area will bring economic benefits for both parties .
Greater simplification and reduction of administrative costs to European and Canadian companies will bring greater economic competitiveness and safety for passengers .
As a substitute member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I voted in favour of this report , but I would stress again that Parliament should take up its new responsibilities enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , and be kept informed at all stages of the process of negotiating international agreements .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Agreement is intended to minimise duplicated assessments , tests and controls by enabling both parties to use the certification system of the other .
This mutual trust in the system operated by the contracting party is based on an approximation of the requirements and regulatory processes , as well as regular consultations between the parties and the establishment of a joint committee .
Because of the shorter and more cost-effective product-approval procedures permitted , the companies working in that sector will save millions each year and will be able to increase their competitiveness .
The Agreement will make the market more competitive and safer , because enforcement authorities will be required to cooperate more extensively .
This report notes that sound financial discipline and transparency in the allocation of funds are key preconditions for achieving cohesion policy 's overall objectives , contributing towards increasing accountability as regards strategic objectives .
Additional efforts are needed to avoid excessive delays and to improve implementation performance .
I would also stress the need for more synergies with other policy instruments .
Cohesion policy should continue to help the poorest regions catch up and adapt its objectives to present and future challenges , providing smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , in line with the Europe 2020 strategy .
Cohesion policy has greater potential today than ever before , and this should not be underestimated ; it is capable of improving less-developed regions characterised by permanent geographical or natural disadvantages .
To leave unused or squander unnecessarily the resources available would be a terrible shame , and it is therefore right to adopt with urgency a results-oriented approach through the establishment of clear and measurable targets and outcome indicators .
The first step , which should apply for all Community resources , is to simplify procedures and make allocation of funds more flexible by reducing bureaucratic barriers , the excessive administrative costs and other obstacles that hamper policy goals regarding employment and the fight against poverty .
Let us not forget that cohesion policy is a long-term mechanism ; therefore , beginning to work on solid ground , establishing precise goals and allocating clear competences to each level of governance are factors of progress which will produce visible results only in the second part of the programming period .
Achieving social , economic and territorial cohesion is one of the important objectives of the European project .
This is a target which all Member States have established as part of the European integration process .
This is precisely why I think that the process for funding cohesion projects must be based on rigorous financial discipline , implementation in strategic areas and , last but not least , on the principle of good governance .
The aim is to reduce the disparities across Europe 's regions .
However , the whole procedure for implementing this policy needs to be simplified in order to achieve this desired goal .
Funds must be used and I believe that we need to overcome the biggest enemy stalling projects of this kind or making them grind to a halt : excessive European red tape .
We must not confuse bureaucracy with transparency , because not every entry registered on a piece of paper or every approval recorded in a file contributes to making cohesion projects transparent .
The disparities between European regions have evolved over long periods of time .
I support the report 's proposal that , in order to reduce these inequalities and streamline the European integration process for all Member States , we need to reduce the period required for funding approval and cut red tape and all the rules and procedures along with it , which needlessly hinder rather than help the European Union 's cohesion policy .
The implementation report drawn up by my colleague Mr Mikolášik presents an excellent track record of what cohesion policy has achieved over the 2007-2013 financial period .
It shows that this policy is useful , since its contribution to achieving the objective of economic , social and territorial cohesion within the European Union is undeniable .
Finally , I should like to emphasise that the adoption of this report comes at an ideal time , for it has enriched the debate on the future of cohesion policy ( 2014-2020 ) .
Indeed , the European Commission will shortly publish its proposals with a view to updating and therefore improving this policy .
The vote on the ' cohesion ' package sends a clear message concerning our desire to have a cohesion policy that shows solidarity , and is effective and ambitious , as it remains one of the most important European policies .
Indeed , at a time when the global crisis has worsened the socio-economic situation of many regions , and when we are already debating future cohesion policy , it was crucial for the European Parliament to stress its opposition to any attempt to nationalise cohesion policy or make it more sector-specific .
In this report in particular , which sought to assess the implementation of the programmes , the European Parliament drew up an assessment and highlighted the successes , difficulties and possible solutions .
This will be of great help for the months to come , when the European Union will introduce a new cohesion policy from 2013 that will have to remedy the shortcomings of the current policy .
In particular , it will be important to simplify and accelerate the allocation procedures , especially in favour of SMEs , and to encourage funding through multi-funds and cross-funding .
I therefore voted for this report , as I did for the other three , to reiterate my commitment to this fundamental policy , whilst at the same time calling for certain changes that have become necessary for dealing with new challenges .
The Member States , as evidenced by facts and figures published in national reports , are making progress in delivering cohesion policy objectives , despite the fact that some heterogeneity at the level of states and regions has been noted .
I recall , moreover , that cohesion policy is a long-term mechanism and that most of the results will become visible only later in the programming period .
In my opinion , the fundamental preconditions for achieving the overall objectives of cohesion policy are sound financial discipline and , above all , transparency in the allocation of funds .
The issue of the architecture of the future cohesion policy for the period 2014-2020 will be at the heart of the political debate in the coming years .
In the context of negotiations for the future programming period , I believe that a strong and well-financed EU regional policy is an essential condition for achieving social , economic and territorial cohesion in the EU .
Therefore , funds intended for cohesion policy in the next programming period should not be subject to any reduction .
Furthermore , in order to avoid scenarios whereby funds remain unused because of excessively complicated regulations and procedures , it is essential that management and implementation of cohesion policy be simplified .
This motion for a European Parliament resolution on the Report 2010 on the implementation of the cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 encompasses points which are contrary to the principles of our political stance , and it therefore cannot be supported .
In particular , the motion calls for an improvement and facilitation of services to the Roma community , which is defined by the motion as a ' marginalised ' community .
The Lega Nord has always stressed that the Roma minority cannot be considered to be the victim of any kind of social ' marginalisation ' in that it is this minority itself which refuses to integrate itself into our society .
Therefore , I feel that this motion , which considers the Roma to be victims of marginalisation and calls for their privileged treatment on the basis of this presumed marginalisation , cannot be approved .
Hence my vote against it .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because cohesion policy continues to prove its relevance as it greatly contributes to the improvement of the socio-economic environment .
Furthermore , cohesion policy is aimed at reducing disparities in the levels of development of European regions , facilitates the pursuit of modernisation and sustainable growth , and demonstrates European solidarity .
As such , it has proved to be essential to the progress of European integration while establishing synergies between various European policies .
Clearly , European regions still face striking economic , social and environmental disparities .
Some of these are consequences of the last two enlargements , while others have been accentuated by the direct effects of the global financial and economic crisis .
The Member States have embraced new requirements in a positive way and they are making progress in delivering cohesion policy objectives , as evidenced by facts and figures provided in national reports , though with a certain inherent heterogeneity at state and regional levels .
Bearing in mind that the European Social Fund ( ESF ) is a basic tool for combating poverty , social exclusion , unemployment , gender inequalities and social discrimination ( against people with disabilities , migrants , older people , etc . ) , by getting people into jobs , the European Parliament calls on the Commission to strengthen the ESF 's potential and its financial autonomy .
Furthermore , we should simplify project management , harmonise and improve procedures and controls , and follow up ongoing projects more effectively .
Cohesion policy constitutes one of the targets of the EU 2020 strategy and for this reason it is necessary to pay greater attention to the coordination of activities between the EU and the Member States which depend on this sector .
I , therefore , voted in favour of this document .
The economic crisis , as well as the reform made to the policy for the period 2007-2013 , have caused activity in Europe to slow down .
With a view to benefitting fully from the potential offered by cohesion policy , as the rapporteur has illustrated clearly , it is necessary to commit in a more determined manner to reducing the gap between the highly-developed EU regions and those that are less developed .
Pursuing this goal is , in my opinion , possible by increasing the funds intended for cohesion policy and facilitating greater control over project approval and over methods of investment .



in writing . - On the Pieper , Sanchez-Schmid , Stavrakakis , Vlasak and Mikolasik reports : Conservative MEPs have elected to reject these reports on the future direction of Cohesion policy , with the exception of the Vlasak report where we have abstained .
This is due to a number of fundamental reasons : it is our contention that at a time of ongoing fiscal consolidation across Member States , it is totally unacceptable that the EU 's large Cohesion budget should remain untouched by these efforts .
Generally , these reports fail to meet Conservative concerns regarding the EU 's management of Cohesion policy in any meaningful way .
They reject any moves to allow richer Member States to fund their own regional development and prevent the emergence of a smaller , more efficient and more targeted Cohesion policy towards Europe 's poorest regions .
Instead , new vehicles of bureaucracy such as the macro-regional entities are proposed , and the nation-state is once again undermined by a determined shift towards regionalism .
This age of austerity offers an opportunity for the EU to spend less on old and wasteful priorities .
These reports go in entirely the wrong direction .
in writing . - Dossiers that analyse the effectiveness with which EU legislation has been transposed within Member States are of crucial importance .
I echo the conclusions of the rapporteur , especially those that concern the importance of SMEs to European economies and the need to facilitate access to finance as well as the need for greater encouragement for SMEs to enhance innovation , thus increasing competitiveness .
For these reasons , amongst others , I have decided to vote in favour of this dossier .
In the context of the current crisis that the European Union is going through , the recently introduced cohesion policy is one of the effective ways to kick-start the EU 's economy .
The Mikolášik report on the implementation of the cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 , which I supported , is in this respect a useful contribution for redefining the objectives of such a policy .
By calling for simplified , enhanced and transparent aid allocation within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy , this report seeks to stimulate the European cohesion programmes in order to address administrative burdens , the latter being the reason why most allocated funds are currently being withheld .
I voted in favour of the report on the implementation of cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 , as I believe that it is necessary to adapt cohesion policy to the challenges that the European regions are facing , supporting smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
Cohesion policy remains one of the most important pillars of EU policy , as it is fundamental for realising the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
For this very reason , cohesion policy should continue to strongly support all the European regions , contributing to smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
At a time when Europe is experiencing an unprecedented economic , financial and social crisis , which is particularly affecting certain regions that were already weaker , it is vital for the future that cohesion policy continue to play its fundamental role in balanced and sustainable development .
This document , for which the rapporteur is Mr Mikolášik , follows the Commission communication entitled ' Cohesion policy : Strategic Report 2010 on the implementation of the programmes 2007-2013 ' .
This is the first rigorous assessment of the implementation of the some 450 operational programmes adopted by the Commission .
EU cohesion policy is part of a European framework of solidarity that encompasses the 27 Member States and their 271 regions , and aims to end existing economic and social disparities within the EU .
This report is of even greater importance given the economic and financial crisis that Europe is experiencing , so it should be an instrument for reallocating and maximising cohesion funding .
Indeed , given the low rate of implementation , there is a need to create mechanisms enabling the most disadvantaged Member States to make use of the funds allocated to them or risk them being forced to return these funds to the EU , which will redistribute them to richer countries .
I welcome the adoption of this report , for which I voted , not only because of the solutions it proposes , but also because of the structure that it suggests for future cohesion policy .
This report acknowledges the existing problems with cohesion policy , beginning with the delayed conclusion of negotiations on the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) and the legislative package , resulting in the belated implementation of the national strategies and operational programmes .
These factors are compounded by the inadequacy of the funds provided for the 2007-2013 period , particularly taking account of the enlargement of the EU , and the use of only 27.1 % of available resources in the current period , as well as the continuation of national cofinancing and the administrative burden .
This situation lays bare some of the errors and weaknesses of cohesion policy which we have always denounced .
Countries like Portugal are drifting ever further from the promised economic and social development that would move them closer to the EU average .
National cofinancing continues to be an obstacle to accessing funds , particularly for countries with weaker economies , which continue to see many millions of euro returned to the countries that benefit most from the main EU policies , specifically the Economic and Monetary Union and the internal market .
This increases the disparity between these countries rather than reducing it .
This report acknowledges the existing problems with cohesion policy , beginning with the delayed conclusion of negotiations on the Multiannual Financial Framework and the legislative package , resulting in the belated implementation of the national strategies and operational programmes , the inadequacy of the funds provided for the 2007-2013 period , particularly taking account of the enlargement of the EU , and the use of only 27.1 % of available resources in the current period , as well as the continuation of national cofinancing and the bureaucratic burden This makes clear the errors and weaknesses of cohesion policy , which we have always denounced .
Countries like Portugal are drifting ever further from the promised economic and social development that would move them closer to the EU average .
All this is exacerbated by the key policies of the EU , particularly the Economic and Monetary Union , internal market competition and the liberalisation of international trade , among other issues .
in writing . - ( SK ) The reports on implementation analyse the implementation of EU regulations in national law and their enforcement in the Member States .
In the case of cohesion policy , the legislative framework is made up of directly applicable regulations .
The Commission report entitled ' Cohesion policy : Strategic report 2010 on the implementation of the programmes 2007-2013 ' thus analyses whether Member States have duly applied the legislation , as well as the way in which Member States have understood the Community 's strategic guidelines and managed them when implementing the national strategic reference frameworks and operational programmes .
Cohesion policy demonstrates its importance , making a substantial contribution to improvements in the socio-economic environment .
The Member States are making progress in achieving its goals , as confirmed by the facts and data mentioned in the national reports .
However , the fundamental preconditions for fulfilling the overall objectives of cohesion policy are , of course , proper financial discipline and transparency in the allocation of funds .
The submission of strategic reports may , as a new instrument , be of considerable benefit for increasing responsibility in the fulfilment of policy objectives .
Likewise , steps leading to the simplification of the management and implementation of cohesion policy are still highly desirable and justifiable in order to fulfil the aims of this policy and thus contribute to European solidarity .
I voted in favour , because despite the problems with using money from the Cohesion Fund , current cohesion policy should continue to be pursued consistently , in view of its long-term objective .
Cohesion of the Union means effective use of the potential of economically backward regions and growth by using the effect of scale throughout the Union .
Hence the concentration on investments in communications infrastructure , which will make it easier for the single market to function , and on ecology .
In the new financial perspective the funds must not be frittered away on sectoral projects .
There is also a need for an improvement in cohesion within Member States and for better use of financial resources earmarked for infrastructure investments related to climate change , such as hydrotechnical constructions .
Poor use is being made in Poland , for example , of money from the Cohesion Fund earmarked for public communications projects , such as railways , trams and the Internet .
Attention needs to be paid to making more effective use of resources by recycling .
The percentage of Union resources allocated to thermomodernisation is also too low , particularly in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
It is in the interest of the Union for the divide between the important centre and the developmentally backward peripheries to disappear , so that the peripheral regions will not just be market outlets and reservoirs of workers .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Swedish Conservatives do not share the enthusiasm expressed in the report for the use of the structural funds in cohesion policy .
We are critical of the system 's current structure and scope , but how the funds are used is nevertheless important .
This own-initiative report does not advocate the allocation of additional resources to the funds , and it also states that priority should be given to research and development in the appropriations .
As a result , we were able to support the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because corrective measures need to be taken promptly to improve poor project performance in certain priority areas .
The document recommends carrying out an in-depth analysis of the implementation problems in areas with specific delays in project selection .
In this context it calls on Member States to step up efforts to improve project selection in areas where there are delays , and to accelerate implementation of all selected projects to avoid the risk of failing to achieve the agreed objectives .
The report underlines the fact that SMEs play an important innovative role in the economy , and it is therefore necessary to develop this sector inter alia through the implementation of the Small Business Act , facilitate SMEs ' access to financing and operating capital , encourage SMEs to become involved in innovative projects , and strengthen their competitiveness and potential for greater employment .
I believe that the effective selection and implementation of projects in some areas is hampered by the lack of relevant preconditions such as simpler application procedures at national level , clear national priorities for certain areas of intervention , timely transposition of EU laws and consolidated institutional and administrative capacity , as well as by excessive red tape at national level .
The document therefore calls on Member States and regions to facilitate policy implementation by tackling these challenges , above all by adapting the legal framework in the field of state aid , public procurement and environmental rules , and pursuing institutional reforms .
Cohesion policy has always been an essential element of the European Economic Recovery Plan through which the role of Structural Funds becomes clear to everyone .
With small businesses specifically in mind , as these are understood to be agents of development within the territory , cohesion measures have been promoted with a view to supporting regional labour markets by reducing gender segregation and inequalities , to facilitating interinstitutional dialogue , and to improving infrastructure and services for disadvantaged microregions with high concentrations of socially marginalised groups .
These interventions , which are only some of many , are specific and necessary in order to maintain the equilibriums that are essential for the territories .
My support for this report recognises the excellent work carried out by Mr Mikolášik and hopes that cohesion policy , even in the next programming period , continues on its path of aggregation and development of territories and the European economy .
Implementation of cohesion policy from 2007-2013 deserves to have Parliament 's attention for several important reasons , which are as follows : systematic growth of cohesion is strategically important for the future of the Union ; the Cohesion Fund is an opportunity for the new Member States and for regions subject to particularly difficult conditions of development ; reservations concerning implementation of policy have been expressed in recent years by the Committee on Budgetary Control because of the rate of error , which is too high .
The Mikolášik report is deserving of support .
This strategic reporting exercise represents a new feature of cohesion policy .
It provides timely evidence of the progress in implementation throughout the EU-27 and promotes transparency of measures through integration with the Community 's priorities .
The progress made by the Member States can be considered reasonable , given the context of serious deterioration in the socio-economic situation due to the global crisis and to the reform made to the policy for the period 2007-2013 .
In many respects , there is still an obvious gap between different EU regions .
Progress varies significantly between countries and across themes : certain strategic areas are facing particular delays in project selection .
Areas of special concern , where an in-depth analysis of the reasons for the delays should be carried out , are the following : the rail sector , certain energy and environmental investments , digital economy , social inclusion , governance and capacity building .
Therefore , additional efforts are needed to avoid excessive delays , strengthen performance of the implementation and to ensure higher financial discipline .
Cohesion policy continues to prove its relevance as it contributes considerably to the improvement of the socio-economic environment .
The fundamental preconditions for achieving the overall objectives of cohesion policy are sound financial discipline and transparency in the allocation of funds .
in writing . - ( LT ) Cohesion policy is a guarantee for improving our socio-economic environment , which helps reduce disparities between the levels of development of the regions , and facilitates the pursuit of modernisation and sustainable growth .
It is an effective and efficient tool for responding to socio-economic challenges brought about by the financial crisis .
In order to reduce the disparities between the less developed and highly developed EU regions , the Member States must be encouraged to improve the absorption capacity of Structural and Cohesion Funds .
The Member States must participate more actively in the implementation of cohesion policy programmes .
In pursuing these objectives , it is important to ensure that projects are selected and properly implemented without any delays .
Consequently , there must be an efficient control and monitoring mechanism , and a reduction in bureaucracy and the administrative burden .
It should be noted that special attention should be paid and financing should be allocated to transport , which is a crucial factor in implementing territorial , economic and social cohesion .
I am disappointed that investment in the rail sector is below the level of investment in the road sector .
Moreover , the delay in investment in the rail sector is doing enormous damage to the implementation of the TEN-T network .
It should be noted that for small businesses the Structural Funds are a crucial tool for economic stimulus .
It is essential to use the opportunities offered by these funds to establish favourable operating conditions for SMEs , improving financing opportunities , and promoting participation in various innovative projects and cooperation at local and regional levels .
Cohesion policy is a fundamental pillar of socio-economic development , and the Member States have received the new requirements positively and are quickly acknowledging the EU 's guidelines , making relevant progress in achieving the targets of political cohesion .
This is what emerges from the report on the Report 2010 ; therefore , in the hope that we will continue on this road , I am voting in favour of the report on the implementation of the cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 .
Moreover , the report formulates proposals and recommendations for greater transparency and flexibility in the allocation and use of European funds .
Cohesion policy is vital to an improved socio-economic environment in Europe and is a practical expression of solidarity between the Member States .
However , the report rightly highlights the belated completion of strategic and operational programmes , due to the difficult negotiating procedures ; however , it also mentions - and this is an important point for Greece - that the EU needs to find ways of dealing with these delays when they arise due to scarce public resources available for cofinancing projects .
At the same time , it is important to emphasise , at every opportunity , that the basic precondition to attaining the global objectives of cohesion policy is sound financial management , accountability and transparency in the allocation of funds .
This can be achieved by submitting regular progress reports and by improving the efficacy of the public administration .
Cohesion policy is a fundamental pillar of EU policy and one of the driving forces behind the creation of a one-speed Europe , as it contributes to improving the socio-economic climate .
The Member States are making progress in delivering cohesion policy objectives , as evidenced by the national reports , although there is a certain inherent heterogeneity between states and regions .
This policy does not offer immediate results : it is a long-term mechanism .
Indeed , the full picture for the 2007-2013 programming period will be visible only in 2015 , two years after the second strategic report , since certain countries have two more years to use all the allocated funding .
I voted in favour of this report , which , among other aspects , draws attention to the fact that effective selection and implementation of projects in some areas is hampered by factors which should be combated .
I would like to highlight the late conclusion of the negotiations on the Multiannual Financial Framework and this policy 's legislative package , resulting in belated completion of the national strategies and operational programmes , and in the scarcity of public resources available for cofinancing in Member States .
It is imperative that these issues be addressed so that the objectives of the process can be fully achieved .
This report analyses whether legislation has been properly applied by the Member States as well as the way in which the Member States have understood and followed the Community Strategic Guidelines when implementing their National Strategic Reference Frameworks and Operational Programmes .
The report has been elaborated mainly on the basis of the following two documents : the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament , the Council and the Court of Auditors entitled ' Cohesion Policy : Strategic Report 2010 on the implementation of the programmes 2007-2013 ' , and the Commission Staff Working Document accompanying the Communication .
Core assessments have been made on the implementation of the programmes , while taking into account for the purposes of comparative analysis differences of several months , because such differences could influence the volume of allocations made to a particular sector .
Core assessments have similarly been made on the strategic reporting exercise , which provides timely evidence of the progress of implementation throughout the whole of Europe , offering a basis for high-level debate , peer review , policy learning and an incentive to improve the quality of performance , even if there are certain limitations in these reports .
So that accountability in delivering policy objectives might be increased , I express my vote in favour of the proposal .
in writing . - It is important for the EU to maintain its focus on disadvantaged areas to ensure they do not suffer further in the current economic crisis .
Helping poorer regions also helps more affluent ones by increasing spending power in neighbouring markets , which is one of the things the single market is all about .
Structural funding is of immense use in tackling challenges in these regions and we must guarantee it continues to operate effectively , delivering sustainable and inclusive growth .
This report commented on the delays in project selection for areas such as the rail sector , energy , the environment , the digital economy , social inclusion , governance and capacity building .
These are key issues for competitiveness and therefore a key issue for economic growth .
The EU must ensure excessive delays in respect of the allocation of funds are avoided .
in writing . - In favour .
The draft report was rather weak , but could have been considerably improved by 22 compromise amendments and a number of stronger paragraphs from different opinions , e.g. in the field of social cohesion ( para 7 and 19 ) , gender mainstreaming ( para 9 ) , decarbonisation of transport ( para 11 ) , energy efficiency ( para 14 ) and environment and climate protection ( para 15 ) .
Our formulation about the synergies among funds ( " each fund needs its own rules " , para 28 ) could be integrated as well as our call for increasing cross-financing ( para 29 ) and strengthening partnership ( para 33 ) and transparency ( para 3 ) .
We also have good wording on realigning programmes to sustainable development ( para 35 ) .
However , we could not avoid jubilation for the Lisbon earmarking ( para 5 and 20 ) and a call for better financing TEN-T projects ( para 12 ) .
More Green focus for measures to exit from the crisis could not have been achieved neither ( para 27 ) .
Article 174 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union establishes that the EU ' shall develop and pursue its actions leading to the strengthening of its economic , social and territorial cohesion ' , and it has therefore set Union funds for the 2007-2013 period at EUR 347 billion , which corresponds to 35.7 % of the overall EU budget .
I am voting in favour of this report as it sets out an accurate analysis of the current state of Union funds by demonstrating the areas in which , up until now , EUR 93.4 million has been spent , suggests recommendations and areas for improvement , contributes to resolving the economic and financial crisis , and promotes best practices and mutual learning at regional level .
I would like to highlight the fact that the implementation of EU funds varies between the different Member States , and it is important for the EU to understand the difficulties that some countries have had in taking corrective action in order to actively contribute to the wider uptake of EU funds , in line with the Europe 2020 strategy .
Finally , I would also like to congratulate the Member States on their efforts in putting together the first national strategy report , actively contributing to greater transparency , flexibility , effectiveness and accountability for cohesion policy funds .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report on the implementation of the cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 as cohesion policy is vital to achieving the Europe 2020 objectives , especially in the areas of employment and social matters .
I deplore the delays that there have been in the selection process for projects in strategic areas such as transport , certain energy and environmental investments , the digital economy , social inclusion , governance and reinforcement of administrative capacities .
Effective selection and implementation of projects in some areas are hampered by missing relevant preconditions such as simpler application procedures at national level , clear national priorities for certain areas of intervention , prompt transposition of EU laws , consolidated institutional and administrative capacities and excessive domestic red tape .
I think that establishing a European intermodal transport system , based on the TEN-T network and interconnecting it with national road , rail and inland waterway projects , is vital to ensuring territorial , economic and social cohesion .
I regret the inadequate investment in projects promoting energy efficiency and renewable energy resources for housing and for housing projects aimed at marginalised communities .
In future , Europe must make considerable investment in innovation , education and new technologies .
in writing . - ( DE ) The strategic report on the implementation of the operational programmes cofinanced under the auspices of cohesion policy is a new instrument that will be essential for transparency and that will help the public understand this complex issue in the future .
Every year the Court of Auditors uncovers enormous irregularities in the distribution of subsidies .
If used correctly , this instrument could play a significant role in helping to stop this .
For this reason , I am in favour of the improvements suggested by the rapporteur , particularly those that relate to the quality of the reports produced by the Member States , ensuring effective controls in the future .
I am voting for this report , as it examines the needs of urban areas , focusing mainly on two aspects : basic infrastructure , and smart investment in infrastructures and services based on technological advances .
I also agree with the call for attention to be given to strategic planning principles , and with the need for cross-financing that is more flexible between the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
European urban diversity must be supported primarily by a flexible mechanism for implementing cohesion policy and by coordinating and adapting urban development projects according to the development needs and strategic guidelines of each city individually .
There is talk about smart urban development and about the need for cities to improve and modernise their infrastructure and the services they offer .
To ensure that this is not an idle notion , I think that we must put our trust in the local authorities and elected representatives of those cities .
We should listen to what communities want , initiate any construction based on their list of priorities and have the belief that mayors know best what are or should be the priorities for their cities .
This is precisely why I firmly believe , along with the rapporteur , that the offer of EU funding must meet local demand and the integrated strategic planning principles at EU level .
Therefore , the European Urban Agenda must help reduce disparities in the strategic areas which every modern European city needs , namely , infrastructure , research and innovation , transport , environment , education , health and culture .
This is because adopting an integrated approach to cohesion policy is the only way in which we will help today 's cities develop in an organic , sustainable and environmentally responsible manner .
in writing . - Mr. President , the report on the " European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy " stresses the fact that , further to the significant contribution of cohesion policy interventions to the development of urban areas , a range of other EU policies ( such as environment , transport and energy ) have a strong impact on urban development .
For this reason the Commission should proceed with a territorial impact assessment of sectorial policies to enhance an effective EU Urban Agenda .
The report also underlines that one of the weaknesses of the Lisbon Strategy was the lack of well-functioning multi-level governance and the insufficient involvement of regional , local authorities and civil society in the design , implementation , communication and evaluation stages of the strategy .
Taking this lack into account , it 's imperative to improve the governance system for the EU2020 Strategy , with greater integration of stakeholders at all stages .
As Vice-Chair of the working group on urban issues , I attach great importance to the impact that cohesion policy can have in our towns , especially in areas that are struggling .
I voted in favour of this report , for in it my colleague Mr Vlasák promotes an important role for urban areas and comes up with a clever compromise between local , national and European responsibilities .
Finally , I am keen to add that I intend to carry on working on the connections that need to be developed between urban areas and rural areas , the latter being all too often forgotten in territorial planning policies .
While a large majority of the European population live in towns and while these towns are facing new challenges , the urban agenda within cohesion policy remained relatively unknown , disorderly and therefore inadequate .
Today 's vote was the chance to emphasise the need to strengthen cooperation between towns and suburbs , as well as to give more consideration to specific urban challenges .
As I am elected in the South-East constituency , I pay close attention to issues relating to towns , especially since Marseille is the second largest French city in terms of population .
Like many other cities , Marseille is facing many challenges , such as public transport , employment , housing and combating social exclusion , which the EU can help to meet , in particular through its cohesion policy .
This report focuses on three objectives that are : developing physical infrastructure ; economic , social and environmental modernisation of towns ; and ' smarter ' urban development .
Thus , without forgetting rural areas , the report stresses the role urban areas play in European regions and points out that urban areas should not be ' forgotten ' if we want balanced regional development .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because the main purpose of the enhanced Urban Agenda should be to serve the development and qualitative upgrading of the infrastructure and services in European cities .
The future measures must be closely connected with overall EU priorities in order to justify assistance allocated from the EU budget .
Europe 's cities are its centres of economic activity , innovation and employment , yet they face a number of challenges .
Complex problems such as the trend towards suburbanisation , the concentration of deprivation and unemployment in urban neighbourhoods , and increasing congestion , require integrated answers in transport , housing , training and employment schemes , which must be tailored to local needs .
These challenges should be addressed by taking into account European regional and cohesion policies .
Furthermore , the European Commission should aim at the best possible harmonisation of rules for particular EU funds and programmes under which urban and local development projects are conducted , in order to minimise red tape and potential errors in implementation .
The Commission should prepare a study comparing the practice to date of individual Member States regarding integrated strategic planning and , on the basis of the outcome of the study , draw up specific EU guidelines for integrated urban development planning practice that promote efficient , legally regulated partnerships , including cross-border urban partnerships .
in writing . - This report concerns a number of issues related to the urban dimension of cohesion policy that the Committee on Regional Development has identified as being particularly challenging for the future cohesion policy .
The austerity measures that are in place across Europe have increased the strain on all levels of public spending , and thus a better coordination of resources has become necessary in order to ensure the most effective use and distribution of such resources .
There should also be an efficient flow of resources from the EU all the way down to sub-national level .
I am in agreement with the rapporteur on such issues and have thus decided to vote in favour of this dossier .
It is important to set out a European urban policy , which should contribute to sustainable development in urban areas , taking into account the principle of subsidiarity .
The European Urban Agenda not only includes the urban dimension of EU policies , in particular cohesion policy , but also the intergovernmental strand of European-level efforts to coordinate the urban policies of the Member States , the latter being implemented through informal ministerial meetings .
It is crucial to strengthen the urban dimension of cohesion policy and to promote sustainable urban development , particularly by strengthening and developing instruments to implement the Leipzig Charter at all levels .
At the same time , the dynamism of urban areas should be stimulated through effective and efficient synergies between the various European financing instruments , especially as regards research and innovation .
It should therefore be ensured that urban areas in all the EU regions , as centres of economic activity , innovation and employment , can benefit from necessary and adequate support in order to address the enormous challenges they are facing , such as the trend towards suburbanisation , the concentration of poverty and unemployment , and rising levels of congestion and pollution , among others .
Cities are the fulcrum of social and economic life and possess a fundamental faculty of social integration since , on the one hand , they guarantee the preservation of cultural diversity and , on the other , they maintain a permanent link between the centre and outlying areas .
For this reason I am voting in favour of the proposal to increase the funds earmarked for urban development .
I also agree with the idea that new investments should not be made exclusively in the economy and in specific sectors ; instead , I would argue for the necessary implementation of projects which are to a large extent aimed at social cohesion and integration of the parts .
To this end it is essential to bring forward projects that are sustainable in terms of costs and resources , and flexible in so much as every city is different and calls for solutions that best suit its demands .
The development objectives of a European Agenda should therefore be aimed at : improving social cohesion in urban areas , including but not only through economic progress ; implementing a well-coordinated policy at both European and local level which involves local elected authorities in the strategic decision-making process ; finding funds and providing incentives for investments to run new projects instead of creating projects in order to gain financial assistance .
I am delighted that this report has been adopted , since most of our ideas ( climate , social cohesion , integrated and bottom-up approach , disadvantaged neighbourhoods , cross-funding and so on ) are included .
However , I do regret that with regard to implementing the urban dimension , there is not a clearer signal in favour of a more widespread use of general subsidies for direct management by towns .
Furthermore , this report should have elaborated on opening up deprived neighbourhoods , the role of medium-sized towns in the urban agenda , as well as the battle for climate and social mixing in our towns .
While they contain nearly 70 % of the population and produce four-fifths of the Union 's GDP , urban areas need to become highly competitive zones with a dense economic fabric , poles of attraction for technological excellence , and they must be directly connected to their regional support base .
By supporting the report on the European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy , I am advocating a new approach to urban policy based on close cooperation between operators at the various levels of decision-making : EU , national level , urban areas and peripheral urban areas .
The fact that fellow Members with such ambitions almost unanimously support European cohesion policy demonstrates the importance we attach to the project of rebalancing development across different territories .
I voted in favour of the report on the European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy , as it underlines the importance of forming networks of cities , sharing best practices and adopting innovative solutions , strengthening the urban dimension of the objective of European territorial cooperation , as well as implementing the partnership principle more effectively in cohesion policy , with a view to the more sustainable development of cities , particularly as regards the modernisation of infrastructure and urban transport networks .
One of the most important dimensions of cohesion policy is the aspect specifically geared towards cities , insofar as most of them are urban areas that implement cohesion policy , and in which many of the challenges to be tackled by the Europe 2020 strategy can be found .
According to the data given by the rapporteur , 70 % of people in Europe live in urban areas .
These people generate 80 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) and consume about 70 % of EU energy .
Large urban areas are also the main centres of innovation , knowledge and science , and are home to the majority of productive activities , which generate wealth and contribute to economic growth .
Furthermore , the greatest challenges in terms of the efficient management of infrastructure and transport are also found in urban areas , and these have a direct impact on environmental and energy policy .
EU cohesion policy is part of a European framework of solidarity encompassing the 27 Member States and their 271 regions , and aims to end existing economic and social disparity within the EU .
The purpose of this report , drafted by Mr Vlasák , is to follow up the previous report , entitled ' The urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period ' .
The role of cities , where 80 % of the European population lives , as sources of wealth creation , and as hubs of social and economic development is indisputable .
However , the problems that affect them , including poverty and social exclusion , unemployment , housing shortages , crime and drug consumption , are huge and require careful attention .
Despite the creation of the financial instruments developed by the Commission and the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , such as the Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium Enterprises ( Jeremie ) , Joint Assistance to Support Projects in European Regions ( Jaspers ) and Joint European Support for Sustainable Investment in City Areas ( Jessica ) , and the other Structural Funds , the results have fallen short of expectations .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations on the preparation of comprehensive and integrated financial planning so that the funds can be allocated to projects aimed at achieving the objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy , rather than to actions that merely consume these same funds .
The massive contradiction inherent in this report is that it places great value on cities , but forgets their citizens .
Great emphasis is placed on strengthening the European Urban Agenda , on developing basic physical infrastructure and its contribution to the economic fabric , and on energy and environmental sustainability through investment based on technological progress , but people are sidelined .
Cities and their entire infrastructure are built by people .
People inhabit them and make their public education , health and transport services , their trade and industry , and their cultural activities work .
These people should be at the centre of any urban policy .
However , they are the ones largely being forgotten by EU policies .
From our point of view , an urban agenda should prioritise better distribution of the population in the territory of certain countries , particularly in Portugal , relieving the cities by valuing rural areas and properly remunerated farming ; spreading productive activity across the country ; valuing quality public services in rural and urban areas ; combating unemployment ; defending jobs with rights ; valuing salaries and pensions ; and combating poverty .
This report focuses on the European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy .
It places great emphasis upon cities , but it forgets a fundamental component of these cities : the people .
The report is clearly contradictory .
It advocates strengthening the European Urban Agenda , developing basic physical infrastructure and its contribution to the economic fabric , and energy and environmental sustainability through investment based on technological progress , but it puts people second .
However , the fact is that cities and their entire infrastructure are built by people .
These people should therefore be at the heart of any urban policy .
However , they are the ones largely being forgotten by EU policies .
From our point of view , an urban agenda should prioritise better distribution of the population in the territory of certain countries , particularly in Portugal , relieving the cities by valuing rural areas and properly remunerated farming ; spreading productive activity across the country ; valuing quality public services in rural and urban areas ; combating unemployment ; defending jobs with rights ; valuing salaries and pensions ; and combating poverty .
Nothing of this sort emerges from this report .
in writing . - ( SK ) The report deals with several aspects of the urban dimension of cohesion policy , which , according to the Committee on Regional Development , are key or problematic in terms of the future of cohesion policy , which should become a fully-fledged and effective policy focussing on the cities of the EU .
Territorial diversity and polycentric development are characteristic in Europe , and there are few large cities in the relatively dense urban network .
A stronger urban agenda requires the development and qualitative modernisation of infrastructure and services in Europe 's cities .
It is desirable for future actions to be closely linked to overall EU priorities .
Although European cities fulfil the role of centres of economic activity , innovation and employment , they face many problems , and solving these problems requires an individual approach taking account of local needs .
European regional policy and cohesion policy deal with precisely this issue .
The problems that have arisen must be resolved through an integrated method at EU level , national level and regional level , and the funding options must be coordinated so as to cover a broad range of specific requirements .
in writing . - I will vote in favour of this report because it highlights the importance of moving beyond the current greenhouse gas emissions target of 20 % and increasing this to 30 % in order to work towards the ambitious 2 degree Celsius objective .
This can only be achieved if there is global adherence to and participation in the ETS , which can only be fully effective if implemented on a wider scale .
The EU ETS must however remain flexible when dealing with the economic crisis by taking financial measures which promote cost-effective GHG reduction in Europe .
It has become increasingly clear that delaying action is unsustainable and will not only increase the costs of reducing emissions but will also result in the EU losing its pioneering role in green research .
There must therefore be continued investment in innovation and promotion of eco-efficient development across Member States .
International cooperation in this major climatic challenge will ensure that European industry is able to remain competitive and is never placed at an economic disadvantage .
The EU , whose global emissions are just over 10 % , cannot combat climate change alone ; this is a global problem which requires global action .
Urban areas , which are home to 73 % of Europe 's population and generate around 80 % of the GDP , are the Union 's major centres of innovation , culture and growth .
However , the urban dimension has up until now received insufficient recognition .
For this reason it is important that Parliament should propose to enhance the European Urban Agenda within the framework of EU policies , reinforcing the contribution of cohesion policy to urban development and encouraging greater involvement on the part of local political stakeholders .
It is necessary to direct the urban dimension of political cohesion towards supporting the development of basic physical infrastructure , the modernisation of economic , social and environmental characteristics of cities , urban regeneration and the promotion of social innovation in disadvantaged neighbourhoods .
All this requires direct participation on the part of local authorities and civil society , and the involvement of cities ' political representatives in strategic planning and in defining and negotiating partnership contracts .
Within this framework the call for the Commission to promote the creation of urban administrators and to establish an Erasmus for local and regional elected representatives is of significance .
Let us monitor closely the Commission 's commitment to welcoming the important proposals of this report , in the belief that a full appreciation of the central role of the urban dimension in EU politics constitutes an indispensable condition for its success .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Swedish Conservatives do not share the view expressed in the report on a number of points .
We are opposed to additional control of the European Investment Bank as well as to the EU 's involvement in urban planning .
However , the report does not advocate the provision of additional funds by the EU , and the role of urban areas as centres for growth is also mentioned .
As a result , we were able to vote in favour of the report as a whole .
The principle of subsidiarity means that urban policy falls within the competence of the Member States .
The development of our territories , however , cannot be considered complete unless we genuinely take the urban dimension into account at European level .
Indeed , cities play a driving role in achieving our objectives in relation to employment , training and energy efficiency .
This report successfully demonstrates the added value of European policies , particularly cohesion policy , when it comes to development and the modernisation of infrastructure and services in European cities .
For this reason , I welcome the fact that this report was adopted with a large majority .
It successfully reconciles national concerns and local needs with the European priorities found in the Europe 2020 strategy whilst respecting the principles of multi-level governance and partnership .

in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because it recommends that the urban dimension of cohesion policy should focus on a threefold objective : firstly , to help urban areas develop their basic physical infrastructure as a precondition for growth in order fully to exploit their potential contribution to economic growth in Europe , diversification of the economic base and energy and environmental sustainability , in particular with a view to maintaining and improving air quality in urban centres , without detriment to rivers ; secondly , to help urban areas modernise their economic , social and environmental characteristics through smart investment in infrastructure and services based on technological advancements and closely related to specific regional , local and national requirements ; thirdly , to regenerate urban areas by reclaiming industrial sites and contaminated land , while bearing in mind the need for links between urban and rural areas with a view to promoting inclusive development , in line with the Europe 2020 strategy .
Urban areas are not isolated elements within their regions and their development must therefore be closely linked to the surrounding functional , suburban or rural areas .
I agree with the opinion that the European Commission should aim at the best possible harmonisation of rules for particular EU funds and programmes under which urban and local development projects are eligible for cofinancing , in order to minimise red tape and potential errors in implementation .
I voted in favour of this report , which represents an important contribution to the European added value of cross-financing between the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the European Social Fund ( ESF ) in terms of increased flexibility for social inclusion projects and integrated urban development programmes .
The presence of more flexible conditions for cross-financing could , in my opinion , optimise the use of the plans or strategies in question , exploiting the complementary synergies of these funds in an effective and efficient way .
Often , and especially in urban areas which stand out thanks to problems of social exclusion or environmental pollution , ESF resources could be used to support local projects to prevent exclusion that are carried out in a coordinated and united way by public authorities and private businesses acting as leaders to a network of cities .
I hope that today 's vote encourages better harmonisation of rules for particular EU funds and programmes under which urban and local development projects are eligible for cofinancing in order to minimise red tape and potential errors in implementation as far as possible .
We believe that the main objective of the European Urban Agenda is to serve the development and qualitative updating of the infrastructure and services in European cities .
Therefore , a proper evaluation of the mainstreaming process , including a list of strengths and weaknesses , must be carried out before further steps are taken .
This should lead to a list of recommendations or standards for more formalised local involvement in future policy design and implementation .
Therefore , the evolution of the Urban Agenda must not be a one-way process , but have an organic dimension with a bottom-up approach .
For this reason , it is crucial that cities be able to have their say , and that they receive due attention at EU level .
We also believe that cities should be offered sufficient flexibility so as to be able to use funds for their own priorities .
Regional , national and EU funding opportunities should be coordinated to cover the whole range of specific needs .
Finally , we believe that future cohesion policy should become a fully-valued and effective policy for EU cities .
in writing . - ( DE ) Urban areas are one of the key factors in European development .
They grow quickly and concentrate economic strength , industry and , above all , a very large number of people , also giving rise to a large number of social and infrastructural issues .
Thus , cities play a particularly important role in the European Union 's cohesion policy .
This point is given due attention in the report , which is why I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( LT ) Cities stimulate economic growth and entrepreneurship , and contribute to the creation of new sustainable jobs .
By implementing the Urban Agenda , we must focus more on serving the development and qualitative upgrading of the infrastructure and services in European cities .
In order to implement the concept of smarter urban development , conditions must be created for cities to develop their infrastructure properly and effectively by means of advanced technologies , in particular information and communications technology ( ICT ) .
The application of intelligent systems would help address challenges related to transport congestion , energy efficiency and safety in the public sector .
Given the specific needs of individual regions , it is necessary to promote investment in technological progress .
We must promote social innovation in urban areas , particularly in disadvantaged neighbourhoods , by exploiting the opportunities offered by cohesion policy .
It is crucial to regenerate urban areas by reclaiming industrial sites and contaminated land , while promoting inclusive development of urban and rural areas .
To achieve this objective it is necessary to implement multi-level governance , regional planning and the partnership principle .
It should be noted that based on the best practice of Member States regarding strategic planning , the Commission should draw up specific EU guidelines for integrated urban development planning practice and make integrated urban planning legally binding .
Moreover , local government initiatives must actively pursue partnership between the public and private sectors and implement innovative strategies for the development of urban infrastructure .
This report aims to identify the modern challenges , especially in terms of living standards , faced by EU citizens living in urban areas .
It is worth reminding ourselves that there are some 5 000 towns in Europe with a population of between 5 000 and 50 000 inhabitants and almost 1 000 cities with a population of over 50 000 .
Even though only 7 % of the population of the EU lives in cities with over 5 million inhabitants , compared with 25 % in the United States of America , in numerous urban areas , including in Greece , the population is increasing .
In any event , the towns of Europe are centres of economic activity , innovation and employment and supporting them is therefore important , especially in times of economic recession .
The report , which I voted for , rightly finds that this support needs to be provided at four levels ( EU , national , regional and local ) , by using the corresponding economic and political tools available in each instance ( Community funds , national strategic programmes , regional operational programmes and local and private resources ) .
Since 2009 , the date of the first report entitled ' The urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period ' , new contributions have been made to this issue , and it has been further developed .
The purpose of this report is to follow the previous report up , highlighting several aspects of the urban dimension of cohesion policy that the Committee on Regional Development identifies as crucial or challenging for future cohesion policy , which should become a fully-valued and effective policy for EU cities .
I voted in favour , in view of the utmost importance of this topic in order for small and medium-sized towns and cities to realise their potential .
I agree with the rapporteur 's warning that the ' projects for money ' approach should be replaced by a ' money for projects ' approach .
Indeed , projects should not be drafted in order to take up the funds available , but rather to meet strategic objectives .
Experience shows that in many cases , project ideas emerge on the basis of available funding , instead of being based on real needs and on strategic priorities .
Combating this is one of the main challenges of development policy and also of cohesion policy .
Europe 's cities are its centres of economic activity , innovation and employment , but they face a number of challenges .
The trend towards suburbanisation , the concentration of deprivation and unemployment in urban neighbourhoods , increased congestion and other problems of similar complexity require solutions in the fields of transport and housing , as well as in training and employment schemes which must be tailored to local needs .
European regional and cohesion policies address these challenges .
The main purpose of the enhanced Urban Agenda is to serve the development and qualitative updating of the infrastructure and services in European cities .
On one hand , the future measures must be closely connected to overall EU priorities to justify the contribution of the EU budget .
The Europe 2020 strategy , however , mainly concerns future trends .
Overcoming the current disparities among European cities is of equal importance and should be reflected in the priorities of future cohesion policy .
Bearing in mind the experience of the Lisbon Strategy , the evolution of the Urban Agenda must not be a one-way process , but have an organic dimension with a bottom-up approach .
So that European cities will always continue to develop , I express my vote in favour of the proposal .
in writing . - Europe has almost 1 000 cities with populations of more than 50 000 and their composition is constantly evolving .
Given recent population changes and migration patterns , it is important to continually assess how we want the cities of the future to develop .
Answers must be found to the challenges of transport , housing , suburbanisation and green space .
These responses must be tailored to local needs but recognising that issues such as unemployment , deprivation and social exclusion are universal problems .
The EU 's regional and cohesion policies must address these challenges .
The rise of cities as economic drivers for regions and entire countries means that the urban agenda must be based on spatial strategies that recognise the role of cities as not just places to live and work but as providing a service to those in the hinterland and beyond .
Europe is characterised by great territorial diversity and polycentric development .
In this context , Europe 's cities represent centres of economic activity , innovation and employment , but they must face up to a number of challenges .
I welcome the fact that , under this Urban Agenda , the issue regarding the definition of the concept ' urban ' is left to the Member States in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
There will thus be more opportunity to adapt interventions according to the demands of each Member State .
For this reason I welcomed and voted in favour of this measure .
in writing . - IN FAVOUR .
This is another own-initiative report on urban development in Europe which rather repeats what has already been stated in the previous reports on that issue .
The only relevant question at this particular moment is the question about the role of urban dimension in the future architecture of cohesion policy post 2013 - however , the report remains open in this point and does not make a clear recommendation .
The report covers several aspects of the urban dimension of Cohesion Policy such as multi-level governance , partnership principle , sub-delegation of responsibilities , integrated strategic planning and comprehensive financial planning .
Besides some IBM friendly text on " smarter urban development " ( para 8 ) we were mainly disappointed that S & D shadow managed to weaken good wording on the partnership principle .
The draft report could have been improved by a number of compromise amendments , and our amendments were quite well integrated .
We have good wording on the costs of economic growth ( para 4 ) , climate protection ( para 9 ) , internal cohesion ( para 10 ) , integrated and bottom-up approach ( para 21 and 23 ) , deprived neighbourhoods ( para 25 ) and cross-financing ( para 28 ) .
Europe is characterised by great territorial diversity .
Europe 's cities are its centres of economic activity , innovation and employment , but they must face up to a number of challenges .
I agree with the rapporteur in that cohesion policy , including the European Agenda , should pursue the objective of overcoming territorial disparities by investing in smart urban development with the aim of raising cities ' infrastructure and services to a higher qualitative level .
The European Commission and the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) have developed three financial instruments , one of which is aimed at administering joint support for sustainable development in urban areas ( that is , the Joint European Support for Sustainable Investment in City Areas , or JESSICA ) .
With the aim of covering specific territorial needs , it is advisable to coordinate regional , national and EU funding opportunities in the best way possible .
in writing . - ( CS ) I voted to adopt the report by Oldřich Vlasák on the European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy .
I welcome the main objective of this report , which is to support the urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period , and to take account of the current development of the urban agenda in the EU .
I would also like to mention , however , the recent publication of the White Paper on the future of transport up to 2050 , which outlines the moves towards achieving a single European transport area .
In my opinion , one of the main obstacles to achieving the ambitious aims of this White Paper is the persistent differences in the level of infrastructure and transport services in the various Member States .
The instruments of cohesion policy must therefore continue to play an important role in bringing these levels closer together , in the interests of sustainable and safe European transport .
This applies both to cities and rural areas , and especially the transboundary areas , whose prosperity and employment prospects depend on the development of infrastructure .
I believe that the European Urban Agenda is a policy of undoubted importance , given that 70 % of the European population lives in cities , and that these people generate about 80 % of EU gross domestic product ( GDP ) .

A total of EUR 21.1 billion has been earmarked for urban development in 2007-2013 , to be targeted at the rehabilitation of industrial sites and contaminated land areas , urban and rural regeneration , clean urban transport , and housing .
The European Urban Agenda focuses on developing infrastructure and services in cities .
Cities are currently facing various and disparate problems , requiring the implementation of tailored and integrated local development models .
Therefore , since urban policy is integrated into cohesion policy objectives , the latter should serve as a link with rural areas in order to foster inclusive development .
Cities should have a voice in solving their problems through multi-level governance and by employing the partnership principle .
Finally , I would like to stress that the preparation of integrated strategic planning should be complemented by flexible financial engineering so that national , regional and local authorities are free to implement their priorities .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report on the European Urban Agenda and its Future in Cohesion Policy .
Urban areas generate around 80 % of GDP , consume up to 70 % of the energy in the EU and are the major centres of innovation , knowledge and culture .

Some EUR 21.1 billion has been allocated to urban development between 2007 and 2013 , representing 6.1 % of the EU 's cohesion policy budget .
In fact , EUR 3.4 billion is targeted at the rehabilitation of industrial sites and contaminated land , EUR 9.8 billion at urban and rural regeneration projects , EUR 7 billion at green urban transport and EUR 917 million at housing .


Smart cities require a smart communications , transport and energy infrastructure .
I support the development of integrated urban mobility plans and I encourage local authorities to modernise urban public transport to make it more environmentally friendly and efficient .
The implementation of intelligent transport systems ( ITS ) in urban areas will increase energy efficiency and transport safety .
Since 99 % of the housing stock in Europe is made up of old buildings , I call on the Commission and Member States to increase the rate of the ERDF allocation which each Member State can use to boost energy efficiency in housing from 4 % to 15 % in the future Multiannual Financial Framework .
in writing . - ( LT ) The rapporteur observes quite rightly that the Member States must make more effort to ensure that sustainable urban development becomes a strategic priority .
Although almost 70 % of the population of Lithuania live in cities and suburban areas , my country nevertheless lacks a clear , integrated and sustainable approach .
This is due to reduced competition .
It is very important to balance EU priorities and local needs .
The EU 's Urban Agenda must not become a one-way process - it is crucial for citizens to have their say .
The report touches upon several challenges of urban planning , such as urban regeneration , adequate housing and green urban transport .
Unfortunately , the list of social problems in Lithuanian urban areas is somewhat longer .
According to the Lithuanian Government 's official statistics , about 18 % of the inhabitants of Lithuania 's urban areas are at risk of poverty .
Lithuania has one of the highest urban suicide rates in the world .
EU statistics show that more than 25 % of young Lithuanians are forced to take low paid work and conclude short-term contracts with insufficient social security guarantees .
This has a significant impact on the independence of young people living in cities and causes major demographic challenges , because starting a family in urban areas is becoming a difficult task .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of this report .
One of the reasons why the Lisbon Strategy was unable to achieve its goals was the poor integration of the cities and regions .
Among the rapporteur 's proposals is a fundamental change to the way in which funds are allocated : ' projects should not be drafted to withdraw the funds available but to meet the strategic goals . '
I am voting for this report as it points to the need to take concrete decisions on certain key issues for future cohesion policy , including strengthening Objective 3 .
In this area it is important not to leave out the most isolated and outermost regions .
The objective of territorial cooperation is essential to putting cohesion policy into practice .
I would like to highlight European Groupings for Territorial Cooperation ( EGTCs ) , which make a significant contribution to cohesion through cross-territorial cooperation programmes .
Serving the harmonious development of the EU is one of the objectives of cohesion policy , which is an indispensable instrument for reinforcing the economic , social and territorial reality of Europe , as well as an essential factor for the realisation of smart and inclusive growth as anticipated in the Europe 2020 strategy .
I support this report as I feel that territorial cohesion should be adequately supported through the allocation of greater structural funds , and it is therefore right that the share allocated to Objective 3 be increased from the current 2.5 % to 7 % , considering in addition that around 37.5 % of the European population lives in border regions .
Allocating greater resources would mean , in the first place , investing in the trans-European transport networks ( TEN-Ts ) , for which modernisation is an urgent priority ; and , secondly , proceeding to reduce the physical , cultural , administrative and regulatory obstacles which hamper cooperation and territorial cohesion .
in writing . - Dear Mr. President , I voted in favour of this report because it stresses that the European territorial cooperation , with its significant contribution to the multi-level governance model , is one of the pillars of the cohesion policy .
Considering that the territorial cooperation has proved its effectiveness in promoting the harmonious development of the Union as a whole , it 's now fundamental to increase its budget from the actual 2.5 % to at least the 7 % of the overall cohesion policy resources for the next programming period .
Although I represent the Centre , Auvergne and Limousin regions , which do not have borders with other Member States of the European Union , I am convinced of the usefulness of cross-border cooperation - and , more generally , of territorial cooperation - for the development of Europe and for building bridges between people .
I completely agree with the proposals brought forward by the rapporteur , my colleague Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , particularly when it comes to enhancing the role of the European Groupings for Territorial Cooperation ( EGTCs ) and the financing of this objective .
The aim of Objective 3 of cohesion policy is to bring all of the European regions , particularly cross-border regions , closer together in economic , social and environmental terms .
This is because it is important to strengthen the links between these regions , particularly in the areas of energy and transport .
At a time when we are living through what might be called a crisis of the European idea , it is good to reiterate the European added value that territorial cooperation provides .
In order that Objective 3 can be implemented in the best way possible , therefore , we have asked for a substantial increase in the structural funds earmarked for this objective , with a view in particular to improving transport infrastructure and thus increasing the mobility of European citizens within regions and between them .
As an elected representative of a cross-border region , I paid particular attention to this issue , and I am pleased that we have called for reinforced cooperation for local authorities , which means both cooperation between authorities and cooperation with the European institutions .
We need to improve dialogue with these authorities in order to better understand the problems that exist and face up to the challenges .
Finally , as it is still too complicated to implement the territorial cooperation programmes , we asked for them to be simplified and stressed the specific nature of the programmes associated with this objective , which are , by their very nature , international programmes .
I am voting in favour of this report , which highlights the benefits deriving from increased cooperation between neighbouring regions of different Member States .
I agree with the transformation of the objective of territorial cooperation into one of the pillars of cohesion policy in the Community as soon as it is necessary , from the point of view of enhancing the synergies between neighbouring territories that naturally have the same needs and problems , to improve capabilities and increase the means of political , economic and administrative exchange between neighbouring regions .
I also believe that the proposal in the report to increase the Community 's financial commitment in order to uphold this pillar of political cohesion is a positive one .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because we must strengthen territorial cooperation aimed at helping territories and regions work together in tackling their common challenges , reducing the physical , cultural , administrative and regulatory barriers to such cooperation and lessening the border effect .
Cross-border cooperation programmes are also important for being effective and achieving results when implementing strategies linked to poverty reduction and the integration of disadvantaged groups into European mainstream society .
Furthermore , close cultural and linguistic links between border regions in different Member States , a legacy of history , must be exploited in order to boost cross-border cooperation .
There also needs to be better coordination between managing authorities and existing cross-border institutions like Euroregions during the implementation of cross-border programmes , so as to guarantee that projects have a high level of quality , transparency and closeness to the citizen .
I voted in favour of the report on the cross-border , transnational and interregional territorial cooperation initiative .
In fact , I understand the importance , which was well highlighted by the rapporteur , of greater cooperation between those on the political stage , with the aim of developing and carrying out projects that are more ambitious and useful to all citizens .
It is well-known that populations in border regions are more likely to suffer for want of infrastructure ; it follows that participation of all the parties concerned could lead to the needs of all such populations being satisfied , even in the case of those populations that are further away from the centre of Europe .
Therefore , in order to attain this goal , what is necessary is more strategic planning and collaboration at the level of governance so that certain financial programmes can become easier to use ; also useful would be more widespread checks to guarantee greater clarity and traceability of used funds .
In this context , I believe it is right that the Commission render all these instruments more visible : only through better publicity of these measures can the parties concerned proceed in unambiguous conditions .
in writing . - In recent years it has become all the more important to limit regulatory and administrative obstacles to cohesion so as to enhance the ability of different regions to address shared problems together .
I am in favour of the conclusions that have been reached by the rapporteur and have decided to vote in favour of this dossier .
' Territorial cooperation ' is surely one of the most important topics today for the European Union .
The need for countries to draw together and for the bond between peoples to continue to grow stronger becomes more apparent than ever when we consider that 37.5 % of the European population lives in border regions .
On this account , territorial cooperation thus proves to be crucial from different points of view .
On the one hand , it would promote effectively the consolidation of the internal market , contributing to the breaking down of physical and cultural obstacles which hinder this process ; on the other hand , it would support European integration in different political sectors , helping countries to develop coordinated and shared projects .
I agree with the allocation of greater funds to support this policy , above all where this concerns raising the percentage of the budget allocated to interregional cooperation .
Another strength brought to light by this report is the establishment of European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation ( EGTCs ) .
I believe that the establishment of these groupings can bring about positive results both from the point of view of governance , in that they would signify cross-border governance that guarantees authorship of different policies at local and regional levels , and from that of social cohesion , as it creates more potential for communities that are linguistically and culturally different from each other to come closer together .
I voted in favour of the report entitled Objective 3 : the future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation , as it is indispensable to the effectiveness of cohesion policy .
It is worth emphasising the importance of creating European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation ( EGTCs ) as a key instrument for territorial governance which addresses the need for structured cooperation in financial terms , as well as legal status and governance at various levels .
Thirty-seven and a half percent of Europe 's population lives in border regions , making the three dimensions of territorial cooperation - cross-border , transnational and interregional - a key policy for the Union , as it helps territories , regions and Member States to work better with one another at pursuing their common objectives .
This report , drafted by Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , is on Objective 3 : a challenge for territorial cooperation - the future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation .
We can think of Objective 3 , European territorial cooperation , as the ' poor relation of the Structural Funds ' .
Despite the fact that the population in cross-border areas amounts to nearly 200 million , this objective is granted only 2.52 % of cohesion funding .
Given that EU cohesion policy is part of a framework of solidarity encompassing the 27 Member States and their 271 regions , and that it aims to end the economic and social disparities that exist therein , it is crucial that the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) increase the funding allocated to this objective , as these are regions with serious competitiveness problems , but are essential to the EU 's sustainability .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to strengthen the ' Territorial Cooperation ' objective by increasing the overall budget from 2.5 % to 7 % , adopting measures to simplify the implementation of programmes and creating European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation ( EGTCs ) , which are essential to the functioning of cross-border governance systems .
in writing . - ( SK ) The importance of territorial cooperation has increased considerably in the recent past due to the basic regulation governing the Structural Funds and the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Its aim is to eliminate physical , administrative and regulatory barriers , and to mitigate the so-called border effect between countries and regions , so that they can react to common challenges as a single unit .
It is essential to retain the relationship between the three basic elements - cross-border cooperation , transnational cooperation and interregional cooperation - as each has its justification and its benefits .
In our effort to fulfil the principle of territorial cohesion , we must better fulfil the goal of territorial cooperation and the standard procedures .
In order that it can be successfully implemented and developed , territorial cooperation , as an important European idea , should also be a kind of symbolic embodiment of the EU for all citizens .
I want to welcome the adoption of this report and to underline the importance of Objective 3 , which concerns territorial cooperation , in the European Union 's cohesion policy .
Our Parliament is calling for an increase in the share of the Structural Funds earmarked for this objective - from the current 2.5 % to 7 % - and I strongly support this position .
Objective 3 must be maintained and , even more importantly , developed , so that we can pursue the integration of Community territory across national borders .
As a Member of Parliament representing a constituency very much affected by cross-border issues , and as someone who comes from the only region in France which shares a border with three other EU Member States , I take a great interest in these issues and in projects for cross-border cooperation .
These territorial cooperation areas are privileged areas for European cooperation , particularly cross-border cooperation .
In these areas , borders , barriers and obstacles are less ' real ' .
Furthermore , in becoming genuine project zones , these cooperation areas have an essential role to play in consolidating links at local level , between partners from different Member States and between citizens who come together to deal with joint problems .
Territorial cooperation must be encouraged .
in writing . - ( DE ) Cross-border cooperation is essential in border regions .
That is why the Euregio and SaarLorLux regions need to be strengthened .
It is for this reason that I welcome the retention of cross-border cooperation as a key element in structural policy .
I particularly welcome the call for at least 70 % of budget funding to be spent on territorial cooperation in cross-border collaboration , on the one hand , and for the funding for territorial cooperation to be increased from a level of 2.5 % in the current programming period to at least 7 % of total budget funding in the next programming period .
Furthermore , the establishment of European alliances for territorial cooperation is to be made easier , because this new instrument will make it easier for local administrations and citizens to access greater cooperation , benefiting many regions , in particular border regions .
Overall , this report marks an important step in the direction of securing the future of cross-border policy in the EU and will make it possible for the German-speaking community in Belgium , as a border area , to further strengthen and improve its partnership with the border regions .
In relation to cohesion policy , I am pleased to see that the committee has adopted my suggestion that structural funds earmarked for transport should have a greater focus on the general EU orientation of transport policy .
This may also speed up important projects in border areas .
Border regions , representing 37.5 % of the European population , are crucially important for integration and for building bridges between European citizens .
The success of territorial cooperation is now well established .
This objective , set in 2007 and provided with a budget of EUR 8.5 billion for 2007-2013 , distributed among cross-border , transnational and interregional programmes , enables 271 European regions to benefit from significant financing aimed at developing and enhancing joint projects and overcoming various natural borders and barriers , such as land and sea borders and administrative barriers , that affect the everyday lives of our citizens .
I have no doubt that Mrs Sanchez-Schmid 's report , which was adopted with a large majority , will have an influence on the work of the European Commission as it prepares the legislative proposals that it will bring forward in September .
This report particularly emphasises the need to maintain the predominant status of the cross-border pillar and to develop incentives to spur on large cross-border and transnational projects , such as the trans-European transport networks ( TEN-T ) .
These are recommendations that I fully agree with , and I would therefore like once again to praise the quality of this report , which has managed to garner broad cross-party support .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because the Multiannual Financial Framework for the period 2007-2013 turned the territorial cooperation objective into one of the three pillars of the EU 's cohesion policy , replacing the INTERREG Community initiative .
Since then , territorial cohesion has become , under Article 174 of the Treaty , one of the three components of cohesion policy , alongside economic and social cohesion .
Territorial cohesion is now firmly established as one of the European Union 's main priorities .
The aim of territorial cooperation must be to do away with physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles to cohesion and to reduce the border effect between territories and regions in order to enable them to address their shared challenges together , whether those challenges are territorial ( services , infrastructure , urban and regional planning ) , global ( globalisation , climate change ) , economic or societal .
Territorial cooperation brings European added value and plays a key role in deepening the internal market and fostering closer European integration in several sectoral policies , and I agree with the opinion that territorial cooperation should remain one of the pillars of cohesion policy .
The instrument of ' territorial cooperation ' , as also highlighted in the Europe 2020 strategy , plays a crucial role in consolidating the internal market and promoting European integration in a variety of EU sectoral policies .
I voted in favour of this report so that these objectives might become a reality in the near future , stimulating harmonious growth not only in different sectors but also in areas of Europe often characterised by heterogeneity on the level of territorial development .
To this end , resources are needed - and these should be allocated on the basis of harmonised criteria - as is an effective synergy between cross-border and transnational areas precisely so that local needs can be coordinated with those that have wider scope .
I am certain that the enormous cultural , historical and linguistic heritage of the EU should become recognisable if physical and territorial barriers are overcome : this is the kind of collaboration which is the cornerstone of our vision of democratic principles and unity in diversity .
in writing . - ( RO ) This European Parliament resolution on Objective 3 is important in terms of removing the administrative and legislative obstacles which currently exist between Member States .
The purpose of territorial cooperation , as suggested in this report , is to get Member States to collaborate on services and infrastructure , as well as on urban , regional , economic and social planning .
This cooperation offers the potential of creating a closer , more lasting union between EU Member States .
Objective 3 offers a complex , multidimensional model of cooperation between partners in different Member States , which requires a specific , distinct and uniform approach and implementation in Member States , which will enhance cohesion between them .
Last but not least , this report highlights one important fact . This is the need to attract , encourage and involve partners from the private sector with a view to achieving this territorial cooperation , since many services or infrastructures are operated and owned by partners in this sector .
European cross-border cooperation is currently part of cohesion policy .
On the one hand , it contributes to the creation of supranational projects and EU strategies , and on the other it helps to reduce barriers between territories and regions .
I am convinced that effective territorial cooperation is important not only inside the Union , but chiefly in areas which share a border with the European Union 's Member States .
Furthermore , during the Polish Presidency of the Council of the European Union we are going to have the opportunity to promote harmonious principles for the implementation of border cooperation programmes both in internal and external EU border areas .
In relation to the above , I think the Sanchez-Schmid report on a challenge for territorial cooperation - the future agenda for cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation is an important contribution to work on regional policy , and I voted in favour of its adoption .
The basic regulation governing the Structural Funds and the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon have substantially enhanced the importance of ' territorial cooperation ' , transforming it into one of the three pillars of the EU 's cohesion policy .
Cohesion policy should certainly remove the current physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles and reduce the ' border effect ' between territories and regions , permitting them to address their shared challenges together , whether these be territorial , global , economic or societal .
We hope that cooperative measures can be coordinated at all levels of governance , in conjunction with a Europe 2020 strategy which meets the demands of territories and with the other existing territorial strategies .
In order to implement the principle of territorial cohesion properly and in order to increase the European added value of the funding allocated under the ' convergence ' and ' competitiveness and employment ' objectives , we believe that greater harmonisation between the ' territorial cooperation ' objective and the mainstream is necessary .
We agree with the idea of taking a ' territorial ' approach in the early stages of the programming period in order to channel ' convergence ' and ' competitiveness and employment ' funding towards a number of priority projects , such as trans-European transport networks ( TEN-Ts ) , as identified in advance and agreed with programme partners , in keeping with the basic tenets of multi-level governance and European partnership .
in writing . - ( LT ) Funding for territorial cooperation should be increased , taking into account its influence on cohesion policy .
However , when increasing the budget for this programming period , we must clearly indicate the cohesion policy budget lines for which the funding allocated will be reduced , without prejudicing the implementation of cohesion policy objectives .
Territorial cooperation eradicates administrative and regulatory barriers between territories and regions and helps address issues linked to territorial , economic and social cohesion .
Furthermore , cooperation among border regions must remain a priority compared to cooperation with other areas .
Consequently , funding for its implementation should be increased .
I believe that there should be more flexibility in the application of the geographical limit of 150 km for coastal and maritime regions .
Various regional cooperation programmes must be taken into account when developing and implementing large-scale strategies .
Furthermore , the Commission should evaluate the results of the first macro-regional strategies implemented .
Territorial cooperation is closely linked to Europe 's external borders and it is therefore necessary to ensure more effective synergies between the ERDF and other arrangements for cooperation , create more favourable funding opportunities and implement a new neighbourhood policy .
It should be noted that the implementation of territorial cooperation programmes is currently hindered by the fact that this involves many different authorities .
There is also a need to simplify rules on auditing and control .
in writing . - Improved cooperation between EU Member States on bilateral , regional and interregional levels is not only a crucial part of the European Union 's mandate but also increasingly necessary in maintaining EU solidarity as we tackle a growing number of issues .
I supported this resolution because it acknowledges that we need to simplify the implementation elements of these levels of cooperation and involve private actors especially with regard to cooperation on economic development .
EU Member States will continue to greatly benefit from enhanced mediums for cooperation with other Member States .
Together with the rapporteur I call on the EC to conduct an in-depth study of the results of the first macroregional strategies implemented .
The future agenda of cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation is strategically important in defining the objectives of every territorial reality in Europe , and the ways in which these can be achieved .
' Territorial cooperation ' is an added value which paves the way towards realising all the possibilities of a region and increasing its competitiveness .
I am voting in favour of the report because I believe it is important to define the objectives which guarantee the adequate allocation of funds for cooperative programmes , and to fully satisfy the needs of every area through the involvement of the most important regional projects .
' Territorial cooperation ' has become one of the three pillars of EU cohesion policy , succeeding the Community initiative INTERREG .
Subsequently , under Article 174 of the Treaty of Lisbon , territorial cohesion has become one of the three components of cohesion policy , alongside economic and social cohesion .
This is one of the European Union 's main priorities .
The aim of this policy is to do away with physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles to cohesion , and to reduce the ' border effect ' between territories and regions in order to enable them to address their shared challenges together , whether those challenges are territorial ( services , infrastructure , urban and regional planning ) , global ( globalisation , climate change ) , economic or societal .
I voted in favour because of the main thrust of the report , specifically : strengthening the ' territorial cooperation ' objective through territorial cohesion programming at all planning stages and in coordination with the Europe 2020 strategy ; adopting a territorial approach to other EU policies ; encouraging the establishment of European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation ( EGTCs ) ; simplifying the implementation of this policy ; and committing to making it visible across Europe are the reasons behind my vote in favour .
The basic regulation governing the Structural Funds and the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon have substantially enhanced the importance of ' territorial cooperation ' in the last five years , transforming it into one of the three pillars of the EU 's cohesion policy .
The financial framework for the period 2007-2013 turned the ' territorial cooperation ' objective into one of the three pillars of the EU 's cohesion policy , replacing the INTERREG Community initiative .
Subsequently , under Article 174 of the Treaty , ' territorial cohesion ' has become one of the three components of cohesion policy alongside economic and social cohesion , and , in fact , constitutes one of the EU 's main priorities .
This aims to remove the current physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles and alleviate the ' border effect ' between territories and regions , permitting them to address their shared challenges together , whether these be territorial , global , economic or societal .
Objective 3 provides for complex and multidimensional cooperation that brings partners from different Member States together .
For this reason , a simplification of the rules of audit and control is required .
In order that territorial cooperation should become the symbolic embodiment of the EU for all its citizens , and that policy-makers and civil servants could become acquainted with the practical aspects of territorial cooperation which relate to their work , I am voting in favour of this proposal .
I concur with the rapporteur in affirming the great importance of ' territorial cooperation ' , which aims to remove physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles and reduce the ' border effect ' between regions , promoting their harmonious development .
This new approach will also be relevant to mountain regions which could similarly play a leading role in realising the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , in order to realise these objectives , territorial cooperation programmes will have to be simplified , and local authorities and the public will need to be more involved by encouraging better communication through a large-scale media and awareness-raising campaign .
in writing . - IN FAVOUR .
The draft text of the rapporteur broadly met the position of our group on objective 3 .
Amendments of our group that were adopted by REGI concern : • a call for flexibility in the application of the geographical limit of 150 km set for cross-border cooperation programmes for coastal and maritime regions ; • the recommendation that a first assessment of the EGTCs in place be carried out , with a view to learning from these initial experiences ; • close cultural and linguistic links between border regions in different Member States must be exploited in order to boost cross-border cooperation .
' Territorial cooperation ' is one of the pillars of the EU 's cohesion policy , which aims to remove the physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles and reduce the ' border effect ' between territories and regions , with a view to promoting a harmonious development that enables them to address their shared challenges together .
In the logic of the Europe 2020 strategy , better allocation of funds is important in order to respond adequately to the needs and idiosyncrasies of European territories .
For these reasons , I am voting in favour of the report .
Since 1986 , the objective of cohesion policy has been to strengthen economic and social cohesion between the different Member States of the EU .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon and the new Europe 2020 strategy set out a third dimension , dubbed ' territorial cohesion ' , which promotes a functional approach to the integrated development of the 271 regions , viewed as areas where people live .
I believe that territorial cohesion should contribute to doing away with physical , administrative and regulatory obstacles between the European regions , and should promote harmonious European development and growing cooperation through joint projects between different regions which have similar characteristics and development objectives .
I would also stress that territorial strategies should be directly related to the trans-European transport network guidelines , to the strategies of the integrated maritime policy and to the Europe 2020 strategy , so as to build a smart , sustainable and inclusive Europe .
Finally , I fully agree with the idea that it is necessary to set out an action plan for the EU 's outermost regions , and multisectoral principles should be established which support their harmonious development and help to reduce the territorial disparities with other European regions .
in writing . - ( DE ) The cofinancing of cross-border , transnational and interregional projects epitomises the EU .
The rapporteur has proposed a series of improvements that deal with previously discussed weaknesses .
I have voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the report presented by Mrs Sanchez-Schmid .
The report highlights the added value of ' territorial cooperation ' and its potential to promote competitiveness .
While it upholds the original structure of Objective 3 , the report proposes an increase in funds and draws attention to the specific needs of border populations .
A strategic approach and a response aimed at the needs and idiosyncrasies of every region can be guaranteed by allocating funds on the basis of harmonised criteria for every territorial cooperation programme .
I firmly believe that an effective strategic framework can ensure a common approach and capitalise on the synergies between all the funds to support the cohesion policy objectives , such as those set out in the Treaties , and thus better serve the people of the EU and meet their expectations .
This report goes some way towards creating these synergies , so I am voting for it .
The need for greater flexibility in the use of funds and for an administrative culture that promotes a multidisciplinary approach and simpler fund administration is vital for establishing a common strategic framework for the Structural Funds .
In terms of synergies between the Structural Funds , the European Parliament has insisted on the need to avoid a high concentration of capacity in economic clusters and top European Union regions .
I think that an integrated approach is needed between the different sectoral policies in order to achieve the optimum result for economic development and growth , the reduction of development disparities between regions , job creation , improvement in quality of life , worker training for new jobs , social and territorial cohesion and the implementation of the European social model , which is a factor contributing to cohesion and the European economy 's competitiveness .
Focusing the funds ' joint action at regional or local level enhances their added value and permits stakeholders to fine-tune specific actions to the real economic and social needs and , therefore , to the employment situation in each specific region .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
All those involved in cohesion policy agree that having several European funds in parallel - the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , the Cohesion Fund , the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) - does not always allow the European Union 's financial resources to be managed in an optimal way .
I voted in favour of this report because it proposes interesting ways of achieving the imperative objective of increasing consistency between these devices .
I have high hopes that this approach , which is supported by the European Commission , will form part of the Commission 's upcoming proposals concerning the regulatory framework that will apply to future cohesion policy ( 2014-2020 ) .
Although we are now thinking about and debating the next multiannual framework , it was important to reiterate the fact that cohesion policy remains an essential lever for growth and that the budget earmarked for it should not be reduced .
One of the ways in which we can make improvements is to raise the level of consistency among the various instruments and policies , particularly in relation to the Europe 2020 strategy , so as to achieve a better synergy between the various funds , and thus to enable us to have a more results-oriented regional development policy .
One consequence of the proliferation of funds is that they are less visible , and thus citizens and interested parties are less aware of them ; another is that this can lead to duplications or inconsistencies and thus reduce the overall impact of this policy .
In this report , therefore , we have specified three main objectives that we think should be pursued : setting up multi-fund programmes , enhancing technical assistance and drawing up a European guide .
By improving synergies , we will be able to increase the European added value of cohesion policy for local and regional partners across the European Union , which will in turn enable citizens to draw increased benefits .
The European Union has insisted in several resolutions on the need for an integrated approach between the different sectoral policies in order to achieve the optimal result for growth and development in the EU .
The most decisive attempt to coordinate the efforts from EU programmes and funds stems , in my opinion , from the post-crisis era that Europe has entered .
It is certainly clear that , in the future , the need to consolidate budgets will force us to seek a bigger impact from the funding available .
I believe that this difficult moment in history , which the whole of Europe is experiencing , does , nevertheless , present an opportunity to use the negotiations on the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) to achieve greater synergies from the EU programmes and funds .
In particular , the experience of these years clearly demonstrates that funding of economic actions such as innovation , research and the environment from the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) can be more effective if closely coordinated and integrated with the actions undertaken by the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
Finally , I would like to reiterate the call to the Commission to promote a culture that aims to simplify the administration of EU funds .
I had to vote in favour of this report .
At a time such as this , when the economic and financial crisis demands more cautious spending , transparency and secure and innovative finance , in the face of ever scarcer resources and ever more acute social needs , to try to make more efficient use of the Structural Funds is not only an objective but also a moral duty for all administrators and , above all , for this Europe , which is perceived by its citizens as an entity that is becoming increasingly abstract and out of touch with people 's real needs .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because the rationalisation of spending calls for greater effectiveness and efficiency of policies at EU level as well as at national , regional and local levels .
Furthermore , in the interinstitutional negotiations on the new EU financial perspective ( 2014-2020 ) , the European Parliament should provide specific proposals on a single strategic framework , to ensure the implementation of the EU cohesion policy objectives and the effectiveness of the Structural Funds .
We should draw attention to the fact that the economic and financial crisis has further increased the urgent need for measures in sectors covered by the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , promoting in particular employment , career reorientation , social inclusion and poverty reduction .
Furthermore , I would like to stress that the ESF , as a support instrument for ongoing training , the acquisition of qualifications and career reorientation , should be considered an essential resource - which is not in fact being exploited to the full - for the promotion of comprehensive and efficient growth and knowledge-based competitiveness for Europe .
Expenditure in the field of cohesion policy must be rationalised by reducing fragmentation of funding instruments and fostering greater complementarity between the various funding instruments .
Moreover , we need to take into account the Commission proposal for better prioritisation and a thematic concentration of EU and national resources on a number of priorities in order to achieve more effective coordination between the funds .
in writing . - It is crucially important to ensure the effectiveness of these and other European funds , in order to ensure their continued support from the European people .
I welcome the ideas that have been taken forward , through the adoption of this report , to enhance synergies between policies with an impact on territories , on the one hand , and between funds , on the other hand , in particular by increasing financing and setting up multiregional programmes .
I find it deplorable , however , that the involvement of local and regional powers in the decision-making process is not being viewed as a priority .
Improving governance through the additional involvement of authorities with decentralised management capacities is the way to respond to the need for absorption , efficiency and simplification , all of which are desirable when implementing cohesion policy .
Economic , social and territorial cohesion policy is one of the fundamental pillars of an EU that is conscious not only to promote and develop excellence by encouraging innovation , but also to create convergence and bridge the gaps of and in less developed areas compared with more advanced ones .
Joint programming was the most innovative aspect of the period 2007-2013 , having led the regions and the Member States to adopt an integrated approach between territories and resources as part of their strategic and operational programming .
However , this important approach is liable , in many cases , to be frustrated by the considerable autonomy and strong competition existing between the various authorities in charge of managing each monofund programme .
By failing to work together properly , they seriously endanger not only the valuable integration of operations and actions that could be achieved , but also the benefits and the impact that those actions could create .
In the next programming period , then , it may be worth reverting to multifund programmes , incorporating in them the experience gained from joint programming and encouraging shared and responsible management between the various stakeholders in charge of regional development .
I believe that the adopted report makes an effective contribution to these objectives .
I voted in favour of the report on increased effectiveness between the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the other Structural Funds as I believe that the development of a strategic framework could ensure a common approach and capitalise on synergies between the various existing funds , with a view to achieving the objectives of cohesion policy as defined by the Treaties , thus meeting the expectations of citizens .
Parliament has been stressing the need to increase the effectiveness of the combined application of the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the other Structural Funds , along with an integrated approach to the various sectoral policies .
The need to avoid wasting resources , which is ever more pressing in the times of serious crisis that we are experiencing , makes it advisable to seek to take the most advantage possible of the synergies resulting from the resources made available by the Structural Funds , and to avoid wasting opportunities due to excessive leakage .
This effort to use available means will contribute to improving opportunities for sustainable growth , reducing disparities between regions , and encouraging social inclusion and cohesion between regions .
However , this will not come about unless the Union and the Member States set out clear priorities , thus preventing the dispersal of funds and emphasising aspects whose pursuit is genuinely essential .
The desired flexibility should be accompanied by close monitoring of the implementation of the funds so that this is done with maximum compliance with the rules of rigour and transparency .
This report , which was drafted by Mr Stavrakakis , is on the current situation and the need to assemble future synergies in order to increase efficiency between the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the other Structural Funds .
Over two decades , the Structural Funds have been invested in various regions of Europe and have made a key contribution to improving the quality of life of millions of Europeans .
They seemed an inexhaustible source from which the most disadvantaged regions could satisfy their funding needs .
The recent economic and financial crisis has brought us to our senses and shown us the consequences of the unrestrained consumerism embodied in non-sustainable investments .
Indeed , improving infrastructure does not always go hand-in-hand with major development .
A rigorous assessment of all projects underway is therefore urgently needed , along with a strategic redirection of the funds that are still available , taking into account the achievement of the objectives set out by the Europe 2020 strategy in preparation for the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) .
I support the recommendations in this report aimed at creating synergies through the establishment of a strategic instrument that covers all the Structural Funds and is geared towards innovation and technological development , supporting companies , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , and reducing administrative costs .
The objective advocated in this report is clear : the creation of a single strategic framework for the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the other Structural Funds , particularly the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , for the next financing period after 2013 , along with its coordination with other instruments of the external aspects of EU policy .
By creating a single strategic framework , the specific characteristics and diversity of beneficiary areas and sectors may be lost , opening the way for the EU budget to be restricted and payments from the funds to be reduced , as the major EU powers have advocated .
This new framework aims to promote competition and strengthen the integration of EU policies in order to consolidate the Europe 2020 strategy , in favour of big companies and financial institutions , and of the concentration and centralisation of capital .
For our part , we will continue to advocate making full use of these funds and making them complement each other , in order to defend and promote production in each country , to combat unemployment and promote jobs with rights , to create wealth and distribute it better , to advocate quality public services , to combat poverty , and to defend small-scale coastal fishing , family-run farms and small and medium-sized farmers .
This report advocates the creation of a single strategic framework for the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and the other Structural Funds , particularly the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , for the next financing period after 2013 , along with its coordination with other instruments of the external aspects of EU policy .
It should be taken into account that by creating a single strategic framework , the specific characteristics and diversity of beneficiary areas and sectors may be lost , opening the way for the EU budget to be restricted and payments from the funds to be reduced , as the major EU powers have advocated .
This new framework aims to promote competition and strengthen the integration of EU policies in order to consolidate the Europe 2020 strategy , to the benefit of the usual suspects : big companies and financial institutions , and the concentration and centralisation of capital .
For our part , we will continue to advocate making full use of these funds and making them complement each other , in order to defend and promote production in each country , making use of their potential for combating unemployment and promoting jobs with rights , to create wealth and distribute it better , to advocate quality public services , to combat poverty , and to defend small-scale coastal fishing , family-run farms and small and medium-sized farmers .
in writing . - ( SK ) Europe is in a post-crisis period , and for this reason it is right to make even greater efforts to coordinate the activities of EU funds and programmes .
As far as the European Social Fund is concerned , experience shows that funding the economic measures of the European Regional Development Fund can be more effective if it is better coordinated and is integrated into the activities performed by this fund .
It should be borne in mind that a good result for most programmes and measures depends to a considerable extent on a successful combination of several factors , of which human resources development is the most important .
The current system for planning and fulfilling programmes , which links the policies relating to the development of human resources , the business development of small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , and infrastructure development , serves as an instrument for bringing the assisted regions into line .
Each of these policies would achieve less by itself than they are all achieving together at present in the integrated system of programme planning and fulfilment .
In my opinion , however , we need to introduce an even more extensive coordination mechanism which would contribute towards aligning the instruments , policies and parties concerned .
It is desirable for the carefully planned interventions and programmes to be implemented in this way , and for them to take account of local peculiarities and comparative advantages , or the specific features of each region , in an integrated approach based on local specifics .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because it calls for a single strategic framework to be proposed , in time for the next financing period after 2013 , to ensure a common approach and to capitalise on synergies between all actions which serve on the ground to further cohesion policy objectives as defined by the Treaties and are funded by the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) , the Cohesion Fund , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) .
I believe that cohesion policy is one of the pillars of an EU economic policy favouring a long-term investment strategy and social inclusion .
Cohesion policy is also a guarantee of support for the least-developed regions and disadvantaged groups , leading to balanced and harmonious development for the European Union .
The European added value lies in the fact that all are able to benefit from the EU 's economic successes , therefore cohesion policy must remain independent and be allocated greater and sufficient funding .
in writing . - I would like to welcome the report of Mr. Stavrakakis on the increased effectiveness between ERDF and other structural funds .
Greater flexibility of the funds , the simplification of their administration and strategic coordination between instruments , policies and actors is a long-standing demand and a necessary tool for the social inclusion of marginalized groups within a complex policy framework of integrated policies , making use of all the EU financial resources available under the EU funds , and in particular under the ERDF , ESF and EAFRD .
The amendment of the regulation governing the ERDF extending the eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities enables Member States to revise their Operational Programmes and re-prioritise their investments , by using maximum 2 % of their total ERDF allocation for housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities for both replacement and renovation .
Member States must make full use of this opportunity to complement their efforts to ensure the effective social inclusion of the most vulnerable and the European Commission should come forward with a specific action plan on this Regulation to speed up the use of funds and to prepare a report on their utilisation .
Cohesion policy is one of the pillars of EU economic policy .
It is a guarantee of support for the least-developed regions and disadvantaged groups , leading to balanced social and territorial development in the Union , and a course of action that has great significance for the 27 Member States , which are required to lay down strategic territorial development guidelines through the increasingly active involvement of the social partners .
My vote in favour of this report confirms my belief in this objective but also my awareness of the need to simplify provisions at national and regional level in order to implement projects by the agreed deadlines , prevent bureaucratic delays and reduce administrative burdens , thereby increasing their absorption capacity .
in writing . - ( RO ) A robust , properly financed cohesion policy provides a key instrument for achieving the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
This is conducive to a well-devised , long-term investment strategy , generates added value , promotes social inclusion and , at the same time , harmonious development across the entire European Union .
I think that we must provide support to Member States and regions by encouraging synergy between structural , social and rural policies .
Establishing a common strategic framework for the next financial programming period would offer an enhanced approach and leverage the synergies better between the measures implemented in Europe 's regions , intended to support EU policy objectives .
The European Union needs new synergies and an integrated approach between the different sectoral policies in order to achieve the optimal result for growth and development on the ground .
There needs to be a greater commitment to regional policy that is increasingly flexible and integrated with other instruments and programmes .
We believe that ERDF funding for innovation , research , the environment and SMEs can only become more effective if it is closely coordinated and integrated with social action in general .
That is the virtue of integrated planning .
It is not possible , in fact , to solve complex problems by just approaching them from one side .
A fragmented approach may lead to overlapping or even conflicting policies , contradictory public actions or , worse , duplication of resources .
We believe that keeping together the planning of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund and re-integrating them better with the Rural Development Fund and the Fisheries Fund is a way of unlocking the potential of regions that are lagging behind .
Greater flexibility , a new multidisciplinary approach and simplification in the management of funds may be the key to the success of our development and territorial cohesion policy .
I voted in favour of the Stavrakakis report because I believe that the various European funds available for implementing regional policies should be made easier to use .
I refer in particular to the development of synergies for an integrated approach between the different sectoral policies that exist in the field of regional policy , as highlighted in the report .
The need to enhance the impact of available funding is made even more acute by the current economic and financial crisis .
In this sense , the report suggests a single strategic framework for the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) , the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) .
Ensuring a common approach to these various regional funds will also serve to prevent overlapping and confusion for those economic operators at regional and local level who are interested in receiving European funding for a particular project .
Furthermore , adopting a systematic and synergic approach between the various European regional funds will contribute to the adoption of cohesion policy objectives and hence the reduction of disparities in development between European regions , and will facilitate social inclusion .
in writing . - ( LT ) We must make every effort to create a favourable environment for all Member States to take advantage of the assistance provided by the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and other structural funds .
In order to implement cohesion policy objectives , we must clarify the synergies between these funds , address issues surrounding their coordination and simplify the funds ' management rules .
Consequently , after 2013 , it is very important to comply with the common approach and the single strategic framework established .
It is also necessary to reduce the fragmentation of funding instruments , ensuring the rationalisation of cohesion policy spending .
It should be noted that cohesion policy guarantees sustainable and long-term European Union development , and , consequently , must remain independent and be allocated increased funding .
Greater attention must be devoted to the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , which makes a major contribution to efficient growth and knowledge-based competitiveness .
I believe that cohesion policy must be more result-oriented , and less focused on the regularity of expenditure and procedures .
European cohesion policy is and will remain a cornerstone of the EU 's tangible action in its regions , as well as the main source of investment in the real economy , capable of helping Europe and its regions to recover from the crisis and become competitive again .
The European Regional Development Fund and the other Structural Funds have accomplished a great deal , but they can and must do more and better for the European Union .
With this in mind , I support the content and structure of Mr Stavrakakis 's report , which I endorse .
In particular , I agree with Mr Stavrakakis 's suggestions and proposals aimed at making more effective use of EU funds .
I hope that the European Commission will take Parliament 's request on board , particularly in view of the new financial perspective for 2014-2020 .
The current economic situation should be seen as an opportunity to reformulate anything that could be made more efficient , tenaciously combating any and every instance where time and resources are being wasted , with greater legitimacy .
The need to consolidate public budgets means that we need to be more innovative and seek to achieve a greater impact from the available funding .
This report , for which I voted , is a reflection on the current situation and the need for future synergies in order to strengthen effectiveness between the funds .
The coordination of these funds should be improved .
The instruments of EU cohesion policy are managed in a common framework that ranges from the strategic guidelines to payments and the submission of reports .
However , coordination between cohesion policy instruments and others should be increased .
I agree with the creation of an integrated planning and delivery system encompassing all policy areas .
The virtue of integrated planning is in the understanding that complex problems can only be solved by approaching them from several different angles at once .
Unemployment cannot be solved just by training the unemployed : you also need to put in place job creation policies , such as support for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) or business startups .
The reform of structural policy for the 2007-2013 programming period led to the separation of rural development from the general framework of the Structural Funds .
That separation should not result in the duplication or the omission of objectives , and development opportunities should be ensured in rural and urban areas alike , but there is conflicting evidence from the ground .
Efficiency of rural development policies requires close coordination with the implementation of measures under the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and regional policy instruments alike .
A single strategic framework is required for the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) , the Cohesion Fund , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , to ensure a common approach and to increase the synergies between all the financing instruments mentioned .
The aim of cohesion policy is to reduce the disparities between regions and to promote social inclusion , for the sake of balanced and harmonious development .
I voted in favour so as to ensure that funds are coordinated better and that regional and local authorities are involved in the development and implementation of partnership contracts .
Economic , social and territorial cohesion are fundamental principles in determining all EU policies and activities .
I share the rapporteur 's view that the economic crisis will force us to be more innovative and to seek a bigger impact from the available funding .
Innovation means creating synergies and an integrated approach between the different sectoral policies in order to achieve the optimal result for growth and development on the ground .
I particularly agree with the rapporteur 's assertion that synergies and coordination do not imply one-size-fits-all solutions , but call for close strategic coordination between instruments , policies and actors in order to produce carefully designed interventions and programmes which take into account the territorial specificities and comparative advantages or special features of each region in an integrated place-based approach .
Today we voted during the plenary session of the European Parliament in Brussels on the report on increased effectiveness between the ERDF and other structural funds .
The resolution adopted by the Committee on Regional Development proposes the creation , as from the forthcoming post-2013 programming period , of a single strategic framework to ensure a common approach and to capitalise on synergies between all actions which serve to further cohesion policy objectives as defined by the Treaties and funded by the ERDF , the Cohesion Fund , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) and the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) .
It points out that increased synergies among the Structural Funds are necessary in order to meet the Europe 2020 objectives , but also and above all to meet the cohesion policy objectives .
Mr Stavrakakis 's report calls for the rural development actions under the EAFRD and the sustainable development actions for fisheries areas under the EFF to be integrated into a single framework with the other structural funds , and for coordination also to be enhanced between cohesion policy instruments as such and activities carried out under the Seventh Framework Programme and the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme .
in writing . - In Favour .
This text basically calls for a single strategic framework to be proposed , in time for the next financing period after 2013 , to ensure a common approach and to capitalise on synergies between all actions which serve on the ground to further cohesion policy objectives as defined by the Treaties and are funded by the ERDF , the Cohesion Fund , the ESF , the EAFRD and the EFF ; Furthermore , it points out that the goal of cohesion policy should be sustainable , smart and inclusive economic growth evenly spread both territorially and socially , reduction of development disparities between regions , job creation , improved quality of life , worker training for new jobs , including in the field of sustainable economy , social and territorial cohesion and the implementation of the European social model , which constitutes a factor of cohesion and competitiveness of the European economy ;
The aim of cohesion policy is sustainable and inclusive economic growth spread evenly across Europe and the reduction of disparities between regions .
To increase synergies , a single strategic framework should be adopted that will strengthen the integration of EU policies for the purposes of implementing the Europe 2020 strategy .
Integrated planning clearly allows for the Structural Funds to be used in a way that will further Europe 's cohesion policy objectives .
One objective to be achieved is the redistribution of European resources that have not been used in certain regions to other , more virtuous regions , but still in the same State .
I endorsed the resolution on the state of play and future synergies for increased effectiveness between the ERDF and other structural funds .
Research conducted in Poland to identify barriers to the take-up of structural funds has shown that the two main obstacles are the lack of comprehensive information and the bureaucratic system of applying for EU funds and accounting for their use .
In particular , I would like to draw attention to the need for simplification of the procedure of applying for funds , at both national and regional level .
For effective use to be made of all funds , this is a priority .
I also appeal to the Commission to simplify the concept of cohesion policy and focus it on results , and not on complicated monitoring procedures .
The new policy must be characterised by greater flexibility , proportionality and visibility in the use of the funds .
Simplification of procedures would be helped by harmonising the rules concerning management , eligibility , audit and reporting of projects financed by the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund , the Cohesion Fund , the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Fisheries Fund .
Greater coordination of aid from different funds will make the search for solutions to complex problems more effective .
For example , the problem of unemployment requires training for the unemployed , but also needs promotion of enterprise and support for structural infrastructure .
A variety of funds come into play , here . Only effective synergy between them will bring about a reduction in unemployment .
A comprehensive approach of this kind may also help to improve the access of potential beneficiaries to essential information .
The issue of greater effectiveness and more synergies between the various Structural Funds is of major importance in debates about future cohesion policy .
This should be simplified and more integrated .
The future approach should therefore be based on a common strategic framework for the various Structural Funds , in order to ensure a common perspective and to optimise the synergies which can be established between the different funds .
Only with an integrated vision which is focused on results and in line with the objectives of smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , will we be able to talk about strengthened effectiveness between the various Structural Funds .
As the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I believe that we must include regional and local authorities in the preparation and implementation of partnerships , and move towards a thematic concentration of priorities and financial resources to be allocated in the future .
The regional dimension should be present and contribute to demonstrating the benefit of cohesion policy for the EU .
As regards financial instruments , the possibility of using financial engineering instruments should be strengthened , just as provision should be made for Member States and their regions to use multi-fund programmes .
in writing . - ( DE ) The rapporteur has emphasised more than once that greater coordination and an integrated planning and implementation system are vital if the best possible results are to be achieved with the subsidies from the three cohesion policy funds .
Our many years of experience provide sufficient data to enable existing opportunities to be used and to significantly improve European cohesion policy for the future .


in writing . - On the Sanchez-Schmid , Stavrakakis , Vlasak and Mikolasik reports : Conservative MEPs have elected to reject these reports on the future direction of Cohesion policy , with the exception of the Vlasak report where we have abstained .
This is due to a number of fundamental reasons : it is our contention that at a time of ongoing fiscal consolidation across Member States , it is totally unacceptable that the EU 's large Cohesion budget should remain untouched by these efforts .
Generally , these reports fail to meet Conservative concerns regarding the EU 's management of Cohesion policy in any meaningful way .
They reject any moves to allow richer Member States to fund their own regional development and prevent the emergence of a smaller , more efficient and more targeted Cohesion policy towards Europe 's poorest regions .
Instead , new vehicles of bureaucracy such as the macro-regional entities are proposed , and the nation-state is once again undermined by a determined shift towards regionalism .
This age of austerity offers an opportunity for the EU to spend less on old and wasteful priorities . These reports go in entirely the wrong direction .
in writing . - Dear Mr. President , I voted in favour of this report because it insists on the fact that the framework for preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances should complement a Union strategy for growth and jobs aimed at boosting the Union 's competitiveness and social stability .
The text also clearly calls on the Commission to have a stronger and more independent role in the enhanced surveillance procedure , missions , recommendations and warnings .
Current events show that the European Stability and Growth Pact is not very efficient and has failed to prevent several Member States from encountering serious problems in their balance of payments and in paying off their debt .
In addition to the aid provided to these countries by the EU , the institutions are therefore working to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact in order to avoid crises of this kind in the future .
That is the objective of the economic governance package , of which this report by my fellow Member Mrs Ferreira is a part .
The report deals with the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances , and advocates increased supervision .
I support the principles behind this , just as I support the economic governance package as a whole .
On 29 September 2010 , the Commission tabled a legislative package aimed at strengthening economic governance in the European Union and the euro area .
The strengthening of economic governance must be linked to a strengthening of the democratic legitimacy of the decisions made .
In other words , it requires closer and more timely involvement of the interested parties , as well as of national parliaments and the European Parliament .
This report , which I voted for , states that the corrective action plan shall set out the specific policy actions that the Member State concerned has implemented or intends to implement , and it shall include the timetable for them .
Equally important among the corrective measures is the possibility for the Commission to carry out enhanced surveillance missions in the Member State concerned in order to monitor the implementation of the plan .
Lastly , I would like to highlight Parliament 's power to act on its own initiative or at the request of a Member State to invite the President of the Council , the Commission and , where justified , the President of the Euro Group to appear before the relevant parliamentary committee to discuss the decision declaring non-compliance .
The inability to assess with certainty the impact of the directives presented in this report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances is what made up my mind to abstain from the vote .
There is no doubt that the scale of the economic meltdown in Greece , coupled with the risk of a similar crisis hitting many other Member States , urgently requires a strategy to prevent such a disaster from happening again .
On the other hand , however , that strategy should not result in indiscriminate interference by the EU central authority in the economies of individual Member States .
The protection of national powers and freedoms is a guarantee of the proper functioning of the EU , and therefore it must not be sacrificed even under circumstances such as the Greek crisis .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this amendment , because I believe that , following the financial and economic crisis that hit Europe and the rest of the world , it is very important to review the issues of Europe 's macroeconomic development and fiscal discipline .
It is a difficult time , but also the right time to complete and correct the existing model in light of past and present evidence , and for the first time , the European Parliament is involved in the process of making these important decisions .
The prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances is a new disciplinary measure for euro area Member States , under which penalties would be introduced to punish fraud or unwillingness to act on agreed recommendations without acceptable justification , but not the inability to achieve the proposed targets .
This disciplinary measure will take into account the total burden of the penalties imposed on the state , and their total amount will be subject to a maximum cap .
Fines paid will provide revenue for the central fund of the Permanent Crisis Mechanism .
The Ferreira report is part of the legislative package for reforming economic governance , which consists of six reports resulting from months of negotiations .
Parliament has sent a clear message to everyone , and particularly to the Council .
I therefore hope that this package will be definitively approved before the summer recess and , above all , applied as soon as possible , so that the European Union is not unprepared , as it was in the past , to rise to the challenges threatening its stability .
In particular , I voted in favour of the Ferreira report because I believe that the emphasis on the role of the scoreboard , as an instrument for identifying possible imbalances by means of specific criteria , is an excellent basis on which to analyse the problem .
In fact , I believe that the first step to be taken in preventing future economic crises is to analyse thoroughly the risk factors that may lead to budgetary imbalances , and this report duly addresses this issue .
Furthermore , these criteria are common and quantifiable , so they can be assessed and compared uniformly across Europe .
I voted in favour of the report because I agree that , when the Commission carries out its economic reading of the scoreboard in connection with the alert mechanism , it should pay particular attention to the evolution of the real economy , including economic growth and employment and unemployment rates ; nominal and real convergence inside and outside the euro area ; the development of productivity and its main drivers , such as research and development and external or internal investment ; and trends at sectoral level , including energy , which affect the performance of both gross domestic product and current account balance .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the European Union 's current economic governance model has not worked : the surveillance framework has shown itself to be very weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have not been respected .
I therefore support the package of measures that the European Commission has tabled on economic governance .
I endorse Mrs Ferreira 's report on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances .
I congratulate the Commission on the idea of introducing a scoreboard , which has already given good results in the fields of the internal market and the area of freedom , security and justice .
I would like the European Parliament to be able to provide expert help to the Commission in defining the indicators on the scoreboard .
The number of indicators is expected to be quite large , but they should focus mainly on the factors relevant to macroeconomic imbalances .
I agree with the possibility of calling for structural reforms in surplus countries , but most attention should be given to deficit countries .
It is very important to stress the importance of this regulation .
While it is completely new within the EU legal framework , it is absolutely innovative in its content and in what it proposes , which is to identify and correct macroeconomic imbalances in the Union .
Drawing on the lessons to be learnt from the recent crisis , this report is noteworthy for seeking to prioritise the monitoring and coordination of the economic policies adopted in the various Member States , for the sake of a strong , well-balanced economic union .
It aims to set up an alert mechanism for possible future imbalances that may occur in a given Member State , so that they can be effectively remedied straight away .
Lastly , I should like to congratulate my compatriot , Mrs Ferreira , on all her commitment and dedication , which has not always been easy but is clearly commendable .
I believe the Commission should have a stronger and more independent role in the enhanced surveillance procedure as regards assessments that are specific to each Member State , monitoring , missions and recommendations .
I support the Union method , and therefore I agree that the role of the Council should be limited in the steps leading to potential sanctions .
The most important thing , however , is to progress towards economic governance with strong preventive and corrective parts , so as to avoid such sanctions .
The prevention and correction framework and the whole economic governance framework should promote growth and jobs and boost the Union 's competitiveness and social stability .
I therefore agree that surveillance of the economic policies of the Member States should be broadened beyond budgetary surveillance to prevent excessive macroeconomic imbalances and vulnerabilities within the Union .
It is also important to consider internal imbalances , including private and public debt , its evolution and origin ( domestic or international ) and late payments of the country , especially from the public sector and big multinationals to small and medium-sized enterprises .
This report is part of the package of six pieces of legislation on so-called economic governance .
While the intention of the rapporteur and her political group was to make it stand out from the other five , the fact is that it is very revealing of the contradictions that exist in this European Union .
In fact , it is not enough to identify macroeconomic imbalances in the Member States if there are no alternative EU policies to the current ones , based on solidarity and economic and social cohesion , in order to remedy the imbalances .
Pious declarations of good intentions about protecting jobs and workers ' and social rights profoundly contradict statements about maintaining the Stability and Growth Pact ( which has been called ' stupid ' ) , including the toughening of sanctions against those countries with more vulnerable economies that have fallen victim to neoliberal policies , and the Euro Plus Pact .
The rapporteur and her political group also insist on acknowledging that the policies that they have supported and endorsed are the fundamental cause of the crisis , and that the creation of the single currency in the image of the German mark was based on false assumptions , which only served the interests of economic and financial groups in the strongest economies .
If things continue like this , we will inevitably witness an even greater deterioration of the economic , social and political situation .
This report is part of the package of six pieces of legislation on economic governance and reveals the contradictions that exist in the European Union .
The fact is that it is not enough to identify macroeconomic imbalances in the Member States if there are no alternative EU policies based on solidarity and economic and social cohesion to remedy the imbalances .
It is not enough , therefore , to make declarations of good intentions about protecting jobs and workers ' and social rights if , afterwards , they do not put an end to the Stability and Growth Pact and the Euro Pact , replacing them with a genuine Progress and Social Development Pact , but prefer to impose broader demands and tougher sanctions on countries and peoples that have fallen victim to neoliberal policies .
Until Europe 's leaders acknowledge that their policies are the fundamental cause of the crises that persist , we will witness a deterioration of the economic , social and political situation , which will inevitably cause further social tension and more conflicts , with unforeseeable consequences .
That will happen until they recognise that the creation of the single currency in the image of the German mark was based on false assumptions , which only served the interests of powerful economic and financial groups , and that that is the fundamental cause of the exacerbation of the crises ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( SK ) The attempt to correct macroeconomic imbalances is extremely important for the future of the euro area and the EU .
Parliament intends to improve the Commission proposal with the aim of creating a strong and coherent framework for the coming decade , guaranteeing compatibility between fiscal discipline and the goals of economic growth and employment in the Union and in all Member States , because the stability and sustainability of the Union and the euro will be secured only through fulfilment of these conditions .
The strengthening of economic governance must go hand-in-hand with a strengthening of the democratic legitimacy of the decisions adopted .
This requires the closer and more timely involvement in the whole process not only of the relevant interested parties , but especially of the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
It is right that the Stability and Growth Pact and the full framework of administration of economic affairs should support the EU strategy on growth and jobs and comply with them , and also that it should aim to boost the competitiveness of all Member States as well as social stability in all regions of the EU .
The prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances is an effective instrument for handling the weak points arising specifically as a result of medium-term and long-term trends , the growing differences within the Union and the euro area and also the external consequences of policies of individual Member States .
We should improve the framework for economic governance and thus bring about the sustainable and balanced growth of the Union as a whole .
in writing . - ( EL ) The New Democracy group of MEPs voted today in favour of the six proposals in the new economic governance package .
The European Parliament 's proposals pave the way for an environment of economic stability , while at the same time allowing for the development of innovative mechanisms , such as Eurobonds and European project bonds .
in writing . - I will vote in favour of the Ferreira report , as it is the only one that emphatically highlights the crucial importance of retaining a broad macroeconomic perspective which takes into account varying levels of productivity in Member States whilst simultaneously safeguarding fundamental and social rights through the ' Monti clause ' .
On the other hand , the economic package proposed by all the other reports only maintains further implementation of widespread austerity measures , which have had , and might well continue to have , damaging effects on economic growth .
Policies which are solely focused on austerity measures and exclusively encourage further cuts without any investment plans hinder job creation .
This is why I will vote against all the other reports and abstain on the Haglund report .
We need to find an alternative way of dealing with the current crisis which involves implementation of responsible austerity measures coupled with a strong investment plan to ensure that those who are most vulnerable in this crisis are supported .
Indeed , changes such as extensive structural and regulatory reform of the financial sector must take place , but any improvement of the current situation can only occur through the creation of incentives as well as radical and comprehensive modernisation policies and targeted investment .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because this procedure should put in place an alert mechanism for the early detection of emerging macroeconomic imbalances .
It should be based on the use of an indicative and transparent scoreboard , comprising indicative thresholds , combined with economic judgment .
This evaluation should take into account , inter alia , nominal and real convergence in the euro area and beyond .
If severe macroeconomic imbalances are identified , including imbalances that jeopardise the proper functioning of the economic and monetary union , an excessive imbalance procedure should be initiated that may include issuing recommendations to the Member State , enhanced surveillance and monitoring requirements and , in respect of Member States whose currency is the euro , the possibility of enforcement ( penalties ) in the event of sustained failure to take corrective action .
I believe that this is a good instrument for avoiding macroeconomic imbalances .
in writing . - The response that Europe needs is a stability pact .
The package is of major importance for the future of the EU and , in particular , of the euro area .
I support this report because it is a base of a structured economic dialogue .
The prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances is a powerful instrument to address fragilities arising , from medium and long term structural trends , from the enlarging divergences within the Union .
We need to have corrective mechanisms implemented at the right time .
in writing . - ( RO ) This proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances intends to improve the Commission 's proposals on creating a powerful instrument where fiscal discipline , economic growth and employment in the EU are interconnected and make a crucial contribution to the stability of the European Union and the euro , with the aim of avoiding future financial crises like the current one .
This regulation is intended to be a standard instrument for preventing macroeconomic imbalances which may occur as a result of economic disparities between EU Member States and of individual policies implemented nationally .
It should be noted that this report is drafted on the basis of prior experience within the EU on the functioning of the economic and monetary union , which identifies the need for an enhanced economic governance framework , as is proposed in this report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as it was an improvement on the original Commission text .
I particularly welcome the provisions for upholding workers ' rights and the importance of a comprehensive assessment of economic performance , particularly including employment .
in writing . - Labour Euro MPs are fundamentally opposed to the current , austerity-only , direction of the economic governance package .
Improved coordination on economic and fiscal policy , particularly within the Eurozone , would be good for Europe 's long term economic growth but must be based on the right rules .
The text negotiated by the right wing majorities in Parliament , Council and the Commission puts too much emphasis on short term , severe cuts to deficits , not long term growth .
These rules would be imposed across the European Union , removing the flexibility for national governments to respond with different policies in the future .
Long term growth keeps debt falling as a proportion of GDP , and is essential to providing jobs and economic well-being and funding high quality public services .
To ensure this package supports economic growth , investment spending must be protected .
Investment in scientific research , vital infrastructure and the new green economy is crucial to long term growth and should never be cut back to meet short term EU targets .
Cutting such spending in times of recession would also worsen an economic downturn .
Labour Euro MPs support the improvements secured to the Commission proposal on macroeconomic imbalances in the Ferreira report , which uphold workers ' rights and the importance of a comprehensive assessment of economic performance , including employment .
The Commission will now be able to give out good and bad marks at will .
It will itself be introducing the indicators which will allow it to give marks to the Member States .
There will also be sanctions for those who do not follow the ' recommendations ' that will then be imposed .
The Commission will be able to implement them in a semi-automatic fashion , thanks to reversed qualified majority voting .
The Commission will even make the decisions when it comes to imposing sanctions .
This is a masterpiece of authoritarianism .
I am voting against this democratic aberration , which I condemn .
in writing . - ( DE ) The targets identified in terms of economic growth , employment and competitiveness cannot be attained through the planned measures because the economic development of the Member States is being stifled .
A framework for controlling economic policy can perhaps be implemented by the various constituent Member States , but not by the EU as a whole , because the strength of the different national economies varies so much .
That is why the euro area should be dissolved as quickly as possible .
The strong states should unite to form a new monetary union and the others should return to their own currencies .
A call for the surveillance of national economic policies in the present situation would mean socialist state intervention , something that failed in the past and that is one of the reasons for the current financial difficulties in the euro area .
There is little democratic legitimisation for such measures , which is why I voted against this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Commission 's proposals primarily aim to tighten up the regulations of the Stability and Growth Pact .
At the same time , one support mechanism after another is being established for the ' budgetary black sheep ' , once again involving taxpayers ' money .
It is about time that we concentrated on stable , sovereign national economies and reducing the national debts of individual states .
It is outrageous that the same hard-working countries should again and again be required to pay for the mistakes of others .
What we need are democratic solutions rather than bureaucratic procedures in order to ensure significant and effective coordination of economic policy at EU level that will benefit all the people of Europe .
in writing . - ( LT ) It is very important to establish an effectively functioning , fully-fledged mechanism for the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances , which would warn about and respond promptly to the risk of macroeconomic imbalances .
It is very important for this mechanism to be based on the use of an indicative and transparent scoreboard .
The Commission , together with the Council and the European Parliament , must construct this scoreboard and macroeconomic and macrofinancial indicators intended for Member States .
I believe that , under special economic circumstances , the scoreboard of indicators and alert thresholds , should be symmetric and differentiated for euro area and non-euro area Member States .
Furthermore , the Council should provide regular reports on the measures carried out that led the excessive imbalance procedure to be placed in a position of abeyance in a certain Member State .
I agree with the proposal to give the Commission the right to carry out enhanced surveillance missions in liaison with the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , social partners and other national stakeholders .
The risk of imbalances must be assessed constantly in order to prevent them from emerging , and the Member States must be given timely recommendations to avoid possible interference with the functioning of the economic and monetary union .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this particular report on macroeconomic imbalances because it addresses the details about the current debt issue in some member states , and more importantly , it offers a progressive method to solve such a serious problem concerning not only short-term but also long-term consequences .
I believe that Europe needs progressive investment to help with economic growth and job creation , and therefore simply just cutting budgets could only undermine the entire economic and political system in the long term .
As a social democrat who emphasizes the fundamental of social rights of the people and the long-term well being of the society , I support this proposal for its depth and comprehensiveness in addressing these issues .
I voted in favour of Mrs Ferreira 's report because I believe that an EU-coordinated surveillance mechanism for the identification and prevention of macroeconomic imbalances is important , as is a procedure for the correction of excessive imbalances .
The identification system , described as an ' alert mechanism ' , uses both a scoreboard of quantitative indicators and qualitative assessments .
I believe that this scoreboard is important in terms of giving us a general and complete overview , and I therefore believe it should be a flexible and adaptable instrument so that it can be modified and adapted to varying requirements and situations , clearly guaranteeing a framework of legal certainty .
I hope that Parliament will reach a final agreement and approve the entire governance package as quickly as possible , in order to send a strong and unified message to the public and the markets and to stop speculation .
On 29 September 2010 , the Commission tabled a legislative package aimed at reinforcing economic governance in the EU and the euro area .
The package is made up of six proposals : four of them deal with budgetary issues , including a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) , while two new regulations aim at detecting and resolving emerging macroeconomic imbalances within the EU and the euro area .
This draft opinion is on the proposal , tabled by the Commission , for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1466 / 97 on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies .
It is generally agreed that the SGP has failed in terms of both prevention and correction , and needs to be reformed .
I agree with the amendments to the proposal initially tabled by the Commission , which were supported by a broad majority in the European Parliament .
I would argue that it is important to take into account the experience acquired during the years when the old SGP existed , along with the fact that economic governance has become more democratic through the European Parliament 's involvement throughout the entire surveillance process .
I therefore voted for this report .
Experience gained during the first decade of functioning of the economic and monetary union shows a clear need for an improved economic governance framework .
The legislative proposals on governance adopted by the Commission in September 2010 will have to be examined carefully and improved by Parliament , in view of their fundamental role for the future of the EU and , in particular , in the euro area .
Strengthening economic governance should go hand in hand with reinforcing the democratic legitimacy of the decisions taken , because economic governance cannot be dissociated from financial market regulation and supervision .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , the Council requires Parliament 's agreement to reach a final consensus .
This is the first time Parliament has co-decided with the Council on macroeconomic developments and fiscal discipline in the Union .
I voted in favour of an extensive reform of the governance framework based on the Community method in order to ensure that Parliament improves the Commission proposals on the establishment of a robust and coherent framework for the next decades , guaranteeing compatibility between fiscal discipline and economic growth .
This is the only report seeking to go against the dominant trend for the economic governance package as a whole .
I abstained from the vote to highlight this aspect and acknowledge its value .
Mrs Ferreira 's report is concerned with preventing severe macroeconomic imbalances .
In it , deficit and debt are no more important than surpluses and commercial deficits , than employment and unemployment , or than any qualitative challenges that might ensure a sustainable growth strategy .
It is sensible to have this type of wide-ranging coordination , based on a scoreboard of various indicators that identifies imbalances at an early stage .
What prevents me from voting for this report is the fact that it is the poor relation of a form of coordination whose beginning and end are still deficit and debt .
in writing . - The current economic crisis facing Europe requires a new approach .
The crisis is political as well as economic in nature and we have seen time and time again that Europe is strongest when it acts together and a unified response to this crisis is the best response .
Even the approach by the EU is novel in this regard as this is the first time the Parliament is co-deciding with the Council on macroeconomic developments and the Council needs the Parliament 's agreement in order to reach a final consensus .
This report represents a large number of compromises from all sides of the argument .
It is vitally important to send a strong signal to the markets and to citizens both of the EU 's intention to combat this financial crisis and of its capacity to resolve differences and address crucial issues .
I also welcome the approach taken to address fraud and an unwillingness to act on agreed recommendations without a reasonable justification .
It is important that such sanctions exist but it is equally important that we do not punish states where they are unable to achieve proposed targets and I welcome the report in this respect .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour .
This report seeks to include prevention and correction mechanisms for Member States when they are facing fiscal imbalances .
The prevention side includes mechanisms such as an annual review of fiscal balances , early warning mechanisms from the European Commission and prevention recommendations to address minor imbalances .
As a corrective measure , a procedure to deal with excessive imbalances will be introduced , namely the excessive imbalance procedure ( EIP ) and also the requirement to submit specific action plans by Member States .
I have voted in favour of this report mainly because it includes the economic imbalances in the Stability and Growth Pact , the Europe 2020 strategy and the European semester .
In other words the real economy is integrated into the procedures of economic control and coordination .
In addition , a series of indicators to determine economic imbalances are included and also , in the interests of consistency , recommendations and indicators such as , for example , investment in research and development and the energy sector .
I believe that the package of interventions contained in the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council may be effective in preventing macroeconomic imbalances , especially in the euro area .
Furthermore , Parliament intends to improve the Commission proposals in order to establish a robust and coherent legislative framework guaranteeing economic growth and employment for the next decades .
At this particularly difficult time for the EU , it is vital to respond by amending , completing and correcting the current sustainable growth model , and by strengthening economic governance and the democratic legitimacy of the decisions taken .
in writing . - The ECR has always worked constructively to ensure that the eurozone can formulate a lasting solution to its sovereign debt crisis .
The defects of the Stability and Growth Pact , in both its substance and its enforcement , have been obvious for some time ; it is right that efforts are now underway to ensure a lasting settlement that works .
We have contributed throughout the committee and trialogue process to ensure that the Parliament 's preferred outcome is realistic , workable , and lasting .
Nevertheless , we regret that what has been proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Parliament is not a solution merely for the eurozone , but one that includes those whose currency is not the euro .
Whichever way one looks at it , the package we have voted on is one which increases the powers of the EU at the expense of the Member States .
It includes concepts that are innovative , such as reversed qualified majority voting and the fining of Member States , and ensures that national budgets are no longer a matter merely for national parliaments .
So while we endorse the long term goals , we cannot endorse the means and have voted against those reports which do not confine themselves to the eurozone .
The stability of the euro area , in particular , and of Europe as a whole requires the restructuring of prevention and surveillance instruments , in order to correct macroeconomic imbalances .
Financial consolidation is essential for correcting the errors of the past , and for a sustained growth of Europe 's economies that is not supported by public and foreign debt , but rather by the promotion of employment and competitiveness .
This report focuses on the scoreboard of macroeconomic and structural statistical indicators that enable comparisons to be made among Member States , reflecting structural , and short- , medium- and long-term trends .
The inclusion of new indicators , and the establishment of lower and upper thresholds that will be symmetric when appropriate , will enable these indicators to serve as alert levels to avoid the current financial rescues being undertaken by the Commission and the International Monetary Fund .
This new smart , symmetrical system will lead to surveillance that is more rigorous , to assessments by the Commission , the European Parliament , the Council and the European Central Bank that are more thorough , and to the drafting of recommendations on additional reforms and corrective plans .
At a critical juncture for the European project , I consider the involvement of all the European and national authorities essential , in order for the necessary measures to be taken early .
Current events show that the European Stability and Growth Pact is not very efficient and has failed to prevent several Member States from encountering serious problems in their balance of payments and in paying off their debt .
In addition to the aid provided to these countries by the EU , the institutions are therefore working to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact in order to avoid crises of this kind in the future .
That is the objective of the economic governance package , of which this report by my colleague Mr Feio is a part .
The report deals with the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
I am in favour , in particular , of calculating debt reduction according to an average rate calculated over a three-year period , rather than according to a fixed rate each year over a three-year period .
I supported this report , just as I support the economic governance package as a whole .
The economic and financial crisis has exposed and reinforced the need for coordination and improved surveillance of economic policies within the economic and monetary union .
These recent experiences have also revealed failings and shortcomings in the current system of coordination and in existing surveillance procedures .
The crisis has dramatically reversed the favourable conditions in which the economic and financial sector operated until 2007 , and the majority of Member States need to undergo a process of consolidating their accounts to reduce public debt .
For the majority of countries , debt reduction is a crucial issue , given the negative effects that it has on economic incentives , and on the growth of the economy thanks to increased taxes and risk premiums .
This report argues that the Commission and the Council should undertake a balanced comprehensive assessment of all the relevant factors , especially of the extent to which they affect , as aggravating or attenuating circumstances , the assessment of compliance with the deficit and / or debt criteria .
The Council will demand that the Member State meet its annual budgetary targets , which will enable a minimum of a 0.5 % increase in gross domestic product per year .
For the above reasons , I voted for this report .
I chose to abstain from the vote on this report on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 97 on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
Although the relationship forged between the economies of individual Member States , and between them and the Union , needs to be reviewed , particularly in the light of what has happened in Greece and of the fact that various other Member States are showing signs of an imminent financial crisis on the same scale as that in Greece , such a review cannot be carried out using the methods presented in this report .
The report seeks to correct the vulnerabilities of national economies by increasing - excessively in my view - the authority of the EU over the Member States themselves , thus sacrificing their freedom and powers in relation to finance .
I therefore cannot vote in favour of this report .
The Feio report is part of the legislative package for reforming economic governance , which consists of six reports resulting from months of negotiations .
Parliament has sent a clear message to everyone , and particularly to the Council .
I therefore hope that this package will be definitively approved before the summer recess and , above all , applied as soon as possible , so that the European Union is not unprepared , as it was in the past , to rise to the challenges threatening its stability .
In particular , I voted in favour of the Feio report because I believe that it correctly emphasises the essential role that Parliament must play in preventing future economic crises .
The text stresses the central importance of the dialogue that Parliament will have to establish with representatives of the national parliaments in order to safeguard the democratic process when issues relating to the EU 's economic stability arise .
Furthermore , the report proposes a three-year period in which to bring down the total debt , which I consider reasonable and sufficient .
I voted for the report because I agree that , when it exceeds the reference value , the ratio of the government debt to gross domestic product is to be considered sufficiently diminishing and approaching the reference value at a satisfactory pace in accordance with Article 126 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) if the differential with respect to the reference value has decreased over the previous three years at an average rate of one twentieth per year as a benchmark , following an assessment made over a three-year period for which there are data .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the economic governance model in force in the European Union has not worked : the surveillance framework has shown itself to be very weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have not been respected .
I therefore support the package of measures that the European Commission has tabled on economic governance .
I am voting for the excellent report by Mr Feio on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
I welcome the call for the process by which the European Commission publishes its recommendations to be sped up .
I agree with the proposal that the European Parliament have the right to invite the representatives of the Member States and I regret that the Council has not accepted it .
I welcome the opportunity granted to the Commission to carry out additional surveillance visits and the fact that the European Central Bank could play a part in those visits .
I decided to vote against four of the six proposals included in the economic governance package as I felt that they contain only austerity measures which would make the European economy even more fragile .
In order to resume economic growth , we need an alternative model to the one proposed in the package , which is based on strategic investments and creating new jobs .
in writing . - ( SV ) As Swedish Social Democrats we view the broad package of reforms for stronger economic governance within the EU as an important tool for creating order in the European economy .
A tighter Stability and Growth Pact , increased requirements for transparency and discipline in the national budgetary frameworks and a new system for preventing economic imbalances are all key elements in the work to stabilise state finances and the financial market .
The fact that we have chosen not to vote in favour of five out of the six reports today is not because we are against stricter regulations .
On the contrary , we believe that stricter regulations need to be put into place quickly .
The purpose of our voting strategy was instead to send a clear signal that certain trends in the package for introducing austerity measures that are far too extensive ought to be exchanged for a more balanced approach in the final negotiating rounds .
Regulations that do not provide sufficient scope for forward-looking investments and sound growth cannot be sustainable in the long term .
The rules on budgetary discipline and on complying with and enforcing it should be strengthened , in particular by giving a more prominent role to the level and evolution of debt and overall sustainability .
I therefore agree with an assessment of the sustainability of public finances , including the debt level , debt profile - including maturity - and debt dynamics .
In this context , private debt cannot be forgotten , to the extent that it may represent a contingent implicit liability for governments .
The framework to control public debt and private debt should support long-term growth , taking due account of the anti-cyclical role of budgetary policy as well as improving the preconditions for investments and the development of the internal market , which is essential to ensuring the correct functioning and the strengthening of the economic and monetary union .
It is important to establish a European Monetary Fund , managed under Union rules and financed in particular with the revenues from the fines , in order to safeguard financial stability of the euro area as whole .
This report is part of the legislative package on economic governance and is one of its key elements .
It is the regulation on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
While it starts from the premise that there is a crisis in the euro area and a need for a comprehensive and integrated solution to the debt crisis in the euro area , given the lack of success of the fragmented approach used until now , the report ends up calling for the same type of monetarist and neoliberal policies and criteria that led to the crisis .
It reiterates and tightens the veritable stranglehold imposed on the Member States , without a care for the causes of the problems , or for alternative policies that take into account economies ' different levels of development .
As such , instead of proposing a pact for progress and social development founded on solidarity and on genuine policies of economic and social cohesion , as we have been advocating , it calls for a deepening of the Stability and Growth Pact and , now , the Euro-Plus Pact .
It expands and reinforces application of sanctions and payment of fines for Member States that do not comply with the impositions .
This is unacceptable interference , which puts Member States subjected to this excessive deficit procedure in a position of veritable colonial-style submission to the European powers .
This is one of the key pieces of legislation in the economic governance package .
It is the regulation on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
While it starts from the premise that there is a crisis in the euro area and even acknowledges the need for a comprehensive and integrated solution to the debt crisis in the euro area , given the lack of success of the fragmented approach used until now , it ends up calling for the same type of monetarist and neoliberal policies and criteria , so tightening the veritable stranglehold imposed on the Member States , without a care for the causes of the problems , or for alternative policies that take into account economies ' different levels of development .
As such , instead of proposing a pact for progress and social development founded on solidarity and on genuine policies of economic and social cohesion , it calls for a deepening of the Stability and Growth Pact and the Euro-Plus Pact .
It also expands the application of sanctions and payment of fines to Member States that do not meet any of the requirements imposed on them .
This is unacceptable interference , which puts Member States subjected to this excessive deficit procedure in a position of veritable colonial submission to the European powers .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - ( SK ) The global economic and financial crisis has revealed and deepened the need for more intensive coordination and better economic governance in the economic and monetary union .
The existing instruments and procedures for coordination and surveillance have enabled the EU to overcome a crisis which no Member State could have overcome alone .
The European institutions and Member States are all striving to recover from the crisis .
This experience , however , has revealed shortcomings and weak points in the current system of coordination and in existing surveillance processes .
It is essential to strengthen the framework of the economic and monetary union with the aim of securing macroeconomic stability and the sustainability of public finances , which are a precondition for sustainable performance and growth in employment .
The individual elements of coordination in the area of economic policy , including surveillance of structural reforms , must be integrated into the new surveillance cycle , the so-called European Semester , which unites the existing processes in the pact with the main aims of economic policies , ensuring that stabilisation and convergence programmes and national reform programmes are submitted concurrently .
in writing . - ( EL ) The New Democracy group of MEPs voted today in favour of the six proposals in the new economic governance package .
The European Parliament 's proposals pave the way for an environment of economic stability , while at the same time allowing for the development of innovative action mechanisms , such as Eurobonds and European project bonds .
in writing . - ( DE ) Greater coordination and closer monitoring of economic policy in Member States is essential if we are to learn from the mistakes of the economic and financial crisis and combat the current debt crisis in some Member States .
This report is a response to the question of precisely how to organise this new coordination and monitoring process .
The debate regarding the enormous deficits in some countries should be noted in Belgium above all , particularly in this transitional period in which Belgium has no government .
This transitional period is extremely problematic because of its major influence on the economy , social policy and the financial sector in Belgium and is not exactly instrumental in improving the situation .
If a country like Belgium wishes to ensure that Europe is not allowed to make decisions on Belgium 's behalf in the future , then it is high time to demand that those responsible for federal policy should recognise their responsibilities to their citizens , instead of intervening with the Commission for the retention of the index or of social policy in Belgium .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because this regulation sets out provisions to speed up and clarify the excessive deficit procedure .
The objective of the excessive deficit procedure is to prevent excessive government deficits and , if they occur , to further prompt their correction , where compliance with the budgetary discipline is examined on the basis of the government deficit and government debt criteria .
The rules on budgetary discipline should be strengthened , above all by giving a more prominent role to the level and evolution of debt and overall sustainability .
Compliance with these rules should be strengthened , along with systems for their enforcement .
Economic governance should be enhanced by also involving the European Parliament and national parliaments in a more active and timely manner .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I strongly oppose the programme of crippling austerity measures which is being driven through the European Union by the centre-right .
This package of economic governance reforms will stifle growth in the EU at the very time we need investment for growth , for research and development and for jobs , to secure the economic future of Europe .
This financial reform package will hit the poorest in Europe the hardest , while leaving the cause of the crisis - the financial sector - untouched .
I welcome improved coordination of economic and fiscal policy in Europe , but strongly oppose the short-term vision under which this is being imposed .
Long-term investment in the green economy , in scientific research and in infrastructure is absolutely crucial to economic stability , job creation and growth , and I cannot support this package of reforms which seeks crippling austerity across Europe .
This proposal concerns the speeding up and clarification of the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
We believe that the enforcement of budgetary surveillance should always be subject to overarching objectives of the EU , and in particular to the requirements related to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection and the fight against social exclusion .
In monitoring compliance with the rules on budgetary discipline , consideration should also be given to social downturns which may have an impact on the financial position of governments .
We also maintain that Member States implementing structural reforms which contribute to job preservation or creation and to reduction of poverty should be given the opportunity to deviate from their respective medium-term budgetary objectives .
Lastly , we believe that strengthening economic governance should go hand in hand with reinforcing the democratic legitimacy of European governance , and that the role of the European Parliament should be strengthened in the whole surveillance process .
In addition , regular consultation of the social partners and a stronger involvement of national parliaments are necessary preconditions of a credible and transparent surveillance framework .
This report proposes extending reversed qualified majority voting in order to fine Member States whose policies do not conform to Euro-liberal standards .
Even worse , it calls on the Commission to introduce a speeded-up punishment process for intentional non-conformity .
The one exemption that exists concerns Member States who reform their pension systems as desired by the Commission .
In this way , an authoritarian federalism is established .
I will never accept my country paying any fines to anyone .
in writing . - ( DE ) Monitoring budgets should not simply involve gaining access to correct facts and figures .
Of course the Commission should also issue recommendations , for example in relation to reducing debt .
However , under no circumstances should we allow Member States to be dictated to on how to spend their money .
European governance is not something the citizens of the EU want , nor is it provided for in the Union 's Treaties .
It represents clear contempt for the principle of subsidiarity .
It is not governance by the EU that will help the affected countries to recover economically , but rather a withdrawal from the euro area .
I am unable to support this motion for the reasons stated .
in writing . - ( DE ) The economic governance proposals are clearly in breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
I have voted against this report because it significantly undermines both European integration and economic and social conditions in the Member States .
in writing . - ( LT ) The excessive deficit procedure must move more rapidly and promptly , in order to prevent excessive government deficits .
I believe that the rules on budgetary discipline must be strengthened by paying particular attention to the level of debt .
In order to achieve the objectives outlined , the Commission must be given a special role in the areas of assessments , monitoring and recommendations .
In carrying out assessments , the Commission and the Council must also take into account pension reforms implemented by the relevant Member State .
I do not agree with the proposal to reduce the size of the penalty for Member States that failed to implement or did not properly implement actions or instruments to control the deficit .
I do not think that it is advisable to reduce the overall annual amount of fines , because the fines collected must be used to implement stability mechanisms .
First of all , I wish to congratulate Mr Feio on his excellent report .
I believe that the ratio of debt to GDP should be reduced at a ' satisfactory pace ' .
In this sense , the differential between current government debt and the 60 % reference value should be reduced by one-twentieth per year .
I welcome Mr Feio 's amendment to the initial Commission proposal , according to which the reduction should be calculated at an average rate of one-twentieth per year over the previous three years .
I also agree that the assessment of compliance with this condition should begin three years after the closure of the excessive deficit procedures currently under way .
Above all , I welcome the fact that , when applying the regulation on government debt , the Commission will have to take into account ' all other relevant factors ' , in particular private debt , and other important factors allowing for an overall assessment to be made .
I hope that Parliament will reach a final agreement and approve the entire governance package as quickly as possible , in order to send a strong and unified message to the public and the markets and to stop speculation .
As part of the legislative package aimed at reinforcing economic governance in the EU and the euro area , there has also been a vote on this draft opinion on the Commission 's proposal amending the regulation on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
I voted for this report because I essentially share the rapporteur 's concerns , particularly as regards the following points : 1 ) the enforcement of budgetary surveillance should be subject to the overarching objectives of the EU ; 2 ) in monitoring compliance with the rules on budgetary discipline , consideration should be given , not only to severe economic downturns , but also to social crises that may have an impact on the financial position of governments ; 3 ) fines collected from Member States failing to comply with their respective recommendations should be used in support of the EU 's long-term investment and job targets , and not distributed only to the Member States that are not subject to any procedure relating to excessive deficits , as the Commission proposed ; 4 ) regular consultation of the social partners and a stronger involvement of national parliaments are necessary preconditions of a credible and transparent surveillance framework .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted against .
This is because of the introduction of a hard pro-cyclical measure to deal with the excessive deficit .
I refer specifically the 1 / 20 measure that involves the reduction of the annual public debt by 5 % in three consecutive years if it exceeds 60 % of Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) even if the deficit is less than 3 % of GDP .
This measure is based on the supposition that economic growth depends exclusively on the reduction of public spending .
In other words , that tackling public debt involves the direct application of austerity plans , particularly rigorous ones , regardless of the circumstances .
The main aim of the legislative package presented by the Commission in 2010 is to revive economic governance in the EU and the euro area .
This is of strategic importance in a crisis such as the one we are going through .
Improving the Member States ' development and growth plans , optimising the coordination of budgetary policies and strengthening the procedures for monitoring deficits and national debt are just some of the priorities to be pursued .
To achieve these results , however , our efforts need to be fully in line with labour market recovery plans and social protection policies , the cornerstone of a new sustainable growth model .
in writing . - The ECR has always worked constructively to ensure that the eurozone can formulate a lasting solution to its sovereign debt crisis .
The defects of the Stability and Growth Pact , in both its substance and its enforcement , have been obvious for some time ; it is right that efforts are now underway to ensure a lasting settlement that works .
We have contributed throughout the committee and trialogue process to ensure that the Parliament 's preferred outcome is realistic , workable , and lasting .
Nevertheless , we regret that what has been proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Parliament is not a solution merely for the eurozone , but one that includes those whose currency is not the euro .
Whichever way one looks at it , the package we have voted on is one which increases the powers of the EU at the expense of the Member States .
It includes concepts that are innovative , such as reversed qualified majority voting and the fining of Member States , and ensures that national budgets are no longer a matter merely for national parliaments .
So while we endorse the long term goals , we cannot endorse the means and have voted against those reports which do not confine themselves to the eurozone .
Recent events have shown that the various Stability and Growth Pacts did not have the desired effect : instead , several Member States have faced severe problems meeting their obligations and have risked increasing their public debt .
The report adopted in plenary today includes a broader package of measures that constitute the proposals for European economic governance .
Specifically , this report analyses the issue of Member States ' excessive debts and considers the problems of the European Union as a whole , not just in the sense of resolving the deficits , but also the level of public debt , so as to ensure that procedures are implemented with a view to correcting the infringement early on and thus prevent corrective measures from being implemented when it is already too late .
The implementation of the measures is essential for the euro area .
With the outcome of the negotiations and the progress made in recent months in trialogue , I hope that we can expect the Commission 's recommendations to be published more quickly , and count on genuine economic dialogue .
I hope that the possibility of reviewing the recommendations on the basis of the economic downturns can also contribute to its success , provided that it does not threaten fiscal sustainability .
in writing . - ( LT ) One of the things that the crisis in Greece shows us is the urgent need for fiscal responsibility .
Otherwise , all EU Member States , not just Greece , will face serious problems , because two thirds of EU Member States have an excessive deficit .
I am pleased that the rapporteur underlines this fact .
The report includes more , but the most important proposals are to overcome the excessive budget deficit and to finalise means of combating deficits in the future .
The report also touches upon another important aspect - that we must combat the budget deficit without damaging growth , particularly as far as generating the economy is concerned .
It is important that the system intended to manage public and private debt should support long-term growth .
This would include improving investment conditions and development of the internal market , while also taking into account the specific priorities and needs of the Member States .
Most importantly , we need transparency , accountability and independent surveillance .
This is an essential part of increasing economic governance .
The national budgetary frameworks should include the establishment and strengthening of the role of independent fiscal bodies and ensure the publication of transparent fiscal statistics .
Current events show that the European Stability and Growth Pact is not very efficient and has failed to prevent several Member States from encountering serious problems in their balance of payments and in paying off their debt .
In addition to the aid provided to these countries by the EU , the institutions are therefore working to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact in order to avoid crises of this kind in the future .
That is the objective of the economic governance package , of which this report by my fellow Member Mrs Ford is a part .
The report deals with requirements for the budgetary frameworks of the Member States .
I supported this report , just as I support the economic governance package as a whole .
I abstained from the vote because I have doubts about the long-term impact that the directives proposed in the report will have on the Member States ' national economies .
In particular , these directives propose to strengthen surveillance mechanisms in a stringent manner in order to prevent any more Greek-style financial crises within the Union .
In my view , the Member States ' economic problems will not be solved by simply restricting their powers and their role , and that is why I decided to abstain from the vote .
The Ford report is part of the legislative package for reforming economic governance , which consists of six reports resulting from months of negotiations .
Parliament has sent a clear message to everyone , and particularly to the Council .
I therefore hope that this package will be definitively approved before the summer recess and , above all , applied as soon as possible , so that the European Union is not unprepared , as it was in the past , to rise to the challenges threatening its stability .
In particular , I voted in favour of the Ford report because I believe that harmonising national systems through the development of minimum requirements and , above all , forecasting plans for public accounting systems is a basic rule if we want to prevent economic crises in future .
This should not mean , however , that we overlook the national nature of fiscal regulations , which contain some considerable differences , especially between countries within and outside the euro area .
I voted for the report because I agree that the Member States should establish an authoritatively scrutinised , effective medium-term budgetary framework providing for the adoption of a fiscal planning horizon of at least four years to ensure that national fiscal planning is part of a multiannual fiscal planning perspective .
Member States should establish appropriate mechanisms of coordination across subsectors of general government , to provide for comprehensive and consistent coverage of all subsectors in fiscal planning , numerical fiscal rules , specific to each country , and in the preparation of budgetary forecasts , and setting up multiannual planning as laid down in the multiannual budgetary framework , in particular .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the European Union 's current economic governance model has not worked : the surveillance framework has shown itself to be very weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have not been respected .
I therefore support the package of measures that the European Commission has tabled on economic governance .
I am voting for the Ford report on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States .
I welcome the fact that the regulation will be applicable to all EU Member States .
I would stress the need for means of independent oversight to be established .
I welcome the possibility that governments that have just come to power might have the right to update their budgetary framework in the medium term to reflect new political priorities .
I voted in favour of this directive because I believe it has succeeded in striking the right balance between rigour , which is a requirement in this area , and discretion , connected to the economic situation .
We must not forget that our economic and monetary union has never been equalled in terms of its size , heterogeneity and level of development .
There is no instruction manual on how to create the perfect monetary union , and nor can any absolute value be put on the knowledge acquired until now , since the socio-economic peculiarities of the euro area are liable to make any comparisons meaningless .
Therefore - and the rapporteur has done very well in this respect - it must be emphasised that the Maastricht criteria , an excellent point of reference and suitable benchmark for establishing the credibility our currency needs , are not absolute values to be upheld everywhere , all of the time .
There may be economic situations in which to deviate from those limits is a risk worth taking , provided that any additional debt finances a recovery that cannot be further delayed .
I congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work she has done , and in a short amount of time at that , and I hope that the political debate and the intellectual debate on these issues can be combined in order to guarantee the people of Europe the prosperity that monetary policy helps to create .
If we really want to prevent future crises ; if we want to create a cohesive and responsible economic Union ; if we want to be guided by a perspective of prevention and correction ; if we want to commit to sustainable growth then , for this package to be complete , this directive was essential .
In this directive we find a series of fundamental premises whose application by national governments will make their budgetary policy rules more transparent , not least as regards publication of budgetary forecasts and performance .
I believe that with everything we are achieving here , the Union will be increasingly prepared to coordinate and to prevent potential problems , shortcomings and imbalances in a unified way .
Finally , I should like to thank my colleague , Mrs Ford , for all her efforts and commitment towards concluding this report .
This report , drafted by Mrs Ford , is on the legislative proposal for amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 97 on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure , which is part of the economic governance package , adopted by the Commission on 29 September 2010 , seeking to ' anchor macroeconomic stability and the sustainability of public finances ' so as to make the EU more robust and sustainable .
The current economic and financial situation of various EU countries demonstrates the failure of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is not enough to control the public deficit .
There is also a need to avoid public and private debt .
It is now also becoming necessary to introduce mechanisms that improve competitiveness and restore public finances .
The Member States will be prevented from taking on excessive deficits .
The measures for coordination and surveillance that ensure respect for budgetary discipline will be reinforced .
I voted for this proposal for a legislative amendment , since I believe it is crucial for the recovery of public confidence in the institutions and for sustainable growth in the EU that these measures be implemented as soon as possible .
This report is on the proposal for a directive on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States , and constitutes one of the most serious attacks on their sovereignty .
Budgetary choices , which are key to determining the path each country will follow , according to its specific characteristics , its interests and the will of its people , are under threat .
The situation is particularly serious for the most vulnerable economies of the euro area , which are considered to have ' excessive deficits ' and could be subjected to severe sanctions .
This directive is part of the legislative package on so-called ' economic governance ' , which is made up of six legislative texts , and which is a veritable attack on social and labour rights , as well as democracy itself .
The intention of this legislative package is an unprecedented attack on the rights of the national parliaments and , in Portugal , on the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic itself .
From now on , the members of the national parliaments will be governed by guidelines from the European Union on their countries ' budgets .
These guidelines are increasingly neoliberal and determined , essentially , by the directorate of powers that hold the majority of votes in the Council and European Parliament .
Our only option is to vote against .
This is one of two reports on the proposal for a directive on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States .
It constitutes one of the most serious attacks on their sovereignty , and this situation will be even worse for those in the euro area considered to have excessive deficits , which , in addition to continuous surveillance by the European Commission , could be subject to sanctions .
This directive is part of the legislative package on so-called ' economic governance ' , which is made up of six legislative texts , and which is a veritable attack on social and labour rights .
It is also part of the European Union 's crusade against national independence and sovereignty .
The result of the negotiations is the final agreement between the three institutions - the European Parliament , the Council and the European Commission - and it will surely be confirmed by the Council of 24 June , despite the contradictions existing at EU level .
The intended outcome is an unprecedented attack on the rights of the national parliaments and on the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic , whose members are governed by guidelines from the European Union on their countries ' budgets ; these guidelines are increasingly neoliberal .
We therefore voted against .
in writing . - ( SK ) The global economic and financial crisis sharply reversed the favourable economic and financial conditions prevailing up to 2007 , and again emphasised the fact that proper use was not made of the unforeseen profits that were accumulated in the favourable period to create an opportunity for effective procedures in the unfavourable period .
The availability of fiscal data is essential to the proper functioning of EU budgetary surveillance .
Timely and reliable fiscal data are essential for proper and well-timed monitoring , making it possible to adopt prompt measures in case of an unfavourable budgetary situation .
Transparency is a fundamental element in ensuring the quality of fiscal data , and must include the regular availability of such data .
in writing . - ( EL ) The New Democracy group of MEPs voted today in favour of the six proposals in the new economic governance package .
The European Parliament 's proposals pave the way for an environment of economic stability , while at the same time allowing for the development of innovative action mechanisms , such as Eurobonds and European project bonds .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because the economic governance package is aimed at responding to the need for greater coordination and closer surveillance of economic policies in the economic and monetary union .
Furthermore , requirements are proposed for the budgetary frameworks of the Member States to encourage fiscal responsibility by setting minimum requirements for national fiscal frameworks and ensuring that they are in line with Treaty obligations .
To back up the changes in the preventive and corrective arms of the Stability and Growth Pact , the Commission also proposed strengthening the enforcement mechanisms for the euro area Member States .
In general , I welcome the proposals put forward to ensure improvements in national fiscal frameworks and to encourage Member States to make better fiscal decisions in the future .
In particular , proposals for improved statistical reporting of fiscal data are required in order to avoid a repeat of recent experiences in some Member States .
Likewise , proposals for independent budgetary offices , national fiscal rules , and mandatory multi-year budgeting should also help provide greater fiscal stability .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I strongly oppose the programme of crippling austerity measures which is being driven through the European Union by the centre-right .
This package of economic governance reforms will stifle growth in the EU at the very time we need investment for growth , for research and development and for jobs , to secure the economic future of Europe .
This financial reform package will hit the poorest in Europe the hardest , while leaving the cause of the crisis - the financial sector - untouched .
I welcome improved coordination of economic and fiscal policy in Europe , but strongly oppose the short-term vision under which this is being imposed .
Long-term investment in the green economy , in scientific research and in infrastructure is absolutely crucial to economic stability , job creation and growth , and I cannot support this package of reforms which seeks crippling austerity across Europe .
The Commission proposes to reinforce Member States ' compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact , deepen fiscal policy coordination , set minimum requirements for fiscal frameworks and specify the mechanisms for enforcing the current rules .
We welcome the proposal put forward to ensure improvements in national fiscal frameworks and to encourage Member States to make better fiscal decisions in the future .
Likewise , we support the establishment of independent budgetary offices , national fiscal rules and mandatory multi-year budgeting to provide greater economic and monetary stability .
We believe that the requirements for national budgetary frameworks should not only ensure that fiscal planning of Member States is based on realistic forecasts , but should also ensure that appropriate attention is given to the sustainability of their respective social protection systems , including pension and health care systems .
Lastly , we believe that the requirements for national budgetary frameworks should be designed in such a way as to encourage Member States and leave them room for manoeuvre for development-oriented public investments , such as in education and training , contributing to the achievement of the EU 's growth and employment objectives .
This report calls on the Commission to publish the accounts of national governments each month .
They will have to do so according to the norms specified to them by the Commission itself .
We are no longer pretending to set budgets at national level except to ' build support ' .
This report shows approval for this state of affairs , to which a majority in Parliament contributed by voting for the introduction of the European Semester .
I am voting against this report .
The French will abolish it .
in writing . - ( DE ) The intention behind the report - ensuring budgetary discipline in the Member States - is to be welcomed .
While I have heard the message , I am not sure I believe it .
There is also a silent majority in Europe that agrees with me .
Interventions in the budgets of the Member States should be rejected .
Different approaches and solutions must be tried and should be discussed by Parliament as a matter of urgency , something that has not happened so far .
We must draw the right conclusions from the wrong turns that have been taken in recent years .
As long as no alternatives are proposed , I am unable to approve this course of action and cannot vote in favour of the motion .
in writing . - ( DE ) In future , compliance with the Maastricht criteria is to be enforced though early warnings and drastic penalties .
However , this pact has failed to work so far . I cannot believe that it will suddenly start to function correctly simply because new directives have been introduced .
For this reason , I have not voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) The coordination and surveillance of economic policies in the economic and monetary union must be efficient and effective .
In order to achieve this objective , fiscal responsibility must be encouraged among the Member States .
We urgently need to set at least minimum requirements for national frameworks and to ensure the effectiveness of the excessive deficit procedure .
Member States must follow prudent and purposeful fiscal policies in good times to build up the necessary buffer for bad times .
I agree with the proposal that numerical fiscal rules for Member States with a derogation should contain specifications that address the target definition and scope of the rules , monitoring and consequences in the event of non-compliance .
I believe that it is appropriate for medium-term budgetary frameworks to include procedures for establishing an opinion as to how the proposed measures will affect the long-term sustainability of the public finances .
Furthermore , it is appropriate to apply escape clauses , which would determine cases where temporary non-compliance with the rules should be permitted .
Within the context of the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact and in the light of the various innovations introduced and of the greater collaboration between European institutions , national parliaments and governments , the Ford report on requirements for budgetary frameworks is vital since it sets minimum requirements for public accounting systems , central and local public finance statistics and multiannual planning .
Transposition of the directive does not necessarily mean that its provisions have to be formally integrated into national legislation ( through a law for example ) .
An administrative act will therefore also suffice , as long as it can guarantee that the directive will be applied transparently .
I hope that this will result in the directive being implemented more quickly .
I hope that Parliament will reach a final agreement and approve the entire governance package as quickly as possible , in order to send a strong and unified message to the public and the markets and to stop speculation .
Also as part of the legislative package aimed at reinforcing economic governance in the EU and the euro area , there has been a vote on this draft opinion on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States .
I voted for this report because I essentially share the rapporteur 's concerns , particularly as regards amendments pertaining to the following key issues : 1 ) the general aim of this proposal should be linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection and the fight against social exclusion ; 2 ) rules put forward to ensure improvements in national budgetary frameworks should be established in the context of the European Semester for policy coordination ; 3 ) the requirements for national budgetary frameworks should not only ensure that Member States ' fiscal planning is based on realistic forecasts , but should also ensure that appropriate attention is given to the sustainability of their respective social protection systems , including health care and pension systems ; and , finally , 4 ) the requirements for national budgetary frameworks should also be designed in such a way as to encourage Member States to achieve the EU 's growth and jobs objectives .
Although it acknowledges the importance and necessity of our having independent statistics authorities able to produce reliable and credible data on a Member State 's macroeconomic and budgetary forecasts , I voted against this report because the punitive thinking behind it slots perfectly into a wider package to which I am opposed , for the reasons already expressed in the reports on this economic coordination .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour of this report as it involves improved harmonisation between macroeconomic and budgetary forecasts , the introduction of numerical fiscal and fiscal consolidation rules , the introduction of a framework on main medium-term expenditure categories , greater requirements for accountancy and statistics and , lastly , greater transparency in general requirements on finance and the overall goal of the budget .
in writing . - The ECR has always worked constructively to ensure that the eurozone can formulate a lasting solution to its sovereign debt crisis .
The defects of the Stability and Growth Pact , in both its substance and its enforcement , have been obvious for some time ; it is right that efforts are now underway to ensure a lasting settlement that works .
We have contributed throughout the committee and trialogue process to ensure that the Parliament 's preferred outcome is realistic , workable , and lasting .
Nevertheless , we regret that what has been proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Parliament is not a solution merely for the eurozone , but one that includes those whose currency is not the euro .
Whichever way one looks at it , the package we have voted on is one which increases the powers of the EU at the expense of the Member States .
It includes concepts that are innovative , such as reversed qualified majority voting and the fining of Member States , and ensures that national budgets are no longer a matter merely for national parliaments .
So while we endorse the long term goals , we cannot endorse the means and have voted against those reports which do not confine themselves to the eurozone .
Current events show that the European Stability and Growth Pact is not very efficient and has failed to prevent several Member States from encountering serious problems in their balance of payments and in paying off their debt .
In addition to the aid provided to these countries by the EU , the institutions are therefore working to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact in order to avoid crises of this kind in the future .
That is the objective of the economic governance package , of which this report by my fellow Member Mrs Goulard is a part .
The report deals with budgetary surveillance in the euro area .
Some of Mrs Goulard 's initial proposals , the creation of a European Monetary Fund in particular , were not retained during the trialogues .
I believe that the balance achieved by the Commission and the Council on this report is satisfactory , and I therefore supported it , just as I support the economic governance packaged as a whole .
The Goulard report is part of the legislative package for reforming economic governance , which consists of six reports resulting from months of negotiations .
Parliament has sent a clear message to everyone , and particularly to the Council .
I therefore hope that this package will be definitively approved before the summer recess and , above all , applied as soon as possible , so that the European Union is not unprepared , as it was in the past , to rise to the challenges threatening its stability .
In particular , I voted in favour of the Goulard report because I believe it is important to lay down criteria but also , and above all , to establish mechanisms for monitoring those criteria .
On the one hand this report specifies the tasks and objectives to be pursued during the stage of monitoring , and possibly sanctioning , the budgets of the various countries , and on the other it identifies forms of incentive to encourage them to meet the criteria ( the so-called Eurobonds ) supplementing the surveillance package .
I voted for this report because I agree that the Council should be able , after debating a Commission recommendation , to impose a fine on any Member State that distorts , whether intentionally or through grave negligence , figures relating to the deficit and public debt relevant to the application of Articles 121 and 126 of the Treaty , and to the Protocol ( No 12 ) annexed to the Treaty .
I also agree that the aforementioned fines should act as an effective deterrent and should be proportional to the nature , seriousness and duration of the offence .
I agree that it should not be possible for the fine to exceed 0.2 % of gross domestic product .
The interest earned by the Commission on deposits lodged in accordance with Article 4 and the fines collected in accordance with Article 5 and 6a should constitute other revenue referred to in Article 311 of the Treaty , and will be allocated to the European Financial Stability Facility .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the European Union 's current economic governance model has not worked : the surveillance framework has shown itself to be very weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have not been respected .
I therefore support the package of measures that the European Commission has tabled on economic governance .
I am voting for the Goulard report on the effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance , although I acknowledge that the rapporteur has overstepped her remit in a number of areas , which will make it very difficult to reach an understanding with the Council .
I welcome provision for fines in the case of falsified statistics , so as to penalise fraud relating to deficit and debt calculation , both inside and outside the euro area .
I agree that it should be possible for countries outside the euro to be part of this system .
I should like to emphasise what I consider to be this report 's most significant step forward : the possibility of creating a system that is not just based on the sanctions aspect of the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) , but that , by contrast , enables the introduction of real incentives that lead to and develop a genuine will in the governments of the Member States to comply with the rules laid down in the SGP .
In this sense , I would highlight the future tabling of a report by the European Commission on issuance of sovereign bonds - Eurosecurities - under joint and several liability .
I should also like to stress the extraordinary work undertaken here , with the institutionalisation of economic dialogue among the various European institutions , as well as the promotion of participation by national parliaments and governments in a genuine democratic debate about economic policy .
Finally , I should like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Goulard , on her extraordinary work and commitment in getting the most out of this package .
This report , drafted by Mrs Goulard , is on the legislative proposal for amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 97 , on budgetary surveillance in the euro area , which is part of the economic governance package , adopted by the Commission on 29 September 2010 , seeking to ' anchor macroeconomic stability and the sustainability of public finances ' so as to make the EU more robust and sustainable .
The current economic and financial situation of various EU countries demonstrates the failure of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It has not managed to control the public deficit .
There is also a need to avoid public and private debt .
It is now also becoming necessary to introduce mechanisms that improve competitiveness and restore public finances .
The Member States will see the coordination and surveillance mechanisms reinforced in order to prevent any serious errors from being made with their budgetary policy that could threaten economic and monetary union .
Since I believe there is a need for rapid , quality solutions in line with the recommendations of the European Central Bank , I voted for this proposal for a legislative amendment , which , in addition to encouraging interinstitutional dialogue , strengthens budgetary discipline and obliges each Member State or institution to accept its responsibilities .
This report is another part of the package of six pieces of legislation on so-called economic governance .
We are voting against each and every one of the reports making up this legislative package because of the vision behind it as a whole .
In this case , it is on the regulation on the effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area .
The report acknowledges the problems and mistakes during the first decade of economic and monetary union , but does not draw the necessary conclusions , instead calling for a ' more robust ' framework for surveillance of national economic policies by the Commission and Council .
It also adds that such policies should have ' particular focus upon development and strengthening of the internal market ' : in other words , it wants more neoliberal policies , more privatisations , more free competition , and more policies that favour the strongest over the weakest .
The report calls for the payment of fines by any Member States that do not meet the requirements imposed on them by the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is also reinforced , however , by an attempt to legitimise the system of sanctions , with an attempt to include a system of incentives .
All of this is done without considering the real causes of the problems or the alternative policies that are needed : that is unacceptable .
This report is another part of the package of six pieces of legislation on so-called economic governance , and is one of the package 's key pieces of legislation .
It is on the regulation on the effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area .
Whilst it acknowledges the problems and mistakes during the first decade of economic and monetary union , it pushes blindly ahead , calling for a ' more robust ' framework for surveillance of national economic policies by the Commission and Council .
However , it always adds that such policies should have ' particular focus upon development and strengthening of the internal market ' : in other words , it wants more neoliberal policies , more privatisations , more free competition , and more policies that favour the strongest over the weakest .
That is , it ends up calling for the same type of monetarist and neoliberal policies and criteria , tightening the veritable stranglehold imposed on the Member States , without a care for the causes of the problems , or for alternative policies that take into account economies ' different levels of development .
Thus , it calls for the payment of fines by any Member States that do not meet the requirements imposed on them by the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is also reinforced , however , by an attempt to legitimise the system of sanctions , with an attempt to include a system of incentives .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - ( SK ) In June 2010 the European Council agreed that it was urgently necessary to strengthen the coordination of our economic policies .
This agreement included above all the Growth and Stability Pact ( GSP ) and budgetary surveillance .
This mainly involved strengthening the preventive and corrective parts of the GSP , and ensuring that all Member States had national budgetary rules and a medium-term budgetary framework that were in line with the GSP .
The Member States using the euro as their currency have a particular interest in and responsibility for implementing economic policies that support the proper functioning of economic and monetary union , and for not applying policies that threaten it .
The sanctions for Member States using the euro as their currency should , in the preventive part of the GSP , provide a stimulus for the prudent drafting of fiscal policy .
At the same time , it also leaves room for budgetary manoeuvring , taking account above all of the importance of public investments .
in writing . - ( EL ) The New Democracy group of MEPs voted today in favour of the six proposals in the new economic governance package .
The European Parliament 's proposals pave the way for an environment of economic stability , while at the same time allowing for the development of innovative action mechanisms , such as Eurobonds and European project bonds .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because in the preventive part of the Stability and Growth Pact , the adjustment and adherence to the medium-term budgetary objective should be ensured through an obligation to lodge an interest-bearing deposit temporarily imposed on a Member State whose currency is the euro that is making insufficient progress with budgetary consolidation .
This should be the case when a Member State , even with a deficit below the 3 % of GDP reference value , deviates significantly from the medium-term budgetary objective or the appropriate adjustment path towards it and fails to correct the deviation .
The interest-bearing deposit imposed should be released to the Member State concerned together with the interest accrued on it once the Council has been satisfied that the situation giving rise to the obligation to lodge that deposit has come to an end .
The non-interest-bearing deposit should be released upon correction of the excessive deficit while the interest on such deposits and the fines collected should be assigned to stability mechanisms to provide financial assistance , created by Member States whose currency is the euro in order to safeguard the stability of the euro area as a whole .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I strongly oppose the programme of crippling austerity measures which is being driven through the European Union by the centre-right .
This package of economic governance reforms will stifle growth in the EU at the very time we need investment for growth , for research and development and for jobs , to secure the economic future of Europe .
This financial reform package will hit the poorest in Europe the hardest , while leaving the cause of the crisis - the financial sector - untouched .
I welcome improved coordination of economic and fiscal policy in Europe , but strongly oppose the short-term vision under which this is being imposed .
Long-term investment in the green economy , in scientific research and in infrastructure is absolutely crucial to economic stability , job creation and growth , and I cannot support this package of reforms which seeks crippling austerity across Europe .
This opinion relates to the proposal for a regulation on the effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area .
We believe that the enforcement of budgetary surveillance should always be subject to overarching objectives of the EU and , in particular , to the requirements of Article 9 TFEU relating to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection and the fight against social exclusion .
It is equally important for the enhanced surveillance framework to be established in the context of the European Semester of policy coordination .
In order to enhance budgetary surveillance , an enforcement system should be composed not only of fines ( sanctions ) but also incentives , thereby strengthening the role of the European Parliament and the national parliaments alike .
Lastly , we maintain that the fines collected from the Member States which fail to comply with their respective recommendations should be used in support of the EU 's long-term investment and job targets .
This report makes it clear what kind of sanctions await Member States which do not bend to the commands of the European Commission .
It shows no concern at all about the consequences that such sanctions will have on the people , nor about the legitimacy of the Commission imposing sanctions on elected governments .
The only concession that is made is on public debates , which cannot take place in the Member State affected by the sanction .
In other words , the people should not interfere in the machinations of a process of which they are the victims .
I will never allow the Commission to attack France .
I am voting against this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) The stability criteria were not respected in the past . It is to be assumed that incentives will not help in the future either .
It is open to question whether the European Parliament and the national parliaments will be able to play a substantial role in any monitoring process .
I believe that macroeconomic imbalances in the EU and in the euro area can only be effectively redressed by splitting the euro into two currency zones .
Further planned rescue packages are not required merely out of a sense of fairness and will lead to major difficulties in the northern EU Member States in the future .
Although I essentially agree with the report , I reject its approach , which is why I am voting against it .
in writing . - ( DE ) I seriously doubt that the Stability and Growth Pact , which has failed to work so far , will suddenly become a panacea in one of the most difficult economic phases in the history of the EU .
Although this would be desirable , in view of the current crisis , it remains a chimera .
We have reached a stage where we can no longer afford further rescue packages .
Moreover , dipping into national treasuries and using taxpayers ' money to save budgetary delinquents is very unfair .
I therefore voted against this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I believe that appropriate financial sanctions should be imposed on Member States which fail to comply with the fiscal framework of the Union .
There must be a gradual differentiation of sanctions in the preventive and corrective parts of the Stability and Growth Pact .
The system of sanctions proposed will ensure graduation and equal treatment between Member States , because the interest-bearing deposit , the non-interest-bearing deposit and the size of the fine will all be composed of a fixed component that equals 0.2 % of GDP .
Furthermore , the Commission will be given the right to recommend reducing the size of a sanction or to cancel it on grounds of exceptional economic circumstances .
In order to implement an effective budgetary surveillance framework , it is very important for the Commission to present the European Parliament and the Council with a report on the possibility of introducing Eurosecurities .
I do not agree with the proposal that revenues from unused payment appropriations in the Union budget should be carried over into the following year 's Union budget and allocated to programmes conducive to the Union 's priorities .
I believe that the tax system must remain under the competence of each Member State , and it is consequently inappropriate to oblige the Commission to put forward a set of proposals on a fully fledged common European system of taxation .
Countries that fail to meet the obligations in the preventive and corrective part of the Stability and Growth Pact may be subject , unless they take appropriate measures ( the suitability of which will be decided by the Council ) and present a rebalancing plan , to the application of financial sanctions equal to 0.1 % of GDP .
This is an important requirement for ensuring that the new framework established under the economic governance reform is credible and effective .
However , there is no need to be too rigid or extreme ; incentives for the Member States are a good idea , too .
In this sense I applaud the reference to the issue of Eurosecurities ( Eurobonds ) .
I have always been in favour of issuing these Eurobonds , which I believe can bring added value by being issued jointly , and of a strong euro .
I hope that Parliament will reach a final agreement and approve the entire governance package as quickly as possible , in order to send a strong and unified message to the public and the markets and to stop speculation .
Also as part of the legislative package aimed at reinforcing the economic governance in the EU and the euro area , there has been a vote on this draft opinion on the effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area .
I voted for this report because I essentially share the rapporteur 's concerns , particularly as regards amendments pertaining to the following key issues : 1 ) the enforcement of budgetary surveillance should always be subject to requirements related to the promotion of a high level of employment ; 2 ) the guarantee of adequate social protection and the fight against social exclusion ; 3 ) enhanced budgetary surveillance through an enforcement system should be composed not only of fines - sanctions - but also incentives ; 4 ) a strengthened role for the European Parliament , as well as that of national parliaments , throughout the entire surveillance process .
This report provides for the Member States to lodge interest-bearing deposits or pay fines , as part of the preventive and corrective parts of the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is a system of punishment in advance , when a system of incentives would be more useful .
The thinking behind it slots perfectly into the overall ' philosophy ' of the package in question .
I am voting against for these reasons .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted against .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance tried to introduce key amendments asking for the use of Eurobonds , fiscal convergence and the application of a cap on financial sanctions and other incentives .
These amendments were not adopted and the report ended up being nothing more than a list of sanctions on those countries that do not adhere to their budget .
This Directive is intrinsically linked to the Wortmann-Kool report which has already been elaborated on .
Thus I have voted against .
At a time of widespread economic crisis such as we are experiencing now , the need for effective enforcement of budgetary surveillance in the euro area is a priority .
Such surveillance must , however , take place without any change to the fundamental objectives of promoting a high level of employment , guaranteeing adequate social protection and stepping up the fight against social exclusion .
The European Parliament and the national parliaments ultimately play a crucial role in the achievement of this ambitious objective , and their role must therefore be strengthened throughout the surveillance process , at national and international level alike .
in writing . - As my group 's shadow Rapporteur I would like to congratulate Mrs Goulard on the adoption of her report and to thank her for the good co-operation between us throughout these difficult negotiations .
I chose to abstain on this report and on the proposed amendment on fiscal convergence .
I regret that despite the Rapporteur 's best efforts the Council watered down or removed numerous intelligent proposals from the text , which made it impossible for me to endorse the report .
Because of my position as S & D group shadow Rapporteur on this report I could not join my colleagues from the Maltese delegation in voting against the amendment tabled by my group on fiscal convergence .
Although I agree with some of the proposals made in the amendment , I do not support the establishment of a common rate of corporate taxation .
We need to have better co-ordination of economic policy but taxation policy must remain in the hands of Member States .
in writing . - The ECR has always worked constructively to ensure that the eurozone can formulate a lasting solution to its sovereign debt crisis .
The defects of the Stability and Growth Pact , in both its substance and its enforcement , have been obvious for some time ; it is right that efforts are now underway to ensure a lasting settlement that works .
We have contributed throughout the committee and trialogue process to ensure that the Parliament 's preferred outcome is realistic , workable , and lasting .
Nevertheless , we regret that what has been proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Parliament is not a solution merely for the eurozone , but one that includes those whose currency is not the euro .
Whichever way one looks at it , the package we have voted on is one which increases the powers of the EU at the expense of the Member States .
It includes concepts that are innovative , such as reversed qualified majority voting and the fining of Member States , and ensures that national budgets are no longer a matter merely for national parliaments .
So while we endorse the long term goals , we cannot endorse the means and have voted against those reports which do not confine themselves to the eurozone .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted with conviction in favour of the compromise package on economic governance as negotiated by us with the Council .
The package that emerged from the negotiations does provide quite a number of answers to the mistakes of the past , including when it comes to budgetary discipline .
That in itself represents important progress .
Nonetheless , my group and I still harbour reservations about some points , in particular when it comes to realising the preventive part of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In order to be able to come up with an all-embracing agreement before the summer recess , it is important to give the negotiations with the Council over the coming weeks every chance and not send out any political signals that could jeopardise a positive end result .
The package reflects a precarious political balance that I do not want to put at risk .
For that reason I voted against some of the amendments .
This should not be interpreted , however , as meaning that I do not fundamentally support some elements of these amendments .
I am referring , in particular , to Amendment 9 , which argues for convergence in the fiscal sphere .
There are certainly elements of this that I could endorse , such as the financial transactions tax or the introduction of a consolidated EU corporate tax base .
The enhancement of economic governance must be based on a robust framework for preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances , minimum requirements for national budgetary frameworks , enhanced financial market regulation and supervision , and a credible , permanent crisis resolution mechanism .
I think that coherence is required among policies aimed at growth and creating sustainable jobs , with a particular focus on the development and strengthening of the internal market , fostering international trade and competitiveness and providing an effective framework for preventing and correcting excessive budgetary positions .
Furthermore , I think that it is of paramount importance that this consolidation of economic governance takes place , while also boosting its democratic credentials .
Current events show that the European Stability and Growth Pact is not very efficient and has failed to prevent several Member States from encountering serious problems in their balance of payments and in paying off their debt .
In addition to the aid provided to these countries by the EU , the institutions are therefore working to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact in order to avoid crises of this kind in the future .
That is the objective of the economic governance package , of which this report by my colleague Mrs Wortmann-Kool is a part .
The report deals with the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies .
The discussion with regard to this report has focused on the issue of the reversed qualified majority voting mechanism - which means that the Commission 's recommendations will come into effect unless opposed by a qualified majority of the Council - as well as the review clause .
I supported these two mechanisms during the vote because I am convinced that we must be demanding and ambitious in order to improve budgetary stability in Europe and thus to safeguard our future .
The coordination of the Member States ' economic policies , in line with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , involves observance of the following guiding principles : stable prices , robust public finances and monetary conditions , and a sustainable balance of payments .
The aim is to lay down rules regulating the content , presentation , examination and monitoring of stability programmes and convergence programmes , as part of the multilateral surveillance to be carried out by the Commission and the Council at an early stage .
The intention is to prevent budget deficits and excessive debt occurring , and to promote the surveillance and coordination of economic policy , so supporting the achievement of the Union 's objectives regarding growth and jobs .
The European Parliament shall be duly involved in the European Semester in order to increase transparency , ownership and accountability for the decisions taken , specifically through economic dialogue .
For the above reasons , I voted for this report .
in writing . - ( NL ) The EU and the euro are in turbulent times and we need a rapid and structural resolution to the problems in Greece .
However , anyone who looked into this more deeply would have to acknowledge that Europe will come out of this crisis stronger and more robust .
Bolstered EU supervision of the economic and budgetary policy of the 27 Member States is an essential prerequisite for the continued existence of the euro .
We must ensure that Europe 's social side emerges from this stormy period unscathed .
Respect for national traditions in relation to wage agreements will have to cost whatever it costs .
The most important prize obtained by Parliament is without doubt the incorporation of the European Semester into this legislative package .
I say that because the result of this is that not only will the governments have to ensure healthy finances , but Europe will also be able to hold them to account if they fail to invest adequately in training and education , jobs and combating poverty .
This package will drastically improve the economic competitiveness and financial health of the EU .
Of course , this cannot be a goal in itself . What we have here are tools to realise growth , jobs and social welfare .
This report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1466 / 97 on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies is part of an EU economic governance package .
This report , like the other , similar reports included in the package , directly refers to the recent financial crisis in Greece and sets the objective of creating a regulatory framework to prevent the repetition of similar crises .
On the one hand , the need to strengthen coordination and especially financial monitoring of Member States appears obvious , given the seriousness of the Greek crisis and its repercussions for the other Member States .
However , the directives proposed by the report also have problematic aspects that should not be underestimated .
In fact , the directives entail a substantial increase in EU interference in the internal economic affairs of Member States , which suggests a sharp decline in the latter 's influence .
The fact that such a risk cannot be ruled out meant I had to abstain from the vote .
The Wortmann-Kool report is part of the legislative package for reforming economic governance , which consists of six reports resulting from months of negotiations .
Parliament has sent a clear message to everyone , and particularly to the Council .
I therefore hope that this package will be definitively approved before the summer recess and , above all , applied as soon as possible , so that the European Union is not unprepared , as it was in the past , to rise to the challenges threatening its stability .
In particular , I voted in favour of the Wortmann-Kool report because I believe that the European Union needs a solid foundation on which to prevent crises similar to the one we have just been through in the future .
This foundation requires the creation of a system of benchmarks for reforming the Stability and Growth Pact in a feasible way .
This is necessary because we need to reach a new agreement that no longer forces struggling States to request exemptions from the agreements in force but instead allows for the introduction , through the renegotiation of the Pact itself , of new criteria for establishing sustainable obligations and achievable objectives .
I voted for the report because I agree that , in order to ensure closer coordination of economic policy and sustained convergence of the behaviours of Member States ' economies , the Council should go ahead with multilateral supervision as an integral part of the European Semester for the coordination of economic policy , in line with the objectives and requirements provided for in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
Parliament shall be duly involved in the European Semester , in order to increase transparency , ownership and accountability of the decisions taken , specifically through economic dialogue .
I agree that the Economic and Financial Committee , the Economic Policy Committee , the Employment Committee and the Social Protection Committee should be consulted within the framework of the European Semester wherever deemed appropriate , and that the relevant stakeholders , in particular the social partners , should be involved in the European Semester as regards the main political issues , wherever appropriate , in accordance with the TFEU , with the law and with national policies .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the European Union 's current economic governance model has not worked : the surveillance framework has shown itself to be very weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) have not been respected .
I therefore support the package of measures that the European Commission has tabled on economic governance .
I am voting for the Wortmann-Kool report on strengthening budgetary surveillance and coordination of economic policies .
I agree with reversed qualified majority voting , which reinforces the role of the European Commission by demanding a qualified majority in the Council in order to derogate from the Commission 's decision .
I think the ' economic dialogue ' provided for here is very important , as is the clear , necessary link with the European Semester .
I welcome the provision for a Member State 's temporary departure from the adjustment path when it results from unforeseen events , which ensures that the process will be flexible and realistic .
We can take two important lessons from the recent crisis : the need for sustainable public finances , and the urgent need to work towards increased coordination of economic policy between the Member States , with an emphasis on prevention .
This report is on those exact points .
I would immediately stress the importance of including the European Semester in this legislative text , so as to gradually provide an effective platform for joint political discussion of the budgetary policies adopted by all the Member States , which will favour a robust and balanced economic union .
I would stress the crucial importance of EU Member States ' public finances being in order , as well as the need to adopt increasingly responsible economic policies that ensure stability and growth .
We need to be responsible .
We need to adopt policies that save money , principally when times are good , so that we might have means of defending ourselves when times are harder .
I consider this report crucial if we , as a Union , are to achieve increasingly greater coordination and prevention .
Finally , I should like to thank Mrs Wortmann-Kool , a colleague from my group , for her exemplary work whilst negotiating and concluding this package .
This report , drafted by Mrs Wortmann-Kool , is on a legislative proposal on economic governance , adopted by the Commission on 29 September 2010 , on the surveillance of budgetary positions , and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies , which is part of the economic governance package , adopted by the Commission on 29 September 2010 , seeking to ' anchor macroeconomic stability and the sustainability of public finances ' .
The strengthened framework for economic governance should promote growth and employment , with particular focus on developing and strengthening the single market , and on fostering international trade and competitiveness .
The strengthening of economic governance should be accompanied by the reinforcement of the democratic legitimacy of economic governance in the Union , which should be achieved through the increased participation of the European Parliament and the national parliaments in all processes of economic policy coordination .
The Stability and Growth Pact and the entire framework for economic governance should be compatible with the Union 's strategy for growth and jobs , and should complete it .
I voted for this proposal for a legislative amendment , whose definitive text I hope to see adopted during Parliament 's July plenary sitting .
This is yet another of the pieces of legislation in the so-called economic governance package .
In this case , it aims to strengthen surveillance of budgetary positions , and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies .
In practice , this regulation lays down the rules regulating the content , presentation , examination and monitoring of stability programmes and convergence programmes , as part of the multilateral surveillance that the Commission and Council want to carry out at an early stage ; the argument being to prevent budget deficits and excessive debt occurring , and to promote the surveillance and coordination of economic policy .
The tired old arguments about growth and jobs being the main objectives are being wheeled out .
As we know and have said , the result is the opposite .
Solidarity and economic and social cohesion are nothing more than empty words : dead letters in the Treaties .
It is dominated by monetarist and neoliberal policies in the interest of guaranteeing greater profits for large companies and financial institutions .
As for the people , as the experiences of Greece , Ireland and Portugal show , what they see and suffer in the flesh is more social inequality , more unemployment and more poverty .
It must be acknowledged , once and for all , that the policies in force , that they now want to deepen , are the fundamental cause of the crisis .
This is part of the package of six legislative texts on economic governance and aims to strengthen surveillance of budgetary positions , and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies .
In practice , this regulation lays down the rules regulating the content , presentation , examination and monitoring of stability programmes and convergence programmes , as part of the multilateral surveillance that the Commission and Council want to carry out at an early stage ; the argument being to prevent budget deficits and excessive debt occurring , and to promote the surveillance and coordination of economic policy .
It is always argued that the objective is growth and employment , but , as they have forgotten policies of solidarity , and of economic and social cohesion , committing only to monetarist and neoliberal policies in the interests of guaranteeing greater profits for large companies and financial institutions , what we will have is more social inequality , more unemployment and more poverty , as the cases of Greece , Ireland and Portugal have already shown .
Until Europe 's leaders acknowledge that their policies are the fundamental cause of the crises that persist , we will witness a degradation of the economic , social and political situation , which will inevitably cause further social tension and more conflicts ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( SK ) The recent global economic and financial crisis has revealed and deepened the need for better coordination and improved surveillance of economic policies in the economic and monetary union .
Shortcomings and weak points persist in the current system of coordination and in existing surveillance processes .
It is essential to strengthen the framework of the economic and monetary union with the aim of securing macroeconomic stability and the sustainability of public finances .
Most Member States will have a vital need for substantial consolidation in order to return to a trend of declining public debt .
The problems are all the more urgent , however , given that European societies and economies are facing the consequences of an ageing population , which could put even greater pressure on labour supply and the budgets of public finances .
The coordination of the economic policies of Member States within an EU framework should above all include adherence to a sustainable balance of payments and the need for public investments .
in writing . - ( EL ) The New Democracy group of MEPs voted today in favour of the six proposals in the new economic governance package .
The European Parliament 's proposals pave the way for an environment of economic stability , while at the same time allowing for the development of innovative action mechanisms , such as Eurobonds and European project bonds .
Europe needs stronger and more Community-based economic governance .
However , the package of measures being voted on today wrongly reflects the tendency of the current centre-right majority to view governance as a mere austerity exercise , by strengthening the preventive and corrective dimension of the Stability and Growth Pact without outlining mechanisms and instruments for supporting investment and development .
One cannot accept the reverse majority rule and tougher parameters and sanctions without a golden rule to protect Member States ' investments and without Eurobonds to fund European investments and , at the same time , to guarantee sovereign debt .
This is not a good enough formula for tackling the crisis and it is destined to make it worse .
That is why we will vote against this and the other reports on fiscal surveillance .
Moreover , we will fight to take European economic policy in a different direction and , at the same time , to strengthen the Community method and the EU 's instruments and resources .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because the economic and financial crisis has exposed the need to review the framework for the economic and monetary union ( EMU ) in order to enforce the existing instruments and to broaden the procedures for coordination and multilateral surveillance .
As the Commission stresses in its Explanatory Memorandum , the system must be strengthened in order to ' anchor macroeconomic stability and the sustainability of public finances , which are preconditions for durable output and employment growth . '
The economic governance package comprises six proposals aiming at reinforcing the coordination and surveillance of economic policies in the economic and monetary union ( EMU ) in the context of the Europe 2020 strategy and the European Semester , which is a new surveillance cycle , a linking process under the Stability and Growth Pact and the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines .
I believe that it is particularly important for the strengthening of economic governance to go hand in hand with reinforcing the democratic legitimacy of European governance .
Consequently , the role of the European Parliament should be strengthened throughout the whole surveillance process .
In addition , regular consultation with social partners and the involvement of national parliaments are necessary preconditions for a credible and transparent surveillance framework .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , but I think we should have been clearer and stronger in our demands when it comes to the mechanism of sanctions and penalties .
The current line stays vague and does not express clearly that in case of a breach , sanctions must follow automatically , without being subject to political bargaining .
Although the role of the Commission is strengthened , the report should clearly support the reversed qualified majority voting as planned in the first place to ensure independent and fast procedure of applying needed measures .
I welcome in overall the call for greater transparency and involvement of European Parliament and national parliaments .
This is especially important considering the call to align the national budgets with the European Semester .
All actors have to be fully involved and informed at all stages to ensure preventing problems and finding solutions at earliest moment possible .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I strongly oppose the programme of crippling austerity measures which is being driven through the European Union by the centre-right .
This package of economic governance reforms will stifle growth in the EU at the very time we need investment for growth , for research and development and for jobs , to secure the economic future of Europe .
This financial reform package will hit the poorest in Europe the hardest , while leaving the cause of the crisis - the financial sector - untouched .
I welcome improved coordination of economic and fiscal policy in Europe , but strongly oppose the short-term vision under which this is being imposed .
Long-term investment in the green economy , in scientific research and in infrastructure is absolutely crucial to economic stability , job creation and growth , and I cannot support this package of reforms which seeks crippling austerity across Europe .
We support the proposal to reinforce Member States ' compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact and to encourage greater coordination of their fiscal policies .
The regulation adopted today has been amended to ensure that Member States follow prudent fiscal policies in good times so as to build up the necessary buffer for more difficult times .
The framework for budgetary surveillance and for the coordination of EU economic policies should be broadened so as to include employment and social aspects .
As regards , on the other hand , the stability and convergence programmes of the Member States , these should include information on the consistency of the Member States ' budgetary objectives with the EU 's growth and jobs strategy , and the Employment Committee and the Social Protection Committee should be consulted during every surveillance procedure .
We also think it extremely important that the strengthening of economic governance go hand in hand with reinforcing the democratic legitimacy of European governance .
In this respect , Parliament should be regularly consulted and involved in the entire process , as should all the social partners .
This is a necessary precondition of a credible and transparent surveillance framework .
This report proposes helping the Commission to find the best instruments for measuring the political failures of leadership for which governments might be responsible .
Do we need to take as a reference the budgetary objective set by the Commission or a reference rate as a function of GDP ?
That is all that worries the parliamentary majority .
These instruments will put the European people at the mercy of rating agencies .
They will extend the austerity plans which are currently bleeding Greece , Ireland and Portugal dry .
I am voting against this report , which I condemn .
France is an independent and sovereign country .
in writing . - ( DE ) The planned measures do not provide for obligatory participation by the banks .
However , a rescheduling of debt will be unavoidable .
The taxpayer does not necessarily have to pay for the speculation errors made by banks .
As the example of Iceland shows , orderly state bankruptcy can be the right answer .
Greece is the cradle of European culture .
In view of the impotence of the political players , their inability to recognise cause and effect and their unwillingness to accept responsibility , it seems that this culture could also come to an end through Greece .
I have voted against this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) The strengthening of economic governance should go hand in hand with reinforcing the democratic legitimacy of European governance .
We must make every effort to ensure that we achieve macroeconomic stability and sustainability in public finance .
In order to ensure strengthened coordination of Member States ' economic policies and actions , it is necessary to broaden the procedures for coordination and multilateral surveillance .
In order to identify expected divergences of the budgetary position from the medium-term budgetary objective , or from the appropriate adjustment path towards it , the Council and the Commission must carry out multilateral surveillance .
We must continuously monitor how convergence programmes and the economic policies of Member States with a derogation are implemented in line with convergence programme objectives .
I believe that the deadline of five months , to address the deviation from the adjustment path towards the medium-term objective , is sufficient .
Moreover , the actions a Member State takes to address the deviation should be strictly controlled .
May I first offer my sincerest congratulations to Mrs Wortmann-Kool on the work she has done on the economic governance package .
The Stability and Growth Pact has been weakened ; more serious and effective rules need to be introduced and less discretion shown to the Member States .
Preventive actions are crucial in this respect , as they allow for situations to be prevented without ex post actions having to be taken .
I agree with the report when it supports the Commission 's approach and extends the use of reversed qualified majority voting to block a Commission decision in the Council .
Parliament 's goal must be to prevent the intergovernmental method from being used , but we must look at things from an overall perspective and , without watering down the regulation , find solutions to ensure that the Commission 's independence is guaranteed and that Parliament can be an actor and not just a spectator in the process , reaching a mutual agreement with the Council .
I hope , in fact , that Parliament will reach a final agreement and approve the entire governance package as quickly as possible , in order to send a strong and unified message to the public and the markets and to stop speculation .
As part of the legislative package aimed at reinforcing the economic governance in the EU and the euro area , there has also been a vote on this draft opinion on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies .
I voted for this report because I essentially share the rapporteur 's concerns , particularly as regards amendments pertaining to the following key issues : 1 ) the EU 's framework for budgetary surveillance should be broadened so as to include employment and social aspects ; 2 ) the guidelines for Member States ' employment policies should be taken into account when they present their respective stability and convergence programmes , as well as during the examination of those programmes ; 3 ) the multilateral surveillance of the stability and convergence programmes should be conducted as part of the European Semester ; and 4 ) the stability and convergence programmes of the Member States should include information on the consistency of the Member States ' budgetary objectives with the EU 's growth and jobs strategy , such as the Europe 2020 strategy , and in particular with the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines and the Guidelines for the Employment Policies .
This report aims to ensure that the Member States will comply with the deficit and debt limits set out in the Stability and Growth Pact .
I am voting against it for two main reasons : because the pact it aims to regulate is responsible for a decade of mediocre growth in Europe , and because its disciplinary measures are founded on sanctions that aggravate the problems it aims to solve .
This reports , and the others in the package , should have at least had the good sense to keep public investment separate from deficit calculations , in the name of job creation , which would be the main objective of any economic coordination that was mindful of Europeans ' concerns .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted against as this report tries to solve the public deficit exclusively through adjustments in public spending .
Specifically , a medium-term objective of gross domestic product growth ( GDP ) is introduced .
This will be strictly controlled by the Commission .
In fact , extra powers are granted to the European Commission including the ability to automatically sanction Member States of the euro area unless the Council decides against this by qualified majority .
This report implies that fiscal consolidation is prioritised over the long term sustainability objectives and the European Union 's objectives of job creation , combating poverty and social cohesion .
It is the tough part of the package .
It tries to put all the emphasis on the application of adjustments and austerity mechanisms , excluding the use of counter-cyclical mechanisms .
Furthermore , it lacks the incentives to achieve the medium-term growth objectives and it focuses exclusively on the system of sanctions .
I believe the Stability and Growth Pact should be updated and fiscal policy coordination improved in order to strengthen surveillance of national budgets and ensure that Member States take ' prudent ' decisions in good times for the economy , building up the necessary buffer for the bad times .
This is the only real way of ensuring that the pattern of debt and deficit will be monitored more closely .
Lastly , I welcome the proposal to set specific requirements for national fiscal frameworks , strengthening the enforcement mechanisms for the euro area Member States .
in writing . - ( NL ) Today , Parliament decided its position on European economic governance .
The European Union needs stricter European economic supervision and a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact .
However , the short-sighted approach of the Centre Right does not provide a sound basis for credible and coherent reform .
Their tunnel vision focus on cuts without seeking to increase EU income is no basis for a sustainable fiscal policy .
It would mean that poverty in the EU would only increase .
Fiscal consolidation must be teamed with government investment and other collective spending if we want to create more jobs and avoid excessive socio-economic instability .
You cannot demand high-quality education and training while at the same time slashing the relevant budgets .
I therefore voted against the Wortmann-Kool , Feio and Goulard reports .
The Group Of The Greens / European Free Alliance advocates a macroeconomic approach whereby the balances of trade of the different Member States would have to be better aligned .
Economic measures need to be placed in a broader framework incorporating other elements such as solidarity and responsibility .
I therefore gave my support to the report on the macroeconomic pillars , which provided for an all-encompassing and systematic approach that would make it possible to prevent future crises .
I also voted in favour of the Ferreira , Haglund and Ford reports .
in writing . - The ECR has always worked constructively to ensure that the eurozone can formulate a lasting solution to its sovereign debt crisis .
The defects of the Stability and Growth Pact , in both its substance and its enforcement , have been obvious for some time ; it is right that efforts are now underway to ensure a lasting settlement that works .
We have contributed throughout the committee and trialogue process to ensure that the Parliament 's preferred outcome is realistic , workable , and lasting .
Nevertheless , we regret that what has been proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Parliament is not a solution merely for the eurozone , but one that includes those whose currency is not the euro .
Whichever way one looks at it , the package we have voted on is one which increases the powers of the EU at the expense of the Member States .
It includes concepts that are innovative , such as reversed qualified majority voting and the fining of Member States , and ensures that national budgets are no longer a matter merely for national parliaments .
So while we endorse the long term goals , we cannot endorse the means and have voted against those reports which do not confine themselves to the eurozone .
The economic and financial crisis that has rocked the euro area has threatened the instruments of economic and monetary union , and demonstrated the harmful consequences of asymmetric shocks and systemic risk , in a monetary area that is not considered optimum .
This report , which is part of a package of six reports on economic governance in the EU , aims to create preventive and corrective mechanisms , so avoiding budget deficits and excessive debt .
Furthermore , it institutionalises the European Semester through the need for the involvement of all the European institutions , where national reform programmes should incorporate EU objectives .
I should also like to stress that it seeks to expand the mechanism of reversed qualified majority voting in the Council to all stages of the process of assessing , examining and monitoring the Stability and Growth Pact and national convergence programmes .
I am voting for this report because I believe the EU needs to send a message of stability to the markets , using a short- and long-term economic governance strategy .
The sovereign debt crisis rocking the EU - in particular the three countries already bailed out , not least Portugal - will only be overcome with concerted decisions and increased involvement of the EU institutions , in particular Parliament and the Commission .
in writing . - The economic governance package approved by a right-wing majority in the European Parliament will risk entrenching austerity in EU law .
I voted against the overall package as I do not believe it is the right thing to do in the current financial climate .
Right-wing governments are trying to push through a number of economic policies that cut deficits in the short term but provide no hope for economic growth in countries in the long term .
Improved coordination on economic policy is without doubt a good idea for Europe 's long-term growth .
However , we need a progressive alternative to ensure growth in the economy - without growth in the economy it is impossible to provide jobs and fund public services .
Investment spending should be dealt with separately from regular annual government spending in the debt rules .
It is also vital for governments to be able to undertake stimulus spending , as the Labour government did in 2008 / 2009 , to prevent this crisis from turning into a global depression .
in writing . - Dear President , I abstained on the vote on the Wortmann-Kool and the Feio reports which look to revise the Stability and Growth Pact .
I am glad that the reports are strong on the need to avoid debts and deficits , and they have certainly been drafted according to an economic philosophy that I support .
However , I have doubts that tweaks to the Stability and Growth Pact , that failed so miserably in assuring both stability and growth , are the right solution to Europe 's economic woes .
I also have grave concerns about reverse qualified majority voting in Council decisions linked to these reports .
We should not underestimate the precedent that this is setting , and the shift in power away from the Council that this would entail .
I voted in favour of the report presented by Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
It supports the Commission 's approach in adding qualified majority voting to selected parts of the procedures .
The upshot of the economic dialogue between the European institutions and the Member States is that the national reform programmes will have to be drawn up by the individual States , with due regard to the achievement of the EU 's objectives .
It is important to stress that , according to Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report , Parliament 's role will involve requesting and conducting hearings of the President of the Euro Group .
Current events show that the European Stability and Growth Pact is not very efficient and has failed to prevent several Member States from encountering serious problems in their balance of payments and in paying off their debt .
In addition to the aid provided to these countries by the EU , the institutions are therefore working to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact in order to avoid crises of this kind in the future .
That is the objective of the economic governance package , of which this report by my fellow Member Mr Haglund is a part .
The report deals with enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area .
I supported this report , just as I support the economic governance package as a whole .
The Commission 's proposals on improving economic governance are of the highest importance for the future of the EU and for economic growth .
Therefore , the framework for economic governance must be improved , and it must be founded on increased national appropriation of the rules and policies adopted , and on more robust EU-level monitoring of national economic policies .
This report , for which I voted , advocates the need for Member States to create accounting systems that fully and consistently cover all sectors of public administration .
It adds that the Member States must ensure that their budgetary plan is founded on realistic macroeconomic and budgetary forecasts .
Budgetary planning must be founded on a realistic scenario .
In order to help the Member States prepare their budgetary forecasts , the Commission should provide forecasts of EU spending , based on the level of expenditure planned in the Multiannual Financial Framework .
The aim of this report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area is to draw up an action plan for preventing new economic crises of the kind that recently befell Greece , and in this way it supplements a series of other reports presented in the same economic governance package .
The general aim of the report , namely to strengthen coordination between EU economies , is undoubtedly a good one , but the same cannot be said of the mechanisms that are meant to achieve it .
In fact , the report , like the other , similar reports included in the economic governance package , essentially proposes to strengthen central surveillance and monitoring of individual Member States ' economies , which would gradually and consistently weaken the role and the freedom of national economies themselves .
I therefore decided to abstain from the vote .
The Haglund report is part of the legislative package for reforming economic governance , which consists of six reports resulting from months of negotiations .
Parliament has sent a clear message to everyone , and particularly to the Council .
I therefore hope that this package will be definitively approved before the summer recess and , above all , applied as soon as possible , so that the European Union is not unprepared , as it was in the past , to rise to the challenges threatening its stability .
In particular , I voted in favour of the Haglund report because I believe that in future we will have to avoid repeating past mistakes , and will have to rule out the possibility of some countries in the euro area violating the stability rules that will be adopted .
Therefore , I believe that the system of yearly fines for non-compliance with these rules , as proposed in the report , should be supported and , above all , strictly applied .
Moreover , the request to extend reversed qualified majority voting is further evidence of this Parliament 's desire to take action and respond to the crisis .
I voted for the report because I agree that the Commission should publish a report on the application of this regulation three years after it comes into force , and then every five years subsequently .
I agree that this report should assess , inter alia , the effectiveness of the regulation , the progress made towards ensuring closer coordination between economic policies , and sustained convergence of the behaviour of the Member States ' economies , pursuant to the Treaty .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the European Union 's current economic governance model has not worked : the surveillance framework has shown itself to be very weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have not been respected .
I therefore support the package of measures that the European Commission has tabled on economic governance .
I am voting for the Haglund report on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances .
I regret that the regulation is not also being applied to any countries outside the euro area that want it .
I agree with reversed qualified majority voting and regret that the Council continues to oppose this mechanism .
I should like to welcome the introduction of a mechanism of sanctions for correcting macroeconomic imbalances , in line with what is happening at the moment with the Stability and Growth Pact rules .
Let us aim here , once again , to give less emphasis to the punitive aspect and more to the corrective aspect .
The procedure provided for in this report is totally new to the framework of Union law , and I believe it will go on to play an indispensible role in the Member States ' future macroeconomic policies .
It enables not just greater coordination , but also greater accountability by governments at national and EU level .
I would also stress the introduction of the reversed qualified majority rule in the Council when decisions are being taken that are essential to the proper functioning of this package .
Finally , I should like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Haglund , on his excellent work and dedication .
The regulation on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area is another key piece of the legislative package on economic governance .
This regulation addresses a system of sanctions and the application of fines to any Member States not fulfilling the requirements imposed by the European Commission on the basis of the delegated acts .
What we have before us is a process of intervention that calls for the application of the same type of monetarist and neoliberal policies and criteria that led to the current crisis , particularly affecting the most vulnerable economies .
The stranglehold imposed on the Member States is being tightened , without a care for the causes of the problems , or for alternative policies that take into account economies ' different levels of development .
Although the proposal initially only covers Member States whose currency is the euro , the European Parliament is seeking its application to any Member State that has notified the Commission that it wishes to apply this regulation , even if it is not a member of the euro area .
The intention is to expand the application of sanctions and the payment of fines to any Member State not complying with the impositions that have been laid down , placing them in a genuinely submissive position with regard to the European institutions and to the directory of powers that are , essentially , in charge of them ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
This is the regulation on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area , and is yet another key piece of legislation in the package on economic governance .
This regulation is concerned , above all , with a system of sanctions and the application of fines to any Member States not fulfilling the requirements imposed by the European Commission on the basis of the delegated acts .
Although the proposal initially only covers Member States whose currency is the euro , the European Parliament is seeking its application to any Member State that has notified the Commission that it wishes to apply this regulation , even if it is not a member of the euro area .
It is yet another interventionist measure that calls for the application of the same type of monetarist and neoliberal policies and criteria , tightening the veritable stranglehold imposed on the Member States , without a care for the causes of the problems , or for alternative policies that take into account economies ' different levels of development .
What it does is expand the application of sanctions and the payment of fines for any Member State not complying with the requirements imposed on it , placing them in a genuinely submissive position with regard to the European institutions , just so as to serve the interests of large companies and financial institutions ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( SK ) The existence of large macroeconomic imbalances , including extensive and persistent differences in competitiveness trends , was looking very harmful for the EU at the moment when the crisis hit , and especially for the euro .
The low cost of finance in the years running up to the crisis led to an incorrect distribution of resources .
These were often assigned for less productive purposes , which in some Member States resulted in an unsustainable level of consumption , the creation of property bubbles and a build-up of both external and internal debt .
It is therefore important to create a new structured approach in order to prevent an undesirable macroeconomic imbalance in all Member States and to correct it .
The Europe 2020 strategy establishes an ambitious and comprehensive strategy for ensuring the intelligent , sustainable and inclusive growth of the EU economy .
In the context of the crisis , this strategy designates new areas that must be focused on in addressing the weak sides of Europe within the framework for the surveillance of macro-financial and structural problems .
It includes a challenge to draw up a specific political framework for the eurozone , with the aim of addressing the extensive macroeconomic imbalance , and in particular to take account within this of the deep economic and financial links within the eurozone and their impact on the single currency .
For this reason , it is essential , in my opinion , to have a mechanism for monitoring macroeconomic imbalances and , if necessary , to ensure that adequate corrective measures are adopted for them .
The key issue above all is the link between the preventive and corrective measures .
in writing . - ( EL ) The New Democracy group of MEPs voted today in favour of the six proposals in the new economic governance package .
The European Parliament 's proposals pave the way for an environment of economic stability , while at the same time allowing for the development of innovative action mechanisms , such as Eurobonds and European project bonds .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because enforcement of the Regulation on macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area should be strengthened by establishing interest-bearing deposits , if a Member State has failed to comply with the recommendations and has not taken the corrective action recommended by the Council , which are converted into a yearly fine in cases of repetitive non-compliance with the recommendations to address excessive macroeconomic imbalances .
These enforcement measures apply to Member States whose currency is the euro .
In order to ensure equal treatment between Member States , the interest-bearing deposit and the fine should be identical for all Member States whose currency is the euro and equal to 0.1 % of the gross domestic product ( GDP ) of the Member State concerned in the preceding year .
I believe that the Commission should be given the possibility to propose to reduce the amount of the fine or cancel it in exceptional economic circumstances , and the power to adopt individual decisions for the application of the sanction provided for in this regulation should be conferred on the Council .
in writing . - I abstained from this vote .
I supported the accompanying Ferreira report , but was unable to support this report as I strongly oppose the programme of crippling austerity measures which is being driven through the European Union by the centre-right .
This package of economic governance reforms will stifle growth in the EU at the very time we need investment for growth , for research and development and for jobs , to secure the economic future of Europe .
This financial reform package will hit the poorest in Europe the hardest , while leaving the cause of the crisis - the financial sector - untouched .
I welcome improved coordination of economic and fiscal policy in Europe , but strongly oppose the short-term vision under which this is being imposed .
Long-term investment in the green economy , in scientific research and in infrastructure is absolutely crucial to economic stability , job creation and growth , and I cannot support this package of reforms which seeks crippling austerity across Europe .
The Commission 's proposals for improved economic governance are of major importance for the future of the European Union and for growth in the countries belonging to the euro area .
Economic governance should be built on stronger national ownership of commonly agreed rules and policies and on a more robust EU national economic policy surveillance framework .
If the latter is to be credible and efficient , it must be strengthened by the introduction of yearly fines for non-compliance with recommendations or the obligation to draw up a sufficient corrective action plan .
We believe that economic governance and national economic policy should be a matter of common concern for all the parties involved , and that there should be an emphasis on early detection and prevention of potentially harmful macroeconomic imbalances .
Greater involvement of parliaments at national level and EU level alike is therefore needed .
Lastly , we believe that the Commission should have a stronger and more independent role in the surveillance procedure as regards assessments that are specific to each Member State , monitoring , missions , recommendations , warnings and sanctions .
We also believe that enhanced transparency and accountability are crucial , in order to strengthen peer support and peer pressure , and that Parliament should have a stronger role in the surveillance process , but not an executive role .
Faced with the threat of the Commission imposing annual fines on Member States challenging its authority , the majority can find nothing better to do than propose extending these .
Even better , they propose that the sums thus obtained by the EU should be allocated to the EU-IMF stability fund , the effects of which are currently being suffered by the Greek , Irish and Portuguese people .
This is tantamount to the hangman 's salary being paid by the victim !
I am voting against this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) The dishonesty of the Greek Government in presenting false information in relation to its budgetary situation has contributed to the current crisis with the euro and the EU .
Following the last rescue package , the socialist government in Greece failed to implement the painful , yet necessary , structural changes .
All of the planned European governance measures aim to wrest power from the Member States , increase the influence of the central powers in Brussels and restrict democracy in Europe .
The lack of participation by the banks and investors , who made healthy profits in recent years , shows how much influence these groups actually wield over the political elite in Europe .
While the top ten thousand will cash in - thus , all the payments to Greece will not go to the Greek people , but will instead line the pockets of investors - the people of Europe are being weighed down with more and more unjustified financial burdens .
Because this should be roundly rejected , I voted against this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) More and more new rescue packages are being assembled for Greece , billions in taxpayers ' money are being squandered and plans are being forged for economic governance for the whole of Europe .
All Member States need to save money in order to deal with the burden of the euro crisis , the safety net and the packages for Greece .
All of these austerity measures hit wage-earners and the weakest sectors of society .
I therefore voted against this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) An improved economic governance framework should be built on stronger national ownership of rules and policies and a more robust surveillance framework at the European level of national economic policies .
The governance framework must be reformed extensively .
In order to ensure that the provisions of the regulation on microeconomic imbalances in the euro area can be properly implemented and achieve the objectives outlined , a differentiated system of sanction allocation must be established .
Consequently interest-bearing deposits must be applied to a Member State if it fails to comply with recommendations and does not carry out the corrective actions proposed by the Council .
In cases of repetitive non-compliance with the recommendations , the interest-bearing deposits are converted into a yearly fine .
I agree with the proposal that the interest-bearing deposit and the fine should be identical for Member States whose currency is the euro , in order to ensure equal treatment for all Member States .
Only a strong and independent Commission can properly supervise and give directions in the new deeper and wider economic policy surveillance framework .
Consequently , the Commission needs to be given the right to recommend reducing the size of a sanction or to cancel it in exceptional economic circumstances .
Meanwhile the power to adopt individual decisions for the application of the sanction should be conferred on the Council .
I voted for this report on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area , which is part of the legislative package aimed at strengthening economic governance in the EU and the euro area .
The Commission proposals for improving economic governance are of the greatest importance for the future of the EU and for economic growth , particularly in the euro area .
The crucial importance of these measures meant that Parliament 's rapporteurs decided to examine the Commission proposals exhaustively as a package , and to improve them so as to establish a robust and coherent framework for the coming decades .
The rapporteurs have taken the Commission 's proposals as a starting point for their work .
This is the first time that Parliament is making a codecision on the macroeconomic development of the Union alongside the Council .
The new competences conferred by the Treaty of Lisbon have led to new responsibilities and the Council will not be able to make a final decision on the entire package without Parliament 's agreement .
The aim of this procedure is to ensure coherence and the timely adoption of all elements making up the package ; that has also been achieved with this report .
Economic governance and national economic policy should be more a matter of common concern for all the parties involved .
The Commission 's proposals for improved economic governance are of major importance for the future of the European Union .
They may be a good starting point , but they need to be further developed .
The points to be further developed are : a stronger focus on prevention of unsustainable fiscal and macroeconomic policies ; the need for national reform programmes and stability and convergence programmes to be duly dealt with at national level before submission to EU-level surveillance ; a stronger and more independent role for the Commission in the surveillance procedure ; more independence for the Commission in relation to the Council concerning compliance with EU rules ; the need for the decision-making procedure based on reversed qualified majority voting in the Council to be introduced in both the preventive and the corrective parts of the framework ; enhanced transparency and accountability , in order to strengthen peer support and peer pressure ; a more independent role for the Commission in the decision-making procedure but also greater accountability on the part of the Commission ; and lastly , the need for Parliament to have a stronger role in the surveillance process , but not an executive role .
For these reasons , I voted in favour .
This report aims to establish a series of joint-action measures that will enable the correction of dangerous macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area .
The measures available range from interest-bearing deposits to the charging of fines , and so slot perfectly into the punitive philosophy of the package as a whole , with which I disagree .
In itself , the inclusion of macroeconomic imbalances in the universe of economic coordination is positive , but the proper conclusions have not been drawn from it .
For example , during the process of applying sanctions , no account is taken of the symmetry and interdependence between countries with trade surpluses and countries with excessive deficits .
All the punishments are applied to those already in difficulty , even when these are the result of a euro overvalued against the dollar .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have abstained .
On the negative side , this report introduces the possibility of sanctioning Member States that do not apply measures to correct excessive imbalances .
Specifically , the possibility to impose a sanction of 0.1 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) in the case of Member States that do not apply the recommendations is introduced .
However , on the positive side , it also includes the requirement to introduce the ' reverse voting mechanism ' clause which implies that sanctions must be adopted except when the Council ( exclusively the euro area members ) votes against this by qualified majority .
When we ask for more economic governance and coordination these must , of course , be accompanied by certain sanction measures .
However , it is still not clear what would be the real economic effect and the effect of the application of this very rigid sanction on the citizens of the Member States .
As there are no reports providing justification , I am therefore abstaining .
If European economic governance is to be improved , the coherence and timely adoption of all parts of the package have to be guaranteed straight away , within the context of these procedures .
Everyone is now aware of the need for an improved economic governance framework to guarantee a more robust EU national economic policy surveillance framework .
Furthermore , this surveillance should be broadened to prevent harmful macroeconomic imbalances , with a guarantee that , in future , it will go beyond fiscal policy and that its remit will be extended to early detection and prevention of potentially harmful economic imbalances , too .
Macroeconomic surveillance cannot be based on a static and simplistic reference framework .
Rather , this procedure must be based on thorough economic analysis , through in-depth reviews investigating a broad range of economic factors .
in writing . - The ECR has always worked constructively to ensure that the eurozone can formulate a lasting solution to its sovereign debt crisis .
The defects of the Stability and Growth Pact , in both its substance and its enforcement , have been obvious for some time ; it is right that efforts are now underway to ensure a lasting settlement that works .
We have contributed throughout the committee and trialogue process to ensure that the Parliament 's preferred outcome is realistic , workable , and lasting .
Nevertheless , we regret that what has been proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Parliament is not a solution merely for the eurozone , but one that includes those whose currency is not the euro .
Whichever way one looks at it , the package we have voted on is one which increases the powers of the EU at the expense of the Member States .
It includes concepts that are innovative , such as reversed qualified majority voting and the fining of Member States , and ensures that national budgets are no longer a matter merely for national parliaments .
So while we endorse the long term goals , we cannot endorse the means and have voted against those reports which do not confine themselves to the eurozone .
As the last year has shown , the Stability and Growth Pact , which was supposed to be an effective means of preventing Member States from breaching the macroeconomic policies of the euro area , has - to put it mildly - not been very successful .
This was to a large extent due to the fact that Member States felt they would not be punished , because the sanctions provided for in the system were not applied automatically .
The measures which have been proposed centre mainly around stronger coordination of the fiscal policy of individual Member States and tougher and automatic sanctions intended to force Member States to maintain greater macroeconomic discipline .
Institutionalised austerity cannot be the only response that we offer Europeans .
The ' governance ' package that has just been voted on is inherently poorly balanced in the way it seeks to respond to the crisis .
Admittedly , we must strengthen the Growth and Stability Pact and deficits must be more closely monitored , and even penalised .
However , strict rules laid down for the deficits and the debt cannot be our sole response .
We must listen to what European citizens are saying to us , they who have been the first to suffer the economic and social effects of the crisis : austerity alone is intolerable .
The ' governance ' package should be offset by a European investment plan which guarantees economically and socially sustainable development .
It should introduce the financial tax and Eurobonds .
I therefore voted for the Feio and Wortmann-Kool reports while I abstained on the Ferreira , Ford and Haglund reports and I voted for the Goulard report ( for Eurobonds ) .
A choice of votes that is intended to reflect my very mixed feelings over this package , which admittedly does offer some steps forward but which is still too poorly balanced : Europe will be unable to continue to develop without its people and therefore we must debate solutions for the future in public .
in writing . - As a result of the global economic crisis and the instability that continues to plague the euro area , the Commission proposed a number of legislative initiatives , cumulatively known as the Economic Governance Package .
The Package aims to address the deficiencies in the system of economic governance currently in place at EU level .
It in order to avoid a repetition of the crises currently inflicting the euro area it is vital that countries exercise fiscal discipline .
Being part of the euro area has been instrumental for most Member States in weathering the adverse effects of the crisis ; nevertheless forming part of this group also entails responsibilities as the potential default of one Member State will see a wave of negative effects across the entire area .
For this reason , ensuring prudent fiscal policy-making is key .
I am in favour of a strong European Economic Governance Package and have thus decided to vote in favour of the six dossiers as amended .
In the context of the euro crisis , Member States should no longer escape penalties if their deficits get out of control .
The six texts adopted today should allow a stability mechanism to be introduced along with financial sanctions which come into play when a nation 's public deficit soars towards the European limit of 3 % of GDP .
While this legislative package does represent a step forward , these legislative measures on financial stability are far from sufficient .
Governments still refuse to let the Commission easily send a warning and impose financial sanctions .
They also refuse to allow the Ministers of Finance of those States whose public accounts are tipping into the red to be heard by Parliament .
Europe also needs to have a real European policy on investment and to introduce a public loan at Union level .
This would be the sign of a strong and united European response to the crisis .
This signal could act as a guarantee against the risk of collapse of the euro area .
I did not support the package as a whole .
Parliament is mistaken in calling for automatic , more severe sanctions .
Of course we need budgetary discipline and less debt .
However , economic policy is not just a simple mechanical sequence of procedures .
Political power must always be in a position to judge the text and the context and to decide the extent to which sanctions are opportune and necessary .
However , economic governance should above all aim for the best possible future , in other words aim for greater economic growth .
I am voting for this report , since it took into account the main concerns of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
The general approach of the directive is now maximum harmonisation , with a few significant exceptions .
It is particularly important that the directive apply to digital products , as well as - partially - to passenger transportation .
The directive includes a vast array of requirements for information to be provided to the consumer by the trader prior to the signing of the contract , whether this is done in person or at a distance .
It is very important that consumers be informed of the total price and principle characteristics of a given product immediately before ordering .
This is about improving and harmonising consumer protection at European level .
The proposal for which we have just voted replaces four existing directives with one , with a view to simplifying and supplementing the existing legal framework for consumer protection .
This is the final vote , as an agreement with the Council was reached after the first vote by Parliament last March .
As Parliament has won most of what it had called for , I fully supported this report .
I welcome what the report says on protecting consumer rights and encouraging cross-border trade throughout Europe .
Consumer rights are of critical importance to the effective functioning of the single market .
I voted in favour of the report because it proposes measures that will ensure that there is protection for consumers everywhere in the Union .
Under its provisions , traders will have to provide clear and accurate information in a timely manner and , failing that , a consumer cannot be bound by distance or off-premises contracts .
I particularly welcome what it says with regard to giving consumers the right to change their mind after buying an article online .
This could be done by email or telephone within a two-week period .
There has been a significant increase in online shopping in the EU and there must be protection for consumers who engage in it .
It must be ensured , however , that too heavy an administrative burden is not placed on SMEs .
A balance must be struck between strengthening consumer rights and cutting red tape .
in writing . - ( FR ) E-commerce is undeniably successful .
It is evidently a lasting trend and will remain so .
We should obviously be delighted .
The role of the legislator is to prevent the most questionable practices from becoming widespread in order to avoid mail order being nothing short of a jungle of regulations .
The European Parliament is restoring overall coherence with this vote .
Specifically , the European consumer is guaranteed the right to withdraw within 14 days .
According to the new regulations , all goods ordered remotely must be delivered within 30 days .
The trader is responsible for all damage to or the loss of the item during delivery .
Last but not least , MEPs have voted for genuine price transparency .
That is excellent news for this sector of the economy which has everything to gain from this new development .
I have voted in favour of this initiative as it is aimed at achieving better protection for consumer rights .
Additionally , it sets the desired level of harmonisation in distance and off-premises contracts as well as the right of withdrawal at Community level .
The directive in question was a great opportunity to try to establish common standards for the 27 Member States , as well as an excellent chance to simplify EU legislation on consumer rights , which is still split into several legislative acts .
However , the outcome of the parliamentary procedures and especially of the trialogues with the Council has provided us with a text that I personally consider unsatisfactory ; sensitive parts and some important aspects of the text submitted by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection have been removed by the Council , and overall the final text shows signs of a struggle between different basic approaches to the issue .
Moreover , it was unrealistic - especially at this moment in time - to expect a result that reconciled legal traditions and protection standards that vary significantly from one Member State to the next .
My final vote on the directive is one of abstention .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because it has greatly simplified EU legislation in the field of consumer protection and extended the rights of consumers when making online purchases .
In addition to enhanced protection of consumer rights , this proposal for a directive is aimed at eliminating unnecessary legal obstacles for companies wishing to sell their goods and services in the entire territory of the European Union .
The newly confirmed consumer rights for online purchases include the opportunity to return goods within 14 days of delivery , the right to withdraw from a purchase if the goods are not delivered within 30 days of ordering , and an obligation to inform the purchaser of the good 's final price .
At the same time , in order to protect retailers and service providers , the report provides for consumer obligations , such as covering the cost of postage when returning goods to the seller , and in the case of provision of services , the recipient will have to pay for the service share that has already been provided .
in writing . - ( CS ) On 23 June 2011 , Parliament approved the proposal for a Consumer Rights Directive , replacing the previous four directives with one legal document .
Firstly , this leads to more transparent legal arrangements for consumer protection in European legislation .
The directive above all responds to the fragmentation of law on cross-border commerce , where , with Internet shopping in particular , traders are unwilling to be governed by the different rules of another Member State .
The directive above all reintroduces the obligation to inform consumers about place of business , telephone and fax numbers and e-mail address , in order to facilitate communication with the trader .
The reintroduction of the obligation for traders to reimburse the direct costs for returning goods where the price of the goods does not exceed EUR 50 is also a new development .
From the perspective of Czech law , the proposal for a directive will not have a major impact on the legal arrangements for consumer protection , except for these new developments .
The new developments apply mainly to distance agreements .
I have therefore voted in favour of the proposal for a directive .
I voted in favour of adopting the final compromise as it marks an important step forward for consumer protection , offering additional legal certainty for both consumers and traders .
I think that the directive offers numerous merits , one of which is maximum harmonisation for distance selling and off-premises contracts , with a few exceptions .
To develop the internal market through boosting cross-border transactions and e-commerce , it is vital that European consumers benefit in these contracts from a standard level of protection , regardless of their country of origin .
Another factor which is also just as important is for traders not to have to adapt to different requirements .
Thanks to the regulations on providing information about delivery areas , giving prices inclusive of all taxes and the standard 14-day right to cancel , this directive is likely to boost consumer confidence in cross-border transactions .
I also welcome the solution found for the right to cancel in the case of online products , given that the number of sales of such products is rising and a solution was an absolute necessity .
Finally , the ban on excessive charges for using certain payment methods and on the use of pre-ticked boxes is excellent news from this directive for consumers .
The introduction of this common platform of rights for all consumers within the Union represents a real step forward for the citizens of other countries where consumer information requirements are not as high and where the period for withdrawal is less well protected .
However , it has given mixed results , as the aim of the Commission and the European right has been above all to facilitate cross-border trade , and not to harmonise upwards consumer protection .
It is therefore a small step for the French consumer but a big step for the European consumer .
in writing . - It is important to underline the necessity of consumer rights , particularly those related to online purchases , in this and future reports in this area .
in writing . - ( PT ) This directive aims to simplify and complete the legislative framework in force , by merging the four existing directives into a single legislative instrument .
These directives only provide for minimal harmonisation clauses and leave the adoption of more rigorous rules to the discretion of the Member States .
This has contributed to an enormous fragmentation at EU level and high compliance costs for businesses in cross-border transactions .
There is a need to establish a true internal market between businesses and consumers that is able to contribute to a fair balance between a high level of consumer protection and businesses ' competitiveness , but also to ensure respect for the subsidiarity principle .
That would enable consumers to have access to competitive cross-border offers , benefitting from better choice , better prices and the clear advantages of the internal market , whilst also enabling them to place greater trust in a high level of protection of their rights .
At the same time , it will enable companies to provide goods and services without being subjected to unnecessary legal obstacles .
I agree that the ideal solution would be an approach of total harmonisation , as initially proposed by the Commission and requested by several spheres of business .
However , unfortunately , that approach is still unfeasible at this stage ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
I welcome this vote , which is a significant step forwards for the internal market and the fruit of complex and involved negotiations .
We now await the Council 's formal approval .
I consider it important for the European Parliament to continue to play a part in monitoring the directive 's implementation by the Member States over the next two years .
While the adoption of the directive is an important result , its transposition into national law is in fact the key stage in ensuring that the legislation is properly implemented by the Member States and that no obstacles or barriers to the single market are created .
With this directive , European consumers will gain new rights enshrined at European level and transcending national borders .
This will most certainly increase cross-border trade and boost online trade , which is the real challenge for businesses and the economic recovery of the market .
Today , Parliament adopted the amended text of the Consumer Rights Directive of my fellow Member , Mr Schwab .
I welcome the adoption of this directive which will contribute to strengthening the platform of common consumer protection regulations , in particular with reference to the sale of goods online .
I also welcome the fact that the legislator has allowed the Member States to include provisions that are more favourable to consumers in their respective national legal systems .
Conversely , like numerous consumer associations , I deplore the fact that options have been provided so that Member States can bypass certain provisions in the directive with commercial or sector interests in mind .
in writing . - I supported this deal between the European Parliament and Council on a Directive on Consumer Rights .
The proposal for the directive merges the four existing Community directives into a single legal instrument .
I would have liked to have seen a higher level of consumer protection in some areas but the proposal as a whole is a very good compromise and will enhance the rights of the consumers throughout the EU .
Several important points will mean real added value for the European consumer ; the Directive now applies to digital products and ( partly ) to passenger travel ; the trader is now required to provide the consumer with specific information in the pre-contractual phase , in on-premises contracts as well as in off-premises and distance contracts ; immediately before a consumer places an order , she has to be informed ( again ) about the full price and the main characteristics of the product , and she has to explicitly confirm that the order implies and obligation to pay ; Moreover , the right of withdrawal will now be fully harmonized in all Member States providing a 14-day withdrawal period .
Further there will be a prohibition of so called pre-ticked boxes causing problems especially in the passenger travel sector .
The Consumer Rights Directive will enable full harmonisation of the rights of European consumers .
This vote is the fruit of two years of discussions with consumer and professional associations , and it is , in particular , a major victory for the European Parliament which remained united around this issue .
This text provides for new , very important regulations for e-commerce .
We have set up a system which will make it possible to ensure that any order meets the wishes of the consumer ( chief characteristics of the good or service , total cost , length of contract ) prior to its definitive validation .
With these new regulations , vendors will still be under the obligation to display clearly the total cost of the good or service including all additional costs .
Thus consumers will be better and fully informed .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for this report because it contributes to increasing the confidence and protection of consumers when they buy on the Internet , and to reducing the reluctance of businesses to sell in other EU countries .
These amendments will ensure consumers greater security , and will contribute to companies , small or large , being able to provide goods and services without unnecessary legal obstacles .
Consumer rights and protection under EU law is one of the fundamental principles of the functioning of the internal market .
I believe adequate consumer protection and security are fundamental to the proper functioning of the markets and to trade , which constitute an essential condition of competitiveness and growth .
As such , it is crucial to strike a balance between a high level of consumer protection - especially as regards the level of information provided to them and responsibility for any harm caused to them - and the costs this will impose on businesses .
As I said during the March vote , it is important to bear in mind the various national particularities and the protection offered , with proper respect for the subsidiarity principle .
I therefore believe that this is an area where , on the one hand , maximum harmonisation may be useful , but , on the other , minimum harmonisation may also be adopted , depending on which is more suited to a given type of contract .
This report is on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on Consumer Rights .
The European Union has always been concerned with the free movement of people and goods .
However , this freedom sometimes raises issues that need to be cleared up and , above all , prepared for or prevented .
In a globalised world where purchases are increasingly made over the Internet , it is becoming essential to adapt legislation to the new requirements of the market , with a view to defending the rights of consumers who , very often , do not even know them .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this report , which represents a major step forward in consumer protection .
I also welcome the option taken by the Council of restricting this directive to door-to-door and Internet sales - a market that is expanding significantly , but in which consumers still feel a little lost - and I approve of the simplification measures adopted , not least the possibility of consumers , but not companies , rescinding contracts by telephone .
In reality , the common market requires rules that are more precise and transparent , such as the clause on the requirement for information on the mechanisms of online transactions .
This is a new proposal for an agreement on a European Directive on Consumer Rights , which is the culmination of tough negotiations between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
This is a compromise between rules aimed at better protecting consumers and guaranteeing clear common conditions for companies competing in the single market .
New rights are considered in this new proposal , like the existence of a 14-day withdrawal period for the entire EU , to be counted from receipt of the products .
In case of return of goods , the price paid by the consumer must be returned within 14 days of their return .
If the seller does not inform the consumer of the right to return goods , the purchaser has a period of one year to return them .
In this new version , the item will have to be delivered within 30 days .
If this does not happen during that time , the buyer has the right to cancel the order , and the seller is responsible for any loss or damage that occurs during transportation and shall not charge any sum that is not clearly marked as part of the initial online order .
All costs added to the value of the order shall be borne by the seller .
It is a positive proposal , overall , and we voted in favour .
This new proposal for an agreement on a European Directive on Consumer Rights is the culmination of tough negotiations between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
It is a compromise between rules aimed at better protecting consumers and guaranteeing clear common conditions for companies competing in the single market .
Of the new rights , the following are particularly important :
a 14-day withdrawal period for the entire EU , to be counted from receipt of the goods , during which consumers buying at distance can change their mind .
In case of return of goods , the price paid by the consumer must be returned within 14 days of their return .
If the seller does not inform the consumer of the right to return goods , the purchaser has a period of one year to return them .
the item shall be delivered within 30 days .
If it is not delivered within this period , the purchaser has the right to cancel the order ;
the seller is responsible for any loss or damage that occurs during transportation and shall not charge any sum that is not clearly marked as part of the initial online order .
All costs added to the value of the order shall be borne by the seller .
in writing . - ( SK ) The aim of this proposal is to ensure that consumers in all 27 Member States of the EU can rely on a high level of consumer protection , and that companies of all sizes are capable of supplying goods and providing services to consumers in all 27 EU Member States without unnecessary legal obstacles .
The fragmentation of existing laws scares off both consumers and businesses who are considering becoming involved in cross-border trade .
Consumers often complain that they cannot make full use of the advantages of the single market , since traders with a place of business in another Member State are often not prepared , when entering a new market , to comply with the differing provisions applicable in that market .
In addition to this , they often refuse to open up a possible legal action in another Member State .
The altered scope of the proposed directive appears to offer a possible solution to the difficulties that have arisen , as , in addition to the introduction of many sectoral variations , the scope of the directive would be mainly limited to off-premises contracts , which make up the greater part of cross-border transactions .
I therefore think it is desirable to apply an approach aimed at a targeted , full and extensive harmonisation , limited to specific aspects of certain contracts , while retaining a high level of consumer protection .
I should like to congratulate Mr Schwab on the important and mammoth task he has accomplished .
However , given the current economic situation , perhaps this is not the best moment to adopt this text .
The effort of consolidating 27 diverse legal traditions in one document has perhaps been too audacious .
Doubts about the consequences of transposing this directive in the individual Member States and the deletion from the text of the amendment approved by our Member in committee induce me to abstain .
I am voting in favour of this report because I believe that the moment has come to harmonise the European legal system in terms of consumer protection .
In 2008 , the European Commission adopted a proposal for a Directive on Consumer Rights , which consolidated the four existing Community directives into a single legal instrument , with the aim of simplifying and standardising the existing regulatory framework in the area of consumer protection .
It is now essential both to guarantee a higher level of protection to all consumers in the 27 Member States of the European Union and to ensure that businesses have the possibility of providing their products and services without encountering unnecessary legal obstacles stemming from differing systems .
Until now , this situation has severely damaged the single European market .
In the era of online purchases and the globalisation of consumption , every trader operating in another Member State must feel encouraged to enter the market in other European countries without having the heavy burden of adapting to their national regulations .
I hope that our work will be able to respond to the great challenge of protecting consumers and to our businesses ' need for growth , in order to strengthen a strong and competitive market .
After weeks of negotiations , agreement has finally been reached on this crucial issue for European citizens , namely consumer rights .
By adopting this proposal for a directive , which replaces four existing directives with one , we hope to improve the regulation of consumer protection and guarantee everyone a minimum level of protection .
Thus this directive contains some major steps forward , and , in particular , better supervision of remote sales and e-commerce .
It will help facilitate the thousands of purchases made on a daily basis from other European countries .
In concrete terms , a French customer buying something from a German website will benefit from the same protection as would a German customer .
As someone who represents a very cross-border constituency and who hails from the only region in France to share a border with three other EU Member States , I am very sensitive to these problems and this directive represents a major step forward .
Beyond that , one of the main successes of the European Union is the internal market .
By guaranteeing clear consumer protection , we will be able to strengthen consumer confidence in the internal market and more generally towards the European Union .
The European Parliament has brought an end to the long legislative procedure on the Consumer Rights Directive by adopting the Schwab report , which is a satisfactory compromise with the Council and the Commission .
Two important steps have thus been taken .
On the one hand , we have adopted a single legislative instrument on consumer rights , which provides harmonisation and takes over from the four previous directives in this area .
On the other hand , we have laid down detailed rules for buying and selling online , in order to promote cross-border trade and to guarantee transparency for both businesses and consumers .
The new directive lays down aspects that are intended to give greater protection to the European consumer , such as the information to be contained in sale contracts , delivery times , the right of withdrawal , and the right to repair or replacement of a defective product , as well as the cases in which the risk is transferred from the vendor to the consumer .
Although yet more detailed rules may be laid down in future , the text that has been adopted represents a positive compromise in the harmonisation of existing regulations , guaranteeing secure purchases and putting a definitive end to typical sharp practices that hide behind electronic purchasing .
I supported this report because I believe that it will above all give greater security to consumers buying online by providing better prior consumer information .
Let me also take this opportunity to commend the fact that priority has not been given to market interests alone .
I note in particular that these new regulations provide consumers with a 14-day withdrawal period after their purchase , with a withdrawal form that is standardised throughout the EU , and that this period can even be extended to one year if the vendor fails to inform the purchaser about the right to withdraw .
Finally , exemptions have been provided for small and medium-sized enterprises who have informed us of the threats that would have hung over their business if the text had been too strict .
In this way , their concerns have been heard .
in writing . - I wish to congratulate the rapporteur and colleagues across the political groups for the excellent work that has been done in negotiating this package .
When this House first received the Commission 's proposal it was clear that consumer rights in numerous countries were being threatened , not enhanced .
This compromise package has removed a number of these threats and will hopefully lead to a better consumer environment across the EU .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because the aim of the directive is to achieve a high level of consumer protection and contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market by approximating certain aspects of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning contracts between consumers and traders .
The most important aspects of the amendment of the directive are related to distance contracts or off-premises contracts .
The act will give consumers more control when purchasing goods , protect them from unfair activities , extend consumer choice and increase competition .
It may also contribute to increasing the flow of cross-border trade and stimulating distance selling .
This directive shall not apply to contracts relating to : social services , health care , financial services , immovable property , the construction of new buildings , as well as contracts concluded by means of automatic vending machines or automated commercial premises or concluded with telecommunications operators through public payphones for the use thereof , or relating to single telephone , Internet or fax connections established by the consumer .
Member States may choose not to apply this directive to off-premises contracts for which the payment to be made by the consumer does not exceed EUR 50 .
This directive shall not prevent traders from offering consumers contractual arrangements which go beyond the protection provided for in this directive .
It should be noted that the European Consumers ' Organisation welcomes this proposal .
I voted for the Consumer Rights Directive today because I believe that it will simplify and improve the existing regulations in the area of consumer protection .
Over many months , Members in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection sought to reach agreement on important aspects of this regulation with the Council , in order that consumers may be better protected , without making businesses suffer from overly strict and unnecessary rules that would restrict business activity and increase bureaucracy .
We have now managed to arrive at a balanced result , that is both consumer-friendly and business-friendly .
However , in my view we must not rest on our laurels .
After consulting consumer-rights organisations and representatives from the business world , I understand that we must insist on yet greater harmonisation of consumer rights across the European Union .
There are currently significant differences , and these are an obstacle to business people who wish to expand into the markets of those other Member States where the standards are higher .
In my opinion , Latvia is a good example in the area of consumer protection , because our standards are some of the highest , but they are proportionate and do not encumber the business environment with bureaucratic requirements .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the results of the negotiations on the Consumer Rights Directive because it was possible to find a balanced compromise between the interests of both consumers and the business community .
By harmonising consumer rights , we are helping to strengthen the internal market , thereby also strengthening Europe .
The directive enables businesses to safely cross borders , taking the internal market one step closer to becoming a European home market .
The new rules offer consumers more security and confidence when they make purchases , particularly using the Internet .
However , sadly , some provisions miss the point .
I would have welcomed it if the Council in particular had agreed on more objective solutions that were sympathetic to small businesses .
Above all , it could have been possible to add the procurement element to the definition of off-premises contracts .
in writing . - ( FR ) I supported the report by my colleague Mr Schwab which had been subject to an agreement between the Commission , Parliament and the Council , and which has struck an appropriate balance between greater protection for all European consumers and easier access to the European market for our businesses .
While this directive deals with sales and service contracts between businesses and consumers , in particular distance contracts and off-premises contracts , it is particularly encouraging that European legislation is at last addressing the issue of e-commerce , which is set to play an increasing role in our economies and purchasing practices .
By guaranteeing a minimum number of common consumer protection regulations within the European Union , we offer our fellow citizens and our businesses the security and the guarantees they need for the development of cross-border and e-commerce purchases .
We are thus working towards achieving a true internal market .
Consumer rights require continuous care , both in the area of legislation , including the scope of regulation , the subject of regulation and the obligations and rights of the parties , and also in the area of the observance of these rights .
It is good that we periodically review and modify provisions in these areas .
Information given to consumers , the medium on which this information is stored , goods of diminished commercial value and the possibility to return goods are particularly important issues today .
The above essential matters and principles have found expression in the Schwab report .
in writing . - ( RO ) The new directive is a balanced agreement offering benefits such as the right recognised at EU level of consumers to change their mind in the two weeks after they have received the item they ordered and the obligation for online traders to provide full information about the total price and the trader 's contact details .
Such a framework was needed for online transactions as this is the method used for the majority of cross-border sales .
We must aim in the future to protect consumers against unfair contractual terms .
In the case of banking , electronic communication and tourist services , the contract 's terms are very often written in tiny letters and customers very frequently agree without familiarising themselves with these terms .
The aim of the Directive on Consumer Rights is to simplify contractual relations between consumers and businesses , thereby contributing to the better functioning of the internal market and increasing their confidence in cross-border purchases .
It should guarantee consumers a higher level of protection and ensure that businesses can provide their goods and services to consumers without encountering legal obstacles .
The European Commission has proposed applying the principle of ' full harmonisation ' , since the current divergence in national legislation has contributed to the fragmentation of the market and the regulatory framework .
We consider that such a proposal is impractical at the moment , and we propose instead minimum harmonisation at a high level of consumer protection as a rule , emphasising the need for convergence of national regulations on the exercise and effects of the right of withdrawal .
All this will help to strengthen consumer confidence and overcome the reluctance of businesses to engage in cross-border trade .
Persons and organisations having an interest in consumer protection will have to report to the Commission on the results of implementing this directive .
On that basis , the Commission will have to draw up a report along with proposals for any revisions .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report on consumer rights still contains numerous shortcomings , particularly in relation to the provisions for craftspeople .
A number of improvements are still needed here and we must first see how the regulations impact on the rights of craftspeople in practice .
However , because it contains a number of improvements on the Commission 's proposal and , most importantly , offers numerous benefits to the European consumer , I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) Certain conditions must be established in order to offer companies an incentive to enter into cross-border trade .
Above all , these include consumer protection , which must be brought to an equally high standard throughout the EU .
There is still a great deal of uncertainty associated with online purchases in particular - especially on the part of the consumer - as there is no clear legal basis for such transactions .
Misunderstandings regularly occur , especially in relation to the purchaser 's right of withdrawal and delivery conditions .
I voted in favour of the report because it is essential to be able to offer consumers a certain level of protection even when they make purchases outside their own country .
This protection should be standardised on a EU-wide basis .
I am pleased to see that , after years of negotiations , agreement between the different political groups has finally been reached and that the new Consumer Rights Directive has finally been adopted today .
The new regulations will notably strengthen consumer rights .
Consumers will be better informed on contract terms and conditions of sale , as well as on delivery times and the possibility of withdrawing from the contract .
I have in mind , for example , the period for a refund in the case of returned goods , which will be considerably reduced , providing a guarantee to the consumer from a financial point of view as well , and the right to reconsider , which will be extended to 14 days .
These are small but important steps that will be appreciated not just by consumers , since the directive , as amended , will also bring benefits to small and medium-sized enterprises , enabling them to extend their business across borders too , where many of them , especially the smaller entrepreneurs , still find it difficult to operate , due to consumers ' mistrust of new technologies , online transactions , assurances that they will get their money back and legal restitution in cases of a change of mind .
in writing . - ( DE ) Now that companies regularly engage in cross-border selling in the internal market , it makes sense to offer consumers cross-border protection .
However , harmonisation is not something to be achieved by force .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) We must make every effort to ensure that there is a high level of consumer protection throughout the entire European Union .
Only by achieving this objective can the internal market function effectively .
Above all , we must harmonise Member States ' legislative requirements relating to distance contracts and off-premises contracts .
Consequently , specific information requirements need to be imposed on these types of contracts to ensure adequate consumer protection .
Once these measures have been implemented , consumers will have more control when purchasing goods .
In addition , they will be protected from unfair activities .
There will also be an increase in consumer choice , competition , the flow of cross-border trade and distance selling .
It should be noted that Member States are given the right not to apply the provisions of this directive to off-premises contracts where the contract amount does not exceed EUR 50 , in order to avoid additional legal obstacles .
I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on Consumer Rights .
The objective of this directive is to achieve a high level of consumer protection .
The European Union 's attempt to combine the harmonisation of the internal market with a high level of consumer protection can best be achieved by trying to raise the current minimum level of harmonisation in the direction of the best national practices existing in several Member States .
In future , the European system of liability for lack of conformity should be developed in such a way that it improves consumer protection and confidence in the markets : this is fair to businesses and supports an increase in the useful life of products .
Putting this into practice requires the creation of a European model for resolving consumer disputes .
Not all the grand ambitions for the Consumer Rights Directive have been achieved , but I believe an important step has been taken that does not compromise the market 's normal workings .
This proposal for a directive is the result of a review of the consumer acquis which started in 2004 with the aim of simplifying and completing the existing regulatory framework relating to consumer protection .
The proposal is intended to ensure that , on the one hand , consumers of the 27 Member States can rely on a high level of protection and , on the other hand , that businesses , regardless of their size , can provide their goods and services to consumers in the 27 Member States without facing unnecessary legal obstacles .
In order to avoid the ever greater fragmentation of existing regulations in this area , a targeted full harmonisation approach was sought ; that is to say , harmonisation limited to specific aspects of certain contracts , while maintaining a high level of consumer protection .
This requires an adjustment of the scope of application .
In fact , apart from a series of sectoral exemptions across a wide range of sectors , the directive is restricted to contracts concluded away from business premises , which increasingly constitute a sizeable proportion of cross-border contracts .
In order that citizens of the EU may benefit fully from their internal market , especially in relation to e-commerce , I am voting in favour of the proposal in question .
in writing . - A directive harmonising consumer rights across Europe makes sense .
It also has the potential to boost Internet and distance sales businesses because shoppers will have greater confidence in services based in the EU .
Providing this information will give consumers confidence and encourage them to engage in cross-border shopping , providing them with better choice and value .
Any increase in cross-border shopping will be a benefit to the internal market as a whole .
Online sales and e-commerce in Europe were worth EUR 163 billion in 2010 and the Centre for Retail Research predicts online sales in Europe will grow by 18.7 % to EUR 202.9 billion in 2011 .
This is a highly lucrative market and we must ensure that consumers are adequately protected .
The directive also protects businesses .
Differing consumer laws in Member States have deterred companies from expanding their markets .
By harmonising these laws across the EU , businesses can be confident the rules that apply in their home market also apply everywhere else in the EU .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Commission proposal for a Directive on Consumer Rights merges four existing directives into a single legislative instrument , with the aim of simplifying and completing the existing consumer protection regulatory framework .
The twin aims of the proposal are to guarantee that every consumer in the 27 EU Member States can rely on a high level of consumer protection and that businesses of all sizes are in a position to provide their goods and services to consumers in the 27 EU Member States .
The new consumer rights regulations include almost every type of sales , in stores , via telephone or online , but reinforce in particular the provisions on international sales .
The new legislation stipulates what kind of information the purchaser must receive from the seller , the delivery terms and the rules applied when the risk lies with the purchaser , not to mention the latter 's right to cancel or refuse purchases or the right to have an item repaired or replaced .
I support the proposal to introduce a combination of the principles of maximum and minimum harmonisation , thereby allowing consumers to retain the rights they have gained through national legal provisions .
In a large internal market like Europe 's , there is a need to ensure that consumers ' rights are protected .
Mr Schwab 's report has the aim of merging four different directives : those on off-premises sales , on distance sales , on guarantees and on unfair contract terms .
It is difficult to reconcile 27 different legal traditions on these subjects .
This is probably not the most appropriate point in history to issue regulations of this complexity .
It would have been more opportune , in my view , to concentrate on specific aspects and sectors , rather than to try and create a new competency shared between the EU and the Member States .
In fact , for certain states , this directive will represent an over-large and over-enthusiastic step forward , while other countries will have to make concessions in the name of European harmonisation .
For this reason , although I acknowledge the great effort made by Mr Schwab , I cannot vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) A well-protected consumer is a citizen at ease and a sign of maturity in our modern democracies .
This is what makes the directive adopted today important .
Not a day passes in which the European consumer , when choosing to make an online purchase or accepting an amendment to a subscription by telephone , is not faced with doubts about whether the contract he or she has signed or approved is in order .
In response to the often unequal relations between professionals and consumers , the European Parliament has negotiated essential rights , namely : a right of withdrawal set at 14 days , whether the purchase has been carried out online , by e-mail , by telephone or by a door-to-door salesperson .
If the vendor has not provided information about the right to withdraw , it will be possible to send back the item for a year after the date of purchase .
All deliveries must be made within a period of 30 days .
Once this period of time has been exceeded , the purchaser may withdraw without justification .
This vote has taken place after fierce negotiations between Parliament and the Member States and constitutes a strong signal that the same rights must be exercised throughout the Union .
I voted in favour of the Schwab report , which strengthens the rights of consumers and safeguards them in particular when they are the weak contractual party , for example when they make purchases away from business premises .
The directive , which spells the end of a lengthy debate between Parliament and the Council , provides , among other things , for the period in which consumers can withdraw from a sale to be doubled from seven to fourteen days , and for enhanced protection in the event of a lack of conformity .
Sellers will also have to make it clear when they impose any binding terms or terms that are unfair to consumers .
in writing . - The new rules approved by the EP today will give a real boost to consumers ' rights across Europe .
Crucially , consumers will now have the right to withdraw from a purchase up to 14 days after .
" The new rules also give much greater protection for online shopping , with consumers covered by the same rules across Europe .
This will give greater peace of mind to online shoppers .
" The Greens welcome the greater protection for consumers buying digital content .
From now on , consumers will have to be properly informed when they purchase digital content online and will have a right of withdrawal under certain conditions .
The new rules will also bring real improvements for passengers buying transport tickets online .
It should end in transparent charging practices and ensure that companies can no longer surcharge consumers when using credit cards .
One in two Europeans uses the Internet , and the number of online purchases has doubled over the last six years .
Nevertheless , the online market is still not being used to its full potential .
The existence of minimum harmonisation clauses has resulted in the fragmentation of the regulatory framework , hindering the completion of the single market .
The adopted report helps to improve the functioning of the internal market , while at the same time bolstering consumer confidence .
Businesses have too often struggled until now to operate not only in their national market but also in transnational markets .
Excessive fragmentation has also reduced the choice of millions of European citizens and made them less confident about purchasing goods from abroad .
The proposal adopted today introduces the obligation to provide clear and legible information , encouraging shrewd and informed choices .
Consumers will have recourse to a number of remedies in the event that they purchase a product that does not conform to the contract , and they will be entitled to claim damages if no remedy is provided .
Provision is also made for the publication of a list of terms that are considered unfair and are therefore prohibited throughout the European Union .
Consumer rights are just one of the many examples of the European institutions ' failure , at this historic time , to carry out acts of great legal and political importance .
We would not want to waste all the work done and the positive things achieved , including , for example , the contribution of our amendment on the right of recourse , which is intended to bring about a clear improvement in the activity of small traders without harming consumer rights .
This plenary session has had the effect of cancelling out the few good things that the rapporteur and the groups introduced into what was a poor proposal to begin with .
The responsibility for this situation lies not with Parliament but with the Commission .
There are some issues on which even we Eurosceptics in the Lega Nord are prepared to say yes to a high degree of harmonisation , but only when it makes good sense and is compatible with the public interest , the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises and , indeed , the prerogatives of Member States .
Consumer protection being a complex issue , an approach reflecting all of the above was needed from the outset .
We abstained during the vote .
The internal market remains one of the pillars and drivers of European integration .
I voted in favour of this report as it represents not only a major advance towards further European integration , but also , once they are implemented , these regulations will enable all citizens to benefit from the same high level of protection , whatever their mode of purchase .
Thus , online purchases will finally become subject to clear regulations : the trader must provide the purchaser with full information about the cost and the characteristics of the good as well as providing him or her with a point of contact .
' Traditional ' purchases will also be better protected : all European consumers will benefit from a 14-day withdrawal period , which can be extended if they have not received certain essential information .
Consumers and traders will be better informed and will benefit from standard protection throughout the EU .
Thus they will be in a position to derive even greater benefit from the advantages of the internal market .
in writing . - ( CS ) I voted for the adoption of the Consumer Rights Directive , because I believe it will ultimately strengthen the rights of European consumers .
My group in particular has managed to carry through several key points which retain the high level of consumer protection in countries where protection would be reduced through the introduction of common rules .
It was important for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , as well as for me personally , that the directive should apply to digital products in the same way as it does , in part , to passenger transport .
Another important point is that the directive includes a long list of requirements pertaining to the information which must be provided by traders to consumers in the pre-contractual stage in the case of off-premises and distance contracts .
Another important point is that consumers must be informed of the full price and the main characteristics of a product immediately before ordering it on the Internet , and they alone must explicitly confirm that they want to pay that price .
In addition to this , the right to withdraw from a contract will be fully harmonised in all Member States , providing a fourteen-day period to do so .
The new directive also does away with the exemption for distance or off-premises contracts , which have been widely abused in the Czech Republic by street traders or at promotional events for old people , for example , depriving consumers of their rights , such as the right to withdraw from a contract .
In today 's vote , I endorsed the amendments to the Directive on Consumer Rights which make it easier to make purchases on the Internet , because this is a very important step towards the complete lifting of barriers to the flow of goods while at the same time safeguarding the rights of consumers .
The right which has been guaranteed to precise information about the ability to withdraw from a contract , the price of a product , the costs of delivery , the total cost of a purchase and details of the trader is intended to increase the security of such transactions and will also be a stimulus to sales .
Consumers very often complain that their right to benefit from all the privileges of the single market is incomplete , and this is reflected in the lack of trust in online transactions and in the feeling of legal uncertainty concerning the scope of the protection which should be enjoyed by consumers .
Meanwhile , traders explain that their dislike of cross-border transactions is caused by differences in legislation in the markets of different Member States .
Therefore , a legal solution at Union level is essential .
The experts estimate that by 2015 as much as a quarter of trade will have moved to the Internet , so it is very important that confidence in this type of transaction should grow .
I congratulate the author of the report and the other people who were involved in the work on the draft of this resolution .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) will be voting in favour of the Consumer Rights Directive because it will provide better protection for Dutch consumers when shopping online .
Consumers shopping in the Netherlands enjoy good protection , but when shopping online , often in foreign shops , that protection is not guaranteed or is unclear .
This Consumer Rights Directive improves protection for cross-border purchases via the Internet , and it is thus of added value to Dutch consumers .
It will mean that , in future , Dutch consumers will enjoy a 14-day cooling-off period right across Europe .
That is a clear improvement on the current 7-day period .
The PVV also thinks it is a good thing that this directive will put an end to hidden costs and those added on at the end .
The final price that a consumer has to pay must be clearly displayed in advance .
This directive will thus help protect Dutch consumers and improve the internal market , and the PVV is fully in favour of that .
This directive which has been adopted today by the vast majority of the European Parliament marks an important stage in achieving greater consumer protection within the European Union .
The new regulations will strengthen consumer rights considerably , in particular with regard to information , delivery and withdrawal from contracts .
The right to withdraw has been extended to 14 days for all European citizens , and this represents a decisive step forward .
However , the area in which the directive breaks new ground is in consumer rights in e-commerce : prohibition of pre-ticked boxes and full information on all different costs are tools indeed for consumer protection .
The Consumer Rights Directive is now going to the final vote , following my vote in favour at the part-session in March 2011 .
This new directive , which comprises the fusion of four already existing directives , aims to give new impetus to completing the internal market by removing legal obstacles to cross-border trade .
Following long negotiations between the various institutions , this new legal framework will ensure clear and common conditions for citizens and businesses in the EU .
Cross-border commercial transactions and online transactions are now harmonised , so ensuring greater security and transparency for EU consumers and businesses .
The information to be provided for consumers needs to be clear , intelligible and provided in good time .
The specificities of hotel- or restaurant-reservation contracts have also been safeguarded , which was not the case with the initial proposal .
I believe this new directive will increase transactions within Europe .
This will enable the safeguarding of consumers and of the proper functioning of the single market , pursuant to Article 26 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union : ' The internal market shall comprise an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods , persons , services and capital is ensured ' .
Purchases made on the Internet , which are becoming ever more popular , have the opportunity to become simpler and safer thanks to this directive .
This is good news for the Polish Presidency , because e-commerce is one of our priorities and is something we want to use to increase the competitiveness of the EU economy .
After the new legislation comes into force , the seller will be obliged to give clear information about the countries to which deliveries are made .
At the moment , many shops do not send goods to all EU Member States , and our transactions are often terminated .
in writing . - ( LT ) I believe that the new rules contained in the report provide clarity and set out acceptable criteria , for both consumers and businesses , when concluding online transactions .
I hope that they will improve consumer protection and the functioning of the internal market , while also stimulating cross-border trade within the EU .
These amendments are overdue - the original directives anticipated the digital revolution , but today consumers shopping online do not have adequate protection .
The new rules are good news for Lithuania , which has one of the highest Internet penetration rates in Europe .
According to reports in the Lithuanian media ( Verslo savaitė ) , in Lithuania the number of consumers shopping online has grown by 73 % over the last two years .
The list of purchases is very broad , from tickets ( 32 % ) , clothes , shoes and accessories ( also 32 % ) , to electrical appliances ( 23 % ) .
However , improving consumer rights should not be restricted to the Internet .
We must reduce bureaucracy and promote transparency in all areas of consumer rights .
We should also strive to ensure that people are better informed about consumer rights .
Research carried out in the EU has shown that seven out of ten Lithuanians would still like to know more about their rights when purchasing airline tickets online or when facing additional credit charges .
in writing . - I wholeheartedly supported this report to strengthen protection for consumers across Wales .
This new legislation will protect those consumers purchasing products on line - customers will now have a period of two weeks in which to change their mind about on-line purchases .
This new legislation takes in to account the " digital revolution " and will help both consumers and traders alike .
Cross border selling will become easier , helping both consumers and traders alike .
The Consumer Rights Directive also signals the end of high credit and debit card fees , which many people pay when purchasing on line - I am pleased to say that this report outlaws the practice of adding credit or debit card payment fees that bear no relation to costs incurred when processing an on-line transaction .
I hope that the British Government will implement these new rules without delay to ensure the protection of consumers across the UK .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Schwab because I consider it a sound basis on which to negotiate with the Council and the Commission the conclusion of an agreement on the level of harmonisation necessary to obtain consumer rights that can be exercised in every Member State .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour of the amendment to Directive 2000 / 25 / EC .
It establishes a gradual , phased reduction in polluting emissions .
This is due to the time period required for the necessary technological development to apply phase III .
The latter provides for more drastic emission reductions and , therefore , important modifications to engines which have not yet been possible .
In addition to this , the economic crisis has affected the production of tractors .
Thus , it is necessary to provide the required time period and adopt measures that allow manufactures to sell tractors , to seek resources for research and that also allow farmers to replace their tractors with less polluting ones , always with the aim of complying with European environmental legislation .
in writing . - ( PT ) The directive in question concerns emissions from agricultural tractors and provides for a quantitative modification , without altering the environmental objectives previously set out in Directive 2000 / 25 / EC .
Given the difficulties currently being experienced in the sector , an increase of the percentage of the number of engines placed on the market under the flexibility scheme could be beneficial .
As the rapporteur mentions , the proposal in question aims to enable Union manufacturers to sell tractors , to overcome the time of economic crisis currently being experienced , to find new resources for research and to respect European legislation 's limits as regards environmental protection , whilst simultaneously replacing the most obsolete tractors with new tractors that have less polluting engines .
In order to make environmental protection compatible with the protection of agricultural and industrial activities , transitional measures like the present flexibility scheme are advisable .
This report by Mr Tatarella is on the joint proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 2000 / 25 / EC as regards the provisions for tractors placed on the market under the flexibility scheme , which concerns exhaust gases .
Environmental protection is one of the European Union 's priorities .
This directive sets out the maximum level of exhaust gases that each tractor with a diesel engine may emit , taking into account its power , and establishes a timetable for phasing out these emissions .
However , the proposal does not provide for a reduction as drastic as was initially envisaged on account of the delay in implementing new technological solutions and the decline of more than 20 % in turnover in 2009 and 2010 .
I voted for the rapporteur 's recommendations because I agree , not only that this directive will enable tractor sellers to respect European legislation whilst overcoming the current crisis , but that it will enable farmers to replace used tractors with new agricultural machines with engines that are more efficient and that cause less pollution .
in writing . - ( SK ) The directive in question applies to emissions from agricultural tractors and its aim is a quantitative amendment to Directive 2000 / 25 / EC .
The directive is urgent , because it has an impact on the period that began on 1 January 2011 , and it is highly significant in view of the positive results it is expected to bring to the sector in question .
A maximum level of emissions is laid down in the directive for each type of tractor on the basis of engine performance , and a gradual reduction in emissions is stipulated in multiple phases .
The limits set for the stage that has just begun are much stricter than for the previous stage .
In the interests of easing the transition between these stages , the directive introduces a system of flexibility , allowing tractor makers to market a limited number of tractors with engines calibrated to the emission limits allowed in the previous stage .
The directive proposed by the Commission should be warmly welcomed .
It takes account of environmental objectives approved by the EU some time ago .
If the proposed amendment is not approved , we would paradoxically end up with the precise opposite , since many farmers might decide to stick with their old , polluting tractors , thus causing environmental deterioration in Europe .
I therefore think that it is desirable to support the amendment to the directive , because approval would bring about the aim of environmental protection , while also promoting the economic prospects of the branch of industry in question .
I am in favour of both the Commission proposal and the Tatarella report because it is absolutely vital to support a sector in serious difficulty .
The directives relate to emissions from agricultural tractors and from the engines of non-road mobile machinery .
Given the 25 % fall in its turnover compared with the pre-crisis period , this sector , an important and well-developed one in our regions , needs our support , not more constraints .
Today 's vote will enable European agricultural tractor manufacturers to deal with the more stringent exhaust emission limits imposed by the entry into force of Stage III B of Directive 2000 / 25 / EC .
We must remember , in fact , that in order to be able to comply with the new limits , engines will have to undergo major modifications , which will involve fundamental changes in the design of the vehicles , too .
In many cases , the solutions for adapting tractors to the new engines are not yet available or final .
Added to this technological development time lag are the effects of the economic crisis , which has hit this industrial sector hard , causing a 20-25 % fall in its turnover compared with 2008 .
In this respect , strengthening the flexibility scheme will make for a smoother transition between the various stages of laying down emission limits , thereby enabling businesses too to spread the necessary investment over a longer period of time , including in the area of research and development .
Lastly , I should like to point out that , although the amendment of this directive will have a significant environmental impact , it will generate major economic benefits , enabling EU manufacturers to overcome this time of crisis and , at the same time , to comply with the limits laid down by European law for environmental protection purposes .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because this directive concerns emissions from agricultural tractors and merely makes a quantitative modification to Directive 2000 / 25 / EC , without altering its environmental protection objectives , methodology or period of validity .
It is an urgent directive , because it affects a period which already began on 1 January 2011 , and it is very important because of the positive impact it is expected to have on the industry concerned .
Directive 2000 / 25 / EC on emissions of pollutants from agricultural tractors lays down the maximum levels of carbon monoxide ( CO ) , hydrocarbons ( HC ) , nitrogen oxides ( NOx ) and particulates ( PM ) which may be emitted in exhaust gases from diesel engines in tractors .
For each different type of tractor , the directive lays down the maximum emission level on the basis of engine power and provides for the gradual , phased reduction of emissions .
It is important to maintain adequate economic development of the industry concerned while at the same time contributing to environmental protection .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the compromise reached by the rapporteur in the negotiations with the Council for reasons relating to Romania 's interests .
Even though the political group which I belong to has taken a different stance , the one adopted in the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which supports an increase from 20 % to just 35 % of tractor production that can be placed on the market , and even though this does not meet current environmental standards , my decision was for us to pursue Romania 's interests .
In the current circumstances , Romania clearly benefits from this production limit being higher , given the economic crisis , the crisis in the domestic agricultural sector and the technology gap .
I wanted to express my support for this report on tractors placed on the market under the flexibility scheme because it introduces appropriate measures that take many aspects into account .
On the one hand , due account is taken of the fact that the crisis has disrupted the entire economic and production landscape and hence also the tractor industry : this flexibility measure will enable it to recover immediately and will also have a positive impact on agriculture as a whole .
On the other hand , it is not a question of climbing down on the issue of pollution , which is still important , but simply of using a criterion that will ensure that basic common sense is applied .
This is the Europe that we value , a Europe that is capable of responding to specific needs and adapting , where necessary , measures that have already been taken when they are no longer sufficient for the changes in circumstances .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcome this resolution .
In order to achieve environmental goals linked to emissions , I believe that the maximum emission level for tractors should be set according to the power of the engine .
This would ensure the effective implementation of a gradual , phased reduction of emissions .
I welcome the fact that the directive includes a flexibility scheme which will facilitate the transition from one stage to the next .
The application of this scheme will take into account the technological development time lag and the negative consequences of the economic crisis .
Thus , due consideration will be given to the interests of both the EU 's manufacturers and its farmers .
Manufacturers will not face an additional burden and will have sufficient time to adapt their production to the requirements at every stage , while farmers will be able to exchange their oldest tractors for new ones , whose engines will be less polluting .
Consequently , I believe that it is appropriate to raise the number exempted from 20 % to 50 % of annual sales of tractors .
Such regulation will create a favourable environment for the economic development of the industry , while at the same time keeping the current environmental protection programme unaltered .
This report is on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 2000 / 25 / EC as regards the provisions for tractors placed on the market under the flexibility scheme .
The directive in question concerns emissions from agricultural tractors and makes a merely quantitative modification to Directive 2000 / 25 / EC , without altering its environmental protection objectives , methodology or period of validity .
It is an urgent directive , because it affects a period which began on 1 January 2011 , and it is very important because of the positive impact it is expected to have on the industry concerned .
All of these factors , duly founded on this report , influenced my vote in favour .
The proposal to amend Directive 2000 / 25 / EC on emissions from agricultural tractors relates solely to the quantitative side of things .
It neither tackles nor alters its environmental protection objectives , and it makes no impact on its methodology or period of validity .
This directive deals with exhaust emissions from diesel engines installed in tractors .
It lays down the maximum emission level on the basis of engine power and provides for the gradual , phased reduction of emissions .
On 31 December 2010 Stage A ended , and on 1 January 2011 Stage B began . The limits set for the stage which has just begun are much stricter than those for the previous stages .
Precisely in order to facilitate the transition from one stage to the next , the directive introduced a ' flexibility scheme ' , allowing tractor manufacturers to place on the market a limited quantity of tractors with engines calibrated to the emission limits permitted during the previous stage .
The amendment increases the percentage of these tractors from 20 % to 50 % .
For these reasons , and because the technological development time lag and the global financial crisis have precluded the adjustment of these factors , I voted in favour .
in writing . - The Directive proposed by the Commission is certainly to be welcomed .
It respects the environmental protection objectives adopted some time ago by the EU .
In view of the serious economic crisis , the Commission might have made more radical proposals , such as a moratorium on the Directive , a change in the timing of the stages or an even higher percentage of flexibility .
However , the Commission has opted to introduce a measure which is simple , effective and timely and which will make it possible : ( a ) for manufacturers in the EU to sell tractors , overcome the current difficult economic crisis , find new resources for research and comply with the limits laid down by European law for environmental protection purposes ; ( b ) for farmers to replace their oldest tractors with new ones whose engines will be less polluting .
I support the compromise as the flexibility scheme could be increased provisionally and exclusively in Stage IIIB or to three years where no subsequent stage exist ; for this period the level of flexibility could be maximum 37.50 % .
in writing . - Against .
Although the agreement is slightly better than the original Commission proposal , the compromise still waters down existing legislation .
The Greens / EFA voted against the committee report , did not support first reading agreement negotiations and consequently has not co-signed the agreement to plenary .
Using the economic crisis as an excuse to weaken existing limit values ( when they have already entered into force ) sets an unfortunate precedent for other EU environmental legislation rewarding non-compliance and punishing those companies that have made the necessary investments to comply with the legislation in time .
While the impact of this particular proposal on EU air quality is small , the issue of principle is important .
I believe that the Commission proposal on the provisions for tractors placed on the market under the flexibility scheme contains timely , simple and effective measures .
Allowing the sale of a higher percentage of tractors calibrated to the old , more permissive emission limits will actually serve to protect the economic interests of this strategic manufacturing sector , without altering the environmental protection objectives that have already been laid down .
Had this request not been approved , the situation would in reality have been made much worse .
Today we have actually succeeded in averting the risk of farmers being put in a position where , because of the difficult economic climate , they have to hold on to old , much more polluting tractors for longer than necessary .
These two proposals to amend directives are crucial to the survival of European manufacturing companies .
The Commission has proposed to exempt 50 % of the tractors manufactured in the EU in the last five years because of the technological development time lag , which makes it impossible - unless an enormous amount of money is spent - to carry out the mechanical modifications necessary to move on to the next stage , and because of the economic crisis affecting the tractor market , which has seen a 20 % annual fall in its turnover since 2008 .
We should have liked the Commission proposals to have been accepted for both directives , since the impact on emissions would be truly negligible .
It is regrettable that the ' no ' stance of the left-wing groups and Mrs Pietikäinen is due purely to matters of principle and completely ignores the risk that would be run if these exemptions were rejected : our factories would close down and jobs would be lost as a result .
The final compromise reached following the trialogues has resulted in a first-reading agreement for a 40 % exemption for tractors and a 37.5 % exemption for non-road mobile machinery .
While we may not be satisfied , we shall vote in favour of the directives on account of the extremely tight deadlines : exceeding them would render the directives meaningless .
I am voting for this proposal , with the amendments of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
The Commission proposal lays down specific requirements to ensure Member States will establish a national regulatory and organisational framework , and draw up appropriate national programmes for managing spent fuel and radioactive waste , from generation up to disposal .
It is essential to impose a ban on exporting waste .
It is also essential that the competent regulatory authority be able to halt certain activities if evaluation reveals them to be unsafe .
Non-recyclable nuclear waste must not be exported to third countries .
We need a responsible strategy and adequate means of eliminating all nuclear waste produced for energy purposes , for research , or for medical uses .
The future of the planet 's energy supply does not lie in nuclear energy .
The future lies in a mix of energy supplies .
Nonetheless , we are still going to have to manage this technology for at least several decades ( manage the dismantling of power stations , and also radioactive waste and spent fuel ) .
We need to understand that this waste has a life that lasts for decades .
Today it is vital to set up a framework for Member States and strengthen supervision of the ways in which the Member States choose to store waste .
I therefore voted for the directive on managing this waste .
Even though the text could be improved further and there is an important point that remains , in my view , unresolved , namely the definition of radioactive waste , I believe that we should continue to forge ahead in this area and that it is pointless to deny the need to treat waste .
I also voted in favour because the possibility of exporting to third countries was rejected .
This was a crucial point indeed .
It would be totally unacceptable if we were to allow the export of our most dangerous waste to countries outside the EU , where we cannot be certain of the level of safety with regard to the treatment and storage of the waste in the long term .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because responsible management and storage of waste that is harmful to the environment and humans is undoubtedly important .
Particularly now , following the accident at the Fukushima nuclear power plant , we are considering how to ensure that nuclear power plants are as safe as possible , and even discussing whether we should reject this type of electricity production altogether in Europe .
With this report the European Parliament basically approved the Commission proposal for a directive , which sets out an EU legal framework for spent fuel and radioactive waste management .
The legal framework proposed by the Commission is aimed at obliging Member States to draw up national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management .
The European Parliament report proposes the following improvements to the text of the future directive : strengthening of the so-called reversibility principle , according to which access would even be created to waste buried by means of deep geological disposal , should a means of processing such waste be discovered at some stage in the future , for example .
The report also proposes providing for more stringent financial obligations for Member States , requiring them to earmark funding for possible waste management , as well as the financing of reserves , and it also proposes a framework for controlling regional waste management projects .
I voted in favour of the report on the management of radioactive waste .
Parliament has long been calling for harmonised standards , and this report contributes towards a consistent legislative corpus aimed at ensuring safe management .
While respect must be shown for the reversibility principle , concepts and technical solutions for final disposal should be envisaged in order to enable potential access to and recovery of waste for technical reasons or if progress in research allows the emergence of new technological solutions such as transmutation .
I agree with the proposal 's aim of ensuring that adequate financial resources are set aside to meet the requirements of nuclear plant decommissioning , and that the waste is managed in a transparent manner .
Member States are still responsible for the safe management of spent fuel and waste , but they can fulfil this obligation while working on joint initiatives to share the management of radioactive waste under duly defined and rigorous conditions .
The proposal for a directive on which the European Parliament was consulted is another example of how Europe is able to act in a practical manner to protect European citizens .
Organising harmonised standards in the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste responds to a demand and a need to strengthen safety in this area .
I was particularly pleased to see a proposal adopted that would go beyond the fundamental safety principles set by the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) and impose the highest safety standards reflecting state-of-the-art practices at regulatory and operational level and best available technology ( BAT ) .
I welcome the vote on this report .
The strengthening of nuclear safety and security regulations was essential for several reasons .
Of course one reason is the serious nuclear accident in Japan .
However , I also welcome it because at the present time , what is referred to as ' high-level and long-life ' radioactive waste is still stored in a provisional manner .
Spent fuel is generally stored securely near to the reactors , but it has to be recognised that , for permanent storage , levels of security should be much higher .
It is therefore our responsibility to demand maximum safety .
That is why I also voted for the amendment banning the installation of nuclear waste management facilities in seismic or coastal areas where there are significant risks of rises in sea levels and tsunamis .
Furthermore , I believe in the principle that the polluter pays , and I also voted in favour of the amendment calling for an assessment of the costs , monitoring , the sending of regular reports to the European Commission and the participation of national governments .
in writing . - I supported this Report on the proposal for a directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
The current directive only covers spent fuel storage facilities directly related to nuclear installations , the current proposal intends to assure safety in the long term of the management of existing and future radioactive waste .
It is crucial that we work together to guarantee the highest possible safety standards .
Indeed , many generations to come will remain at risk This Report calls on member states to accept common minimum standards , invest in new technologies and , importantly , to ban nuclear waste export to third countries .
The tragic events in Fukushima have only served to strengthen the will of Parliament to have a strong clear directive on the export and processing of nuclear waste .
The export of nuclear waste to countries outside the EU must be banned , and exports within the EU must be permitted only through bilateral agreements .
We also must have stricter rules in order to protect workers , better monitoring and strengthening of the powers of investigation by the competent authorities in order to be able to carry out regular assessments of nuclear safety , enquiries and inspections .
At the same time , research into alternatives to deep disposal of waste must be stepped up .
The nuclear issue can no longer be dealt with by sidestepping public opinion , which is increasingly unfavourable towards it .
We must have a joint policy on renewable energy and develop other sources of energy , without falling back on fossil fuels , while seeking to ensure that we are self-sufficient .
I voted for the report on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste , because I believe there is a need for a responsible strategy and adequate means to respond to all nuclear waste , whether from energy production , from scientific research , or from medicine .
It should also be taken into account that non-recyclable nuclear waste must not be exported to third countries .
The proposed directive establishes a European legal framework for the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
It sets out specific requirements so as to ensure the Member States have the regulatory and organisational means to enable them to tackle the problem adequately .
As this proposal is based on the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) , the European Parliament is only being consulted .
This is a highly sensitive environmental issue , requiring the utmost attention from political decision-makers , and the reliable and rigorous monitoring of the management of this waste .
The terrible events of Fukushima have given the issue an urgency and drama that we should perhaps overcome when debating issues relating to energy resources .
The emotional climate that has developed - which is understandable - does not seem to me to give the best guidance on issues of this magnitude .
Clearly , this does not mean that we should not pursue a policy of controls on and strict monitoring of anything relating to nuclear power .
The problem of the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste is tackled in the report by Mrs Jordan Cizeli that we have just voted on .
Following the Fukushima disaster , the resulting security issues have made this issue unexpectedly acute .
In fact , the European Parliament has been calling for the adoption of a new directive in this area for some time already .
Radioactive waste is worthy of increased attention because of the safety , not just of the workers handling it , but also of the general public .
Furthermore , we cannot forget the environmental consequences of this waste , which is harmful to biodiversity .
I therefore voted for this proposal , which aims to implement the polluter-pays principle - respect for which has been very gradual - and introduces measures restricting the shipping of these goods to third countries .
In truth , it is essential that we increase our awareness of the fact that we cannot leave these problems for future generations .
I welcome the introduction of a financial mechanism to help manage this waste , so as to stop it being dangerous , and the adoption of regulators that are more demanding and prevent the violation of this directive .
in writing . - ( SK ) Last November the Commission issued a proposal for a directive establishing the EU 's legal framework for the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
The proposal sets out concrete requirements which should ensure the safe handling and management of spent fuel and radioactive waste from its creation to its disposal .
In planning the concept and technical solution for final storage - mainly the deep geological storage of spent fuel and highly radioactive waste - urgent consideration should be given to the principle of reversibility .
The aim is to enable potential access to the waste and its reverse recovery , either for technical reasons or if progress in research creates the possibility of a new , longer-term technological solution .
The storage of waste in repositories , however , must in any case be performed in accordance with internationally accepted safety standards , requirements and methodology .
In the final analysis , it is the Member States that bear responsibility for the safe management of any spent fuel and radioactive waste that they produce , including its safe storage .
Although it is vital for every Member State to draw up its own national programme for spent fuel and radioactive waste , it may be an interesting alternative to look for a common solution to this issue .
I take the view , however , that such a concept can under no circumstances be a substitute , encouraging Member States to avoid their national obligations relating to the management of radioactive waste .
The proposal for a directive is designed to ensure that Member States establish a national regulatory and organisational framework and draw up appropriate national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management , regardless of the perspectives of nuclear power and non-power applications .
Forty thousand cubic metres of radioactive waste is produced each year in the European Union .
Of this , 80 % is short-lived low-level radioactive waste , 5 % long-lived low-level radioactive waste and less than 10 % high-level waste .
Armed with such data , I think it is important to establish a European legislative framework to regulate , with the help of national programmes , the spent fuel and radioactive waste production and disposal sector .
The sustainable disposal of certain substances is a goal that requires ongoing monitoring and the gradual emergence of technological solutions in the long term .
That is why I agree with the rapporteur on the need to focus on reversibility , in the hope that research will soon result in the definitive transmutation of spent fuel and radioactive waste so that it can be used for other purposes .
In fact , research and technological development are the keystone of this sector : they will allow for the safe use of nuclear power , which is capable of meeting the energy needs of the food , medical , industrial , agricultural , research and education sectors .
Lastly , I hope that the adoption of this report will be an important step towards achieving the goal of a European energy plan .
As permanent rapporteur in the area of the legal basis of legislation in the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs , I would like to draw attention to one aspect of the report in particular - the question of its legal basis .
In view of the controversies which are aroused by nuclear energy today and the fact that the EU institutional system has changed since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , I think the European Parliament should be included in the decision-making process in the area of nuclear energy .
This , therefore , is why I recommended Article 192 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and Articles 31 and 32 of the Euratom Treaty as the proper legal basis for this directive .
Unfortunately , because of changes to the calendar of work of the Committee on Legal Affairs , my opinion was not taken into consideration by the committee responsible for the directive - the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy - which by a very small majority voted to accept the Euratom Treaty as the only legal basis .
I think this happened to the detriment of the transparency of the decision-making process for nuclear energy - a matter which is so important for the EU 's citizens .
I voted in favour of this report on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste to send a clear message to the Member States : polluters must be held responsible for their waste .
Indeed , whether it is a question of waste resulting from activities relating to the production of electricity or activities in other areas such as medicine , research and industry , the export of radioactive waste to third countries is an irresponsible practice that has been condemned by Parliament in adopting this report .
Despite the success of this vote , given the cross-border implications for the safety and health of European citizens , I regret the minor role that Parliament has been given in nuclear matters as it has only a consultative role in this matter .
Thanks to an amendment brought by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , this report underlines the need to find a new legal basis for legislation in nuclear matters in order for the interests of European citizens to be better represented on issues that are of such direct concern to them .
The tragic earthquake in Japan is an incentive for Europe to look more deeply at the consequences of nuclear technology use and its impact on the safety of European citizens .
In adopting the report on the proposal for a directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste , Parliament is showing that it is particularly sensitive to this issue and demonstrating a clear desire to find common , definitive solutions to the storage of nuclear waste in Europe .
By calling for common minimum standards for all the Member States , we are encouraging their governments to invest in new technologies , with a view to obtaining rapid , concrete results in relation to the disposal of this extremely hazardous waste .
I therefore welcome two amendments tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament calling for Parliament and the Council to co-decide on matters relating to nuclear energy use and endorsing the fundamental ban on waste exports to third countries , a ban which demonstrates Parliament 's determination to shoulder its responsibilities .
Parliament 's vote is therefore a further step towards the gradual abandonment of nuclear energy , in favour of sustainable energy solutions that are safe for the public .
After the incident in Fukushima in Japan , the EU must equip itself with ambitious standards and framework treaties in matters concerning nuclear power and energy policy .
I voted in favour of the Cizelj report on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste from the energy , medical and research sectors .
Third countries are not the ' dustbins ' of the EU Member States .
I welcome the fact that the MEPs have adopted the amendment by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament on the prohibition of the mass export of waste to third countries , unless they are exported for recycling and then reimported back into the EU .
The authorisation for an EU State to export its waste to another Member State only through a bilateral agreement provides the appropriate framework for nuclear and environmental safety .
I am pleased that Parliament has opposed the storing of waste of this nature in seismic regions and that the powers of national authorities have been strengthened .
Despite the fact that the position of Parliament on the revision of the Euratom Treaty is only of consultative value , MEPs have sent a clear message to the Council : the EU must provide itself with the appropriate means to develop a responsible energy policy that it can hand on to future generations .
in writing . - The horrors at Fukushima have served to highlight the unavoidable dangers of the nuclear industry .
My party has long campaigned against Scotland being used as a nuclear dumping ground for other countries and one of the first acts of the SNP Scottish Government was to withdraw Scotland from the UK position of deep geological disposal .
Whilst today 's vote could have gone much further , I welcome colleagues ' decision to reject the dumping of nuclear waste in third countries .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because it sets out an EU legal framework for spent fuel and radioactive waste management .
The proposal lays down specific requirements to ensure that Member States establish a national regulatory and organisational framework and draw up appropriate national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management , from their generation to their disposal .
The management of spent fuel and radioactive waste is particularly important , both for the environment and for public safety .
However , we cannot guarantee safety without the appropriate funding , and I therefore believe that the decommissioning of nuclear power plants like Ignalina should not just be a concern for one Member State , in this case Lithuania , but for the whole of Europe .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have my reservations about the management of radioactive waste and , although this initiative contains some good ideas , it is not enough to solve the underlying problem , which is why I abstained from voting .
Even though the nuclear industry has spent five decades looking for solutions to radioactive waste , we are , in this respect , still at square one .
Nuclear waste is transported the length and breadth of Europe in convoys that cost the taxpayer millions , entailing a high risk of accidents .
Risk-free storage over a period of millennia is an impossibility and such an idea takes the argument about clean and cheap electricity from nuclear power to absurd lengths .
Nuclear dumping sites in the immediate vicinity of nuclear power stations and / or in areas where earthquakes are prevalent are particularly risky .
Worryingly , in the case of the Krsko storage facility , both factors apply .
in writing . - ( DE ) Some time ago , I drafted a motion calling for greater safety for nuclear reactors in the Danube region .
After all , the Danube region , which lies right in the heart of Europe , is where some of the most dangerous reactors are located : Temelin , Bohunice , Mochovce , Dukovany and Paks .
The mostly outdated construction methods used have led to poor safety standards .
Dangerous incidents occur with alarming regularity , but are mostly swept under the carpet .
Neighbouring countries like Austria are often not even informed when an incident occurs .
Even in the environmental impact assessment procedure there is insufficient consultation or no consultation whatsoever with neighbouring states .
However , funds are now being made available for the drafting and financing of plans for the closure of productive reactors .
That is why I abstained .
in writing . - ( LT ) We must make every effort to ensure that we make the safest decisions in the area of spent fuel and radioactive waste management .
The accident at Fukushima nuclear power plant has shown that the disposal of radioactive waste remains a complicated and risky process that can have particularly painful negative consequences .
Therefore , nuclear safety assessments , research and checks must be continuous .
We must continuously exchange good practice in this area throughout the EU .
We must not allow people 's health or the environment to be endangered .
It is crucial for Member States to establish a national regulatory and organisational framework and draw up national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management , from their generation to their disposal .
Given the principles of safety and economy , I believe that Member States can share spent fuel and radioactive waste management facilities , but such use must be based on an agreement between both parties .
The Member States will thus be able to take advantage of the favourable geological and technical advantages of a specific territory and share the financial burden of the project .
It should be noted that spent nuclear fuel storage basins pose an enormous risk and hazards , and therefore all unused fuel should be transferred to dry cask storage as soon as possible .
In November 2010 , the Commission published a proposal for a directive establishing an EU legal framework for the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
The proposal lays down specific requirements to ensure that Member States establish a national regulatory and organisational framework , and draw up appropriate national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management , from generation up to disposal .
The Commission 's proposal was well received since it was drawn up following principles already existing at international level , basing its proposals on the approaches already adopted in the most advanced Member States and providing a framework for a more responsible management , including : ( i ) a national framework based on a clear distribution of duties and responsibilities among those involved , ( ii ) a national programme ensuring milestones , timeframes and clarity of the decision-making process on radioactive waste , and ( iii ) balanced rules on transparency and information , oversight and control .
I share the concerns raised about the potentially disastrous effects of human error in managing radioactive waste and spent fuel , and would stress the need to apply rigorous standards of training , workplace safety and inspection by independent authorities .
The proposal for a directive presented by the Commission sets out an EU legal framework for spent fuel and radioactive waste management .
The proposal lays down requirements to ensure that Member States establish a national regulatory and organisational framework , in order to be able to draw up appropriate national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management , from their generation to their disposal .
The proposal is based on the Euratom Treaty and , in particular , on the guidelines provided in the report ' Assessing Euratom - 50 years of European nuclear energy policy ' .
The rapporteur identifies four main priorities among the amendments tabled in the draft report for consideration by the members of the committee .
The first is the need to envisage concepts and technical solutions for final disposal , in particular deep geological disposal .
The second is the need to ensure that adequate financial resources are set aside to meet the requirements of nuclear plant decommissioning and that the resultant waste is disposed of .
The third concerns the development of regional disposal facilities , while the fourth deals with transparency and participation of the public .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive .
in writing . - ( RO ) This proposal for a directive sets out the EU legal framework for spent fuel and radioactive waste management and revises the Commission proposal for a Council ( Euratom ) directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
The sustainable management of radioactive waste and spent fuel must include the waste 's life cycle ( from generation to temporary or final storage , as well as during the post-closure period of the storage facilities ) and restoring the environment .
During this whole period , environmental factors must be closely monitored while the waste is being stored , also during its transportation and that of the products obtained from recycling spent fuel .
All these measures must be complied with to safeguard people 's health and protect the environment .
in writing . - This report highlights a serious flaw in EU governance that must be addressed as soon as possible .
Member States with nuclear power enjoy a competitive advantage over states that are nuclear-free .
However , states adjacent to countries with nuclear power plants can be adversely affected by their neighbour .
It will be recalled that in the past carbon emissions from some Member States created acid rain in other countries .
Also nuclear fallout from Chernobyl affected EU states .
This is the case in Ireland , where Sellafield - one of the world 's biggest nuclear reprocessing plants - has been contaminating the Irish Sea to the detriment of Ireland since the 1950s .
Apart from the threat of accident or terrorist attack , there is also considerable evidence of adverse health effects along Ireland 's eastern seaboard attributed to Sellafield discharges .
Europe has been using nuclear technology for more than 60 years and still there is no policy on management and disposal of nuclear waste .
The 12th Congress of the International Radiation Protection Association called for a regional approach to the transport of nuclear waste .
The industry and Parliament should recognise that disposal and reprocessing is also a transnational policy area that cannot be left to individual Member States .
This directive is designed to ensure that Member States establish a national regulatory and organisational framework and draw up appropriate national programmes for spent fuel and radioactive waste management , regardless of the perspectives of nuclear power and non-power applications .
The Commission 's position is commendable : it makes the Member States responsible for the safe management , including disposal , of the spent fuel and radioactive waste that they generate , through the development of their own programmes .
On the other hand , many of the amendments incorporated in the text are questionable .
On such a sensitive issue as this , maximum transparency and public information are crucial .
However , choices of this kind cannot be restricted to public participation in decision-making alone .
In fact , the danger of not laying down precise rules is that we will fail to take the decisions necessary to ensure the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
For this reason I cannot support this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is important for the European Parliament to express an opinion on the revision of the Directive on Radioactive Waste .
It is a sign of responsibility and maturity to be able to turn a blind eye to divergences on whether to maintain or phase out nuclear energy and to come up with an effective policy for burying nuclear waste .
That is the first lesson to be learnt from today 's vote .
Clearly , nuclear safety also means strengthening nuclear safety and security regulations in a post-Fukushima landscape .
I particularly welcome the adoption of Amendments 124 and 130 which respectively call for the prohibition of the installation of nuclear waste management facilities in seismic or coastal regions which are at risk and the preparation of a safety case to accompany any radioactive waste management activity .
It remains to be hoped that the European Energy Ministers will pay heed to this strong message in favour of a safety culture .
This inevitably requires priority to be given to deep burying solutions , such as permanent storage in dry rock or permanent storage in deep cavities ( 3 000 to 5 000 metres deep ) , which are still being examined .
I also welcome recourse in the last resort to the transport of highly radioactive waste .
We are having to express an opinion on a proposal for a directive on nuclear waste based on the Euratom Treaty and our Parliament only has a consultative opinion on this text , which is something I regret .
I hope that the Council will take due account of our position .
One of the most controversial issues in this debate is whether or not to authorise the export of nuclear waste to countries outside the EU .
I clearly supported the option of prohibiting exports to third countries , contrary to initial proposals .
I also supported the proposal not to allow exports of waste other than for recycling , on the express condition that they should subsequently be imported back into the EU .
This position was supported by a majority and I am glad of this .
Furthermore , I would urge that workers involved in the management of radioactive waste , from its production to its disposal , receive adequate protection and training .
Unlike the Commission , which considers that deep geological storage is the safest option for highly radioactive waste , I think that we should support and step up research into alternatives to burying waste at depth .
in writing . - Abstain .
While the outcome of today 's vote is certainly a lot better than was expected , the proposed rules remain far too weak and fall far short of addressing the very real concerns with nuclear waste .
These rules aim to create perception that the problems of nuclear waste are solved but nothing could be further from the truth .
Significantly , the rules do not apply to nuclear waste from military use , waste from uranium mining or spent fuel that is to be sent for reprocessing .
It is a huge source of relief that MEPs rejected a proposal to export nuclear waste to third countries however .
It is outrageous to suggest that , because we cannot solve the problem of nuclear waste ourselves , it is ok to dump our nuclear waste in other countries .
Hopefully this vote will convince those governments that are pushing export as a solution to drop this approach .
Importantly , a Green amendment calling for the storage of nuclear waste in seismic areas to be banned was passed .
The ongoing disaster in Fukushima should be a wake-up call on the huge risks involved with storing nuclear waste and we welcome that MEPs have heeded this call .
in writing . - President , I have voted on the JORDAN CIZELJ report in a way in which I believe was the most responsible regarding Europe 's future energy concerns .
I am referring to the fact that roughly 15 % of the EU 's current energy supply comes from nuclear energy .
This is huge chunk of our energy demand , a demand which is projected to increase in the coming decades .
It is therefore essential that this significant section our energy supply not be taken hostage to fear and panic in the wake of the Fukushima incident .
President I fear that these concerns have been exacerbated for political ends by certain factions here and elsewhere in Europe and I wish to make a clear stance regarding our future energy mix that is free from fear and panic and approaches the subject of nuclear energy based on science and evidence .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and my friend and colleague Ms Edit Herczog for all their efforts on this .
The fact is that nuclear energy and nuclear research will be a part of future energy demand and that 's why I 've voted the way I did in order to ensure that the waste and spent fuel is dealt with in the appropriate way .
Thank you
in writing . - ( NL ) I abstained from the vote on the Cizelj report concerning a Commission proposal laying down rules for the management of radioactive waste .
Why did I do that ?
I did not vote against the report as , this way , the Commissioner for Energy , Mr Oettinger , has a chance to stand by his original proposal and ban the exporting of radioactive materials to third countries .
This is contrary to the wishes of a number of Member States , who would love to see the existing ban on such exports lifted .
Well aware , as I am , that the level of such management or environmental awareness , let alone a strict culture of safety in relation to nuclear matters , is not or is barely present in many developing countries , it seems to me that allowing such exports is completely irresponsible .
Moreover , Europe must manage its own nuclear waste itself if the EU wants nuclear power so badly .
What some Member States are angling for borders on the criminal at government level in Europe .
It is regrettable that exporting spent nuclear fuel to Russia and Ukraine for processing is not prohibited .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is nonetheless very pleased that a majority in this House rejected further exports and endorsed an amendment by our group that prohibits the storage of radioactive waste in seismologically active areas .
On the other hand , I could not vote in favour of this report because the rules proposed are far too weak .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report on the proposal for a Council directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste because nuclear security in the EU depends on the proper management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
Member States are ultimately responsible for spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste management .
They must ensure that information on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste is made available to the relevant local and regional authorities , workers and the general public , and that these parties are effectively involved in the relevant decision-making process .
The Commission and Member States must provide , in the long term , sufficient financial resources for the activities and facilities required to manage spent fuel and waste .
Through the amendments tabled , we have called for education and vocational training plans to maintain and develop the expertise and skills required for spent fuel and radioactive waste management .
I think that a well-trained workforce and the provision of suitable working conditions help enhance nuclear safety .
I do not support the ban on exporting radioactive waste , but I call for all the specific contracts signed between Member States and third countries to comply with Recommendation 2008 / 956 / Euratom on criteria for the export of radioactive waste and spent fuel to third countries .
I agree with the main political message of the preliminary report , which maintains that the EU budget has a crucial role to play in helping the Member States recover from the economic and social crisis , in the sense of promoting growth and jobs .
This report also rejects the exclusive following of an approach that promotes austerity to resolve the EU 's economic problems .
I cannot fail to point out that there is a need for more investment to help in the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , and this report stresses that need .
Finally , I would stress the important point , directed at the Council , to pressure it not to make mere arithmetical cuts and , if it does so , to explain what the priorities established were .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on the mandate for the trilogue negotiations from the Budget committee because it wants to increase the EU budget for 2012 by 3.7 % for commitments and 4.9 % for payments .
I could not vote in favour of the Conservative Party amendment to freeze the budget at 2011 levels because I firmly believe it is a reduction that is needed , and their stand represents a weak starting point for negotiations .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on the mandate for the trilogue negotiations from the Budget committee because it wants to increase the EU budget for 2012 by 3.7 % for commitments and 4.9 % for payments .
I could not vote in favour of the Conservative Party amendment to freeze the budget at 2011 levels because I firmly believe it is a reduction that is needed , and their stand represents a weak starting point for negotiations
How and to what extent should ITER be financed ?
The subject has now become a recurrent item on the agenda of the European Parliament .
It has been raised once again at a time when we are being asked to vote on the 2012 budget .
While the cost of the project has increased exponentially since it was launched in 2006 , from EUR 6 to 16 billion , I think it must now continue with the available resources .
Not one euro more should be added to ITER .
I therefore voted for the amendments against increasing expenditure for ITER .
Unfortunately , however , they were not adopted for want of a majority .
While research - into both fusion and fission - is a good thing ( albeit diversified ) , I deeply regret the increase in appropriations ( EUR 700 000 for 2012 ) as well as the anticipated financial tinkering , which would lead to part of the European research budget being emptied simply to finance ITER .
Not to mention the fact that budget cuts are planned in this area , creating more imbalance between research spending on nuclear energy and renewable energy .
It is , however , essential to re-establish the balance between the two , especially in France , where almost 80 % of the research budget is still devoted to nuclear energy .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because it outlines the general guidelines for the European Union 2012 budget and gives Members of the European Parliament powers to represent the European Parliament at trialogue negotiations with the Council and the European Commission on the 2012 draft budget .
The report stresses that next year 's budget must be drawn up in such a way that it helps Europe recover from the economic and social crisis as quickly as possible .
Consequently , the Member States are urged to continue investing in areas that reinforce growth and employment , but it should also be noted that the European Union budget should support the Member States ' collective efforts to consolidate national budgets in times of austerity .
The report calls for continued investment in youth education , mobility and employment , supporting and promoting small businesses , scientific innovation , social integration and poverty reduction .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on the mandate for the trilogue negotiations from the Budget committee because it wants to increase the EU budget for 2012 by 3.7 % for commitments and 4.9 % for payments .
I could not vote in favour of the Conservative Party amendment to freeze the budget at 2011 levels because I firmly believe it is a reduction that is needed , and their stand represents a weak starting point for negotiations
in writing . - ( SV ) To quite abruptly reduce or freeze next year 's EU budget would not be a responsible approach .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the proposals that called for this .
On the other hand , we support the call for a review of expenditure in all areas of activity in order to ensure that all expenditure gives value for money , with the aim of identifying areas for potential savings .
We also believe that we should firstly redistribute existing funds before we call for new resources .
However , as this proposal did not meet with a sympathetic response , we chose to abstain in the final vote .
I voted for the report on the mandate for the trialogue on the 2012 Draft Budget , because the European Union budget should foster recovery from the economic and social crisis in the Member States , by promoting growth , employment and the investment that is critical to the realisation of the Europe 2020 strategy 's goals .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote in favour of the report on the mandate for the trialogue on the 2012 Draft Budget .
We believe that it is very important for work on the EU 2020 strategy to begin immediately and for the strategy to be given adequate financial resources in order to prevent a repeat of the failure of the Lisbon Strategy .
We also believe that it is important for the EU to have the resources it requires to be able to carry out its new tasks under the Treaty of Lisbon .
We do not agree that the level of payments from the EU budget should be frozen during 2012 , which is why we do not support Amendment 16 .
The payments are based on previous years ' budget decisions regarding commitments and therefore the level of the payments is simply a consequence of previous undertakings .
The Union must inevitably pay what it has promised to pay .
At the same time , we are also keen for the EU to pursue a responsible budgetary policy and therefore welcome the passages stating that we will also continue to identify and evaluate negative priorities .
However , we would like to point out that we do not believe it to be necessary to continue to provide EU support for the school fruit programme and the aid for deprived persons programme , as we believe that it is better for the measures that these programmes entail to be taken at national level .
Neither do we agree that initiatives for a switch to a more environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture should only be taken without compromising the competitiveness of EU farmers .
Unfortunately , it was not possible to vote on these aspects separately .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on the mandate for the trilogue negotiations from the Budget committee because it wants to increase the EU budget for 2012 by 3.7 % for commitments and 4.9 % for payments .
I could not vote in favour of the Conservative Party amendment to freeze the budget at 2011 levels because I firmly believe it is a reduction that is needed , and their stand represents a weak starting point for negotiations .
European strategy for sustainable and inclusive growth remains high on the Union 's list of concerns , and cannot fail to be present in the preparation for the 2012 EU budget .
The role reserved for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) is extremely important , since it is SMEs that are best placed to stimulate this type of growth .
This budget is emerging at a time of particular difficulty in terms of the crisis being experienced by the peripheral countries - including Portugal - and can play an important role in how these countries conduct their efforts to get back on the path to financial stability and healthy public accounts .
Furthermore , new competences , like those relating to the area of freedom , security and justice , require the reinforcement of its resources and capacity for action .
There could also be a need to increase resources , in order to face up to the consequences of how the conflicts in the Mediterranean develop .
I hope the trialogue on the 2012 draft budget will take place in a constructive climate and will not fail to take into account Europeans ' main needs and concerns , and that it will contribute to providing the Union with adequate resources to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities that result from these .
The intention is for the Europe 2020 strategy to start guiding the 2012 budget now .
It should be noted that the implementation of this strategy will require a huge amount of future-oriented investment up to 2020 , estimated at around EUR 1 800 billion .
Starting now , we must seek to improve levels of education , foster social inclusion - not least by reducing poverty - and foster the development of a knowledge society founded on the EU 's overall scientific and technological capacity .
Therefore , there is a need to support research , development , and innovation and small and medium-sized enterprises .
The EU draft budget for 2012 , as proposed by the Commission , amounts to EUR 147 435 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 132 738 million in payment appropriations .
These amounts represent respectively 1.12 % and 1.01 % of the EU 's forecast gross national income for 2012 .
It should be noted that the EU 27 annual inflation rate for 2011 is estimated at 2.7 % , meaning that the proposed nominal 2012 increases of 3.7 % in commitment appropriations and 4.9 % in payment appropriations are , compared to the 2011 budget , in real terms 1 % and 2.2 % , respectively .
It is not acceptable to , yet again , subordinate the EU budget strategy - this time for 2012 - to the objectives of the so-called Europe 2020 strategy , heir to the failed ' Lisbon Strategy ' whose stated objectives of poverty reduction and job creation were no more than propaganda .
The specific situation of countries like Portugal demonstrates this , with more people in poverty , more unemployment and more inequality .
The 2012 draft budget should take this situation into account , supporting production in each Member State , wealth creation , the combating of unemployment and the creation of jobs with rights , the combating of social inequality and poverty , and the defence and promotion of public services .
The guidelines for the budget , accepted by the majority in Parliament , are ' fully in line with the dynamics of the European Semester ' , seeking to impose structural adjustments that have neoliberal content .
It is unacceptable that , in the face of the extremely severe crisis affecting the most vulnerable economies in the EU , there continue to be insupportable cofinancing requirements for the use of Union funds , particularly the Structural Funds .
That is why we have been advocating the abolition or substantial reduction - to a maximum of 10 % - of national contributions .
We voted against for all these reasons .
We consider it unacceptable that the European Union budget - this time for 2012 - is yet again being subordinated to the objectives of the so-called Europe 2020 strategy , heir to the failed Lisbon Strategy whose stated objectives of poverty reduction and job creation were no more than propaganda .
The specific situation of countries like Portugal demonstrates this , with more people in poverty , more unemployment and more inequality .
The guidelines for the budget , accepted by the majority in Parliament , are ' fully in line with the dynamics of the European Semester ' , seeking to impose structural adjustments that have neoliberal content .
It is unacceptable that , in the face of the extremely severe crisis affecting the most vulnerable economies in the EU , there continue to be insupportable cofinancing requirements for the use of Union funds , particularly the Structural Funds .
That is why we have been advocating the abolition or substantial reduction - to a maximum of 10 % - of national contributions .
The 2012 draft budget should take this situation into account , supporting production in each Member State , wealth creation , the combating of unemployment and the creation of jobs with rights , the combating of social inequality and poverty , and the defence and promotion of public services .
in writing . - ( SK ) Reducing the public investments of Member States in selected areas is not an appropriate solution , since the fight that the EU and the individual nation states are waging against the crisis through cost-cutting is really not the most viable approach .
If we really do have an interest in restoring economic growth and employment and intend to do so , and if we really do want to implement the Europe 2020 strategy , then growth in public investment must be greatly accelerated .
In addition to the Europe 2020 strategy , this would also be fully in accordance with the European Semester .
Among other things , this should result in the national Member State budgets and the EU budget complementing each other and working through synergy towards the fulfilment of these objectives .
The Commission , however , is inclined to postpone the necessary giant leap in terms of a common financial effort to the Multiannual Financial Framework after 2013 .
Such a position , however , will seriously threaten the achievement of the main objectives by 2020 .
It is therefore desirable for the Commission to reassess its position in unambiguous terms .
in writing . - ( CS ) The European draft budget for 2012 will be only the second since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
After last year 's complicated negotiations , a tough fight up to the last minute can be expected over the budget this year too .
The real institutional struggle , however , will begin only afterwards , when the Union decides on the new Multiannual Finance Framework .
Precisely for this reason , it will be necessary to emphasise better coordination between all participants in the negotiating process when preparing the current trialogue , so that the European budget will secure sufficient funding to achieve the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
These objectives promote smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , and therefore investment into the creation of decent jobs .
I fully agree with the priorities outlined by the rapporteur , Mrs Balzani .
I also think that the EU budget should fulfil a role as the main mechanism for boosting and restoring growth and employment .
I would also like to emphasise that the rapporteur 's conclusions are fully in line with the dynamic of the European Semester , which , as a new instrument for strengthening European economic management , has the objective of increasing cohesion and complementarity , as well as coordinating the EU budget and national budgets in the implementation of common EU investments , in relation to achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because necessary investments - at both EU and Member State levels - must be made now and delayed no longer , to improve education levels and to foster social inclusion , particularly through the reduction of poverty , and the development of a knowledge-based society rooted in the EU 's scientific and technological capacity .
In this context , we need to support research , development , innovation and SMEs and the development of resource-efficient technologies .
Support for youth training , mobility and employment , SMEs , research and development should be a key priority of the EU budget .
With today 's vote Parliament has adopted the mandate for the trialogue on the 2012 budget .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I am very satisfied with the final document .
It will give direction to the negotiations with the Council , which will enable us to approve the general budget of the European Union for 2012 at the end of the entire procedure .
The document specifically identifies the priorities of the European Parliament , placing the need for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy , at the centre of the 2012 budget .
We also aim to support research , development , innovation , employment and SMEs .
I believe , in fact , that investment in these areas is the only way of pulling Europe out of the crisis and that , even in times of austerity , the EU budget can be an important tool for stimulating European action .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) is opposed to an absolute increase in the EU budget for 2012 .
While all the Member States are currently suffering severe cuts in their public finances , the EU cannot be left out and it , too , must make choices about what to do and what not to do .
I voted for the report on the mandate for the trialogue on the 2012 Draft Budget .
Some people are saying that in circumstances where there are large budget deficits and high levels of debt , Member States should contribute as little as possible to the EU budget .
I believe that this is a mistake .
2012 is the penultimate year in the current financial period .
It is an important year from a financial perspective for EU programmes .
At times of crisis , investment is needed in jobs and development .
Investment accounts for 95 % of the European Union budget .
The funds are distributed for EU projects and policies in all Member States , admittedly , in varying proportions .
All Member States benefit directly or indirectly .
The proposed budget increase is an absolute necessity .
I cannot see why anyone should object to this increase .
There are policies which are absolutely essential , approved by Member States and , therefore , they need to be financed so that they can be implemented .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU needs to tighten its belt .
This is not just because increasing the budget would be a slap in the face for our citizens in the light of national austerity programmes , but also because next year payments are to be made into the permanent euro stabilisation mechanism .
This money needs to be found from the already cash-strapped national budgets .
It may well be that spending is scheduled for many multi-annual programmes and the relevant funding cannot be cut at present because the EU would otherwise be open to accusations of breach of contract .
However , there is plenty of scope available for savings .
It is for these reasons that I have voted against this draft budget .
I consider this report on the mandate for the trialogue to be fairly satisfactory .
The fact that , at a time of crisis and necessary cutbacks , there has still been an increase in the resources from the European budget for heading 3a , on the management of immigration , is a good thing in my view .
I therefore hope that the European Union will no longer avoid facing up to this problematic situation or leave Italy alone to manage it .
Some cutbacks are necessary and therefore some priorities can also take second place .
It is always difficult to say where and how things should be done , but action has to be taken somewhere .
We could start with administrative expenditure , for example , and in this respect we are still a long way from meeting the Commissioner 's request to keep the increase below 1 % .
The European Personnel Selection Office , among others , is undoubtedly a classic example of mismanagement , and it is at that and certain other agencies that we can begin to try to reduce Europe 's administrative costs .
For the reasons listed above , I chose to abstain during the vote .
in writing . - ( DE ) The line being taken by the governments of the core Members States of the EU , the European Commission and the European Central Bank is becoming increasingly clear .
The Commission 's proposals primarily aim to tighten up the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In future , compliance with the Maastricht criteria is to be enforced though early warnings and drastic penalties .
However , this pact has not worked in the past and probably will not work in the future either .
It is about time that we concentrated on stable , sovereign national economies and reducing the national debt of individual states .
It is outrageous that the same hard-working countries should again and again be required to pay for the mistakes of others .
This report on the mandate for the trialogue on the 2012 Draft Budget is of particular interest due to the economic times we are experiencing .
In fact , 11 of this House 's 22 standing committees have tabled opinions on this report .
This is the second budget to be adopted under the terms of the rules set out in the Treaty of Lisbon , so it is an important exercise to establish what went wrong last year so that the process can be improved .
I voted for this report because I agree in general terms with the mandate that this report grants to Parliament 's representatives in the trialogue on this issue , which will take place on 11 July 2011 .
I would stress the following points of interest in the mandate granted for the trialogue : 1 ) 2012 EU budgetary allocations in support of the Europe 2020 strategy ; 2 ) proposal for a revision of the current Multiannual Financial Framework 2007-2013 to address the additional financing needs of the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ( ITER ) project ; and 3 ) financial sustainability and manageability of Heading 4 in 2012 , particularly in view of the forthcoming amending letter to address the democratic transition in the southern Mediterranean .
I voted in favour of the report by my fellow Member , Mrs Balzani , defining the position of Parliament in the forthcoming negotiations on the 2012 budget .
Today , the European Parliament has given instructions to those of its Members who will represent it before the Council and the Commission in the budget negotiations starting on 11 July .
If there is a message in this vote , it is that the vast majority of us are intent on warning the Council against any attempt to reduce the European budget .
We are not of course advocating spending for spending 's sake .
We are well aware of the terrible crisis ravaging our continent .
However - and the Socialists have been saying this for a long time - Europe will not emerge from this crisis by sacrificing its future and selling tomorrow 's growth on the cheap .
We should , rather , have the courage to speak out and not fear confronting populism .
We do not need less Europe .
We need more Europe .
Until we give the Union the resources it needs to fulfil its ambitions , it would be an illusion to believe that it will be able to return to the path our citizens want to go down .
in writing . - Against .
Even though the report is largely positive , we have a strong problem with the ITER parts .
The Europe 2020 strategy objectives of smart , sustainable and inclusive growth should be central priorities when considering the future budget for 2012 .
The European Union 's small and medium-sized companies should also receive particular attention and , as such , it will be appropriate to insist on the need to clarify the budgetary implications of the Europe 2020 strategy 's flagship initiatives .
It should be mentioned that , in a context of recovery for many Member States , the European Union budget has a role to take up by reinforcing support for national investment to encourage growth .
Therefore , the level of payment allocations , as proposed by the European Commission , should be maintained , whilst taking into account that all programmes should proceed quickly .
As such , there is a need to try to focus priorities and to aim to redeploy resources .
There are also other areas that should have an equivalent in the budget , such as that of justice , freedom and security , and there is a need to react to events in the Mediterranean too .
in writing . - I am voting against Amendment 11 concerning the withholding of European funds for regions that use the ' Ley de Costas ' in a retroactive way without compensation for the citizens affected .
I completely disagree with the current state of affairs regarding ' Ley de Costas ' , but I also think that , especially in this moment of economic crisis , it is not responsible to take such a strong stand , as hundreds of thousands of citizens would be affected if funds were withheld .
The situation of the citizens affected by ' Ley de Costas ' has to be directly tackled , and I call on the Commission to put all possible pressure on the Spanish Government to achieve a positive outcome for the citizens affected , in order to protect their property rights .
I am voting in favour because , inter alia , the report includes a proposal stressing the need to assess the specific situation of the milk and dairy products sector before March 2015 , in order to ensure the proper functioning and stability of the milk market .
I view this adoption as an important message from the European Parliament to let the Commission know , without taking dogma into consideration , if a decision taken years previously on the basis of certain rules will introduce real benefits when the time comes for it to enter into force , taking into account the situation 12 years later , or if it will contribute to exacerbating the situation instead .
The report also mentions that the common agricultural policy should be fairer and more equitable , with a distribution of financial resources between countries that is more balanced , and a system of direct support for farmers that is fairer and based on environmental and social criteria .
in writing . - I voted against amendment 21 of the Dess report which in the CAP sought to remove the need to co-finance appropriations for modulation and capping as a means of flat-rate aid .
This would facilitate the EU 's giving of British taxpayer 's money with fewer obstacles to recipients across the EU .
It would also result in these moneys not being returned to the British exchequer from the EU budget when they are unused .
In a nutshell it would increase the burden on the British taxpayer by the EU .
I also believe that it contribute to the argument of those who want to eliminate the British rebate since they will be able to claim that these moneys will also be given to British farmers .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because it clearly points out that the EU agricultural budget in the next financing period has to be maintained at least at the same level as the 2013 considering that only with adequate financial resources will be possible to meet the challenges of food security and environmental protection .
Thanks to the Socialist Group 's amendments now the report is more balanced and in line with the Commission Communication which recognises the need for further reform of the CAP in view of the changing nature of the farming industry in the EU27 and of the new international context of globalisation .
in writing . - ( FR ) While I recognise that the different agricultural sectors are worried about their future , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Dess as it advocates a strong and sustainable common agricultural policy ( CAP ) benefiting all farmers .
In fact , in the current context , the European Union needs more than ever to ensure its food independence , the quality of food products , the protection of the environment , and adequate incomes for those who contribute to this .
Changes are , of course , necessary , but the CAP must evolve and not be revolutionised .
For that reason , I welcome the work done by the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( NL ) A strong common agricultural policy with appropriate resources is necessary to ensure food safety .
This report demonstrates that there is acceptance of this fact amongst the elected representatives of the people and thus also amongst the citizens of the European Union .
When it comes to the structure of direct payments I completely support retaining the basic premium .
This is because European food production meets high requirements that add numerous costs for farmers without adequate recompense via the market .
It has been proposed by the Commission and Parliament that greening services be provided , in return for payment , as ' top ups ' to the basic premium .
I want to stress that these must under no circumstances result in an increased regulatory burden .
Instead they must simply offer opportunities .
Such services must therefore be provided on a voluntary basis .
The report shows that Parliament , too , is opposed to the mandatory nature of these top-ups as proposed by the Commission .
I urge that , when lists of options for greening services are compiled , attempts must be made to find projects that deliver a win-win for the environment and farmers , leading to further innovation and sustainable growth .
One example of this is the conversion of manure into energy .
I would particularly like to emphasise the fact that the above-mentioned proposals can only be applied on a general basis if the budget for agriculture is increased .
in writing . - ( FR ) This vote has caused less of a stir than the economic governance package but it is , nonetheless , a very important vote at this plenary session in Brussels .
In fact , the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is becoming an increasingly important issue and , on the eve of the great debate to adjust our CAP after 2013 , this vote has given us a particularly interesting road map .
We have some monumental issues ahead of us .
The MEPs have established the major thrust of their priorities .
Our CAP must be an opportunity to take a step towards adopting greener practices .
This vote will help in that regard .
The European Parliament must allocate payments more fairly among countries and among European farmers .
This vote will also help in that regard .
With this vote , the European Parliament has once again shown that it is a place where constructive consensus can be reached and that it is committed to preparing for the future .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution , because I agree that demographic change , climate change and the objectives of territorial cohesion policy demand that we review and modernise the EU 's common agricultural policy .
The resolution adopted calls for us to maintain the current level of spending on agriculture in the EU budget , but urges us to reject disparities in the allocation of these funds to the Member States .
The resolution proposes using the allocation of funds to introduce an incentivisation scheme for farmers to develop green and environmentally friendly agriculture , effectively managing scarce resources while reducing production costs .
It also proposes differentiating payments among different agricultural sectors and farmers and strengthening farmers ' negotiating power in the food supply chain .
The document also draws attention to the influence of agricultural policy on reducing the disparities among the various EU regions in terms of the level of territorial and economic development , and on developing rural areas and encouraging young farmers .
in writing . - ( CS ) It concerns me that the planned ceiling on direct payments to farmers was not removed from the report on the new agricultural policy of the EU after 2013 , which the European Parliament approved today .
The approval of a ceiling on subsidies means in practice that a limit will be set on direct subsidies depending on the size of the agricultural undertaking .
I would like to point out that the Czech Republic in particular , with an average farm size of 85 ha ( the European average is about 15 ha ) has the largest agricultural undertakings in the EU , so they would pay a heavy price for the ceiling on direct payments .
The ceiling on direct payments would mean disaster not only for Czech farmers .
Czech farmers would , in the worst-case scenario , lose up to CZK 13 billion , as a result of their weaker competitive position on the market .
In my opinion , therefore , the result of today 's announcement plays into the hands of farmers from the old Member States , where farms are typically smaller .
I am convinced that a ceiling on direct payments would unquestionably discriminate against large farms .
It would lead to a situation where large agricultural undertakings would , even at the cost of a greater bureaucratic burden , artificially split up in order to minimise financial losses .
European agriculture as a whole would then ultimately pay the price of an artificial and forced break-up of farms .
I voted in favour of the Dess report entitled ' The CAP towards 2020 : meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future ' .
I am delighted that this document calls for the continuation of a strong and sustainable common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
To achieve this , a budget commensurate with the ambitious objectives to be pursued is required .
The European Union therefore calls for the EU agricultural budget in the next financial programming period to be maintained at least at the same level as the 2013 agricultural budget .
This very comprehensive report takes account of all the various interests involved .
Rural development and the interests of farmers are safeguarded , as are resource protection and the environmental policy component .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe it takes due account of the role played by the agricultural sector from an economic and employment point of view , and in the field of sustainable development and biodiversity preservation .
Europe needs a robust agricultural policy consisting of transparent rules and efficient and rapid prevention tools , so that it can reduce administrative costs , manage risks and adopt effective crisis-prevention policies .
' Innovation ' and a ' well-organised infrastructure network ' are the basic criteria necessary to make agribusinesses competitive , competent and well prepared , and to ensure that rural areas too have access to culture and training .
More support should be given to young farmers in order to prevent them from leaving the countryside , and generational renewal should be promoted as a way of ensuring the continuity of the activities carried out .
All this should be accompanied by a budget commensurate with the needs that exist , together with the identification of instruments that are not open to abuse and efforts to control price volatility .
Lastly , we must not forget that the agricultural challenge is directly linked to the food challenge , and it is therefore of the utmost importance when it comes to protecting the health of European citizens .
We , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialist and Democrats in the European Parliament , introduced radical changes to the draft produced by the German conservative rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , regarded by many as woefully inadequate , and we succeeded in obtaining a majority in the European Parliament on the objective of a fairer allocation of agricultural payments .
The abolition of historical reference values , aid to farmers with small farms , a rebalancing in favour of the livestock sector and , above all , the adoption of the principle of the degressivity of direct payments , taking employment and the environment into account , represent crucial progress in this regard .
I welcome the work carried out , which will also have made it possible to put in place tools committing agriculture to move towards more sustainable development , while taking into account the objectives of food security , the environment , territories and jobs .
The greening of payments of the first pillar will also make it possible to encourage farmers to adopt good farming practices and to be more economically and ecologically efficient .
Dacian Cioloş , Member of the European Commission responsible for Agriculture and Rural Development , must now use this report to put forward some good proposals by the end of this year .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that an excellent job has been done , despite the complexity of the issue .
Marrying food security with medium- and long-term environmental sustainability , with rural development , with a strong emphasis on the prudent management of financial resources and with aspects linked to international trade patterns required a considerable amount of skill , and I believe the rapporteur has accomplished his task very well , for which I congratulate him .
In particular , I appreciated the reference to quality as a foundation on which to build everything else .
Furthermore , it is not stating the obvious to say that payments based on the two pillars of the CAP are not mere public resources , but actually buy a public good that may not be sufficiently rewarded by the market .
Cross-compliance , moreover , is an excellent criterion for preventing waste , but its use needs to be improved in practice .
The report offers a response to the major issues that the CAP approach left open .
I think that continuous monitoring of the less obvious issues is also positive .
The agricultural sector still plays a strategic role today in our societies and economies .
It does so firstly from a food perspective , since not only does it provide the raw materials for food , but the safety of that food is essential for our health .
It does so secondly from an environmental perspective , since the vitality of the sector and the quality of its production processes make for environmentally friendly land management .
It does so thirdly from a social perspective , since it represents a challenge to provide high-quality , innovative jobs for young people .
It does so fourthly and finally from an economic perspective , since a local / global approach allows for the economic development of traditional , high-quality , certified and high added value products , through the adoption of management models that turn businesses and their products into competitive cooperatives on a global scale .
A fair CAP that promotes micro , small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises and high-quality , traditional and certified products , that supports environmentally friendly processes , that introduces aid ceilings and that sets aside sufficient resources for rural development is an ambitious and far-sighted policy that benefits citizens , consumers and agricultural operators .
I believe that the adopted report offers this possibility .
in writing . - ( FR ) Europeans must have access to a healthy , varied , balanced and diversified diet .
Today , agriculture and its food production are highly strategic , and their international regulation is of the utmost importance .
Food is a very specific issue , and encouraging competition in agriculture between the different regions of the world jeopardises the food security of our communities .
It is at least as much by improving the productivity of the territories as by becoming more competitive internationally that we will achieve a higher degree of self-sufficiency in the EU .
In addition , the EU should seek to secure the income earned by producers , mainly through their own labour .
In the light of the reform applicable in 2014 , the common agricultural policy must respond to the following priorities : viable food production , sustainable management of natural resources , measures for combating climate change and balanced territorial development .
If the EU 's agricultural policy is to secure the supply of safe and high quality foods , while contributing to the protection of the environment and to renewable energy , its funding will have to be commensurate with its goals .
I voted for the report on the common agricultural policy towards 2020 : meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future , because it tables proposals that respond to new challenges like food security , environmental protection and climate change , whilst simultaneously ensuring greater territorial balance in Europe 's rural areas .
in writing . - These two amendments ( 10 and 11 ) were supported to stop a cap or ceiling being introduced for direct payments .
The effect of such a cap would be to create an administrative and bureaucratic nightmare as landowners sought to divide up large holdings to avoid the ceiling cutting their money : it represents the very worst sort of bureaucratic perverse incentive for questionable but probably legal behaviour .
Agriculture should be viewed as an economic activity that generates wealth and development , within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Its reform should therefore be thought of in the context of the competitiveness and sustainability of European production .
To this end , there is a need to breathe new life into it by simplifying procedures , but also by reinforcing the EU 's common agricultural policy ( CAP ) budget , so I consider it very positive that the report calls for the CAP budget to be maintained at least until 2013 , with it unlikely that Parliament will accept any reduction .
Once again , I would stress the importance to Portugal of the issue of maintaining the milk quotas or any other effective mechanism for regulating the market , and my undertaking that I , as a Member of this House , will remain committed to defending it .
Sustainable , productive and competitive European agriculture enables the challenges of security of supply in the food and energy sectors , of climate change , of the environment and biodiversity , of health , and of demographic change in the EU to be met .
It should be noted that the world population is predicted to grow from 7 billion to more than 9 billion by 2050 , requiring a 70 % increase in global agricultural production according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation .
More food will therefore need to be produced against a background of higher production costs , severe volatility in agricultural markets and mounting pressure on natural resources , meaning that farmers will have to produce more using less land , less water and reduced energy inputs .
I would argue that a two-pillar common agricultural policy ( CAP ) should be retained , with each pillar 's structure and objectives being clearly defined and designed in a way that allows each to complement the other .
I am hoping for more equality as regards the first pillar . I also believe particular attention should be paid to small farmers , since they make a significant contribution to CAP objectives .
I think it is essential to keep the current milk quotas system .
This report comes in the wake of the previously drafted Lyon report on the broad strokes of common agricultural policy ( CAP ) reform , and of the Commission communication on the CAP , of which it is largely in favour .
Despite important aspects , which we acknowledge , such as the refusal to cut the CAP 's overall budget or the proposal to keep planting rights in the wine sector , the report 's content is profoundly negative , advocating a CAP whose consequences constitute a very clear step towards the decline and destruction of Portuguese agriculture .
In line with previous reforms , it re-emphasises and deepens the deregulation and liberalisation of markets , and the ' market orientation ' of production , so threatening countries ' rights to produce and to food security and sovereignty , as well as the survival of small and medium-sized farmers .
It continues to advocate the subordination of agriculture to World Trade Organisation rules , so promoting intensive , export-focused models of production at the expense of local production and consumption that are socially and environmentally sustainable .
Given the profound injustice today existing between countries , producers and products , the advocated redistribution of CAP funds cannot be dissociated from the guarantee of minimising losses by the major beneficiaries ...
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
We voted against this report because it responds to neither the challenges of the future , nor the serious problems of the present .
That is why we tabled a series of draft amendments that we consider essential for a profound modification of the current common agricultural policy .
We regret that they have not been adopted in their entirety , specifically those advocating instruments for regulating markets and for intervention mechanisms that guarantee a fair price for farmers and each country 's right to produce .
However , we will continue to advocate the maintenance of a system of milk-production quotas as an essential condition for defending producers in the countries that are more sensitive , the maintenance of planting rights in the wine sector , and the maintenance of subsidies for potable alcohol distillation and crisis distillation .
We will also continue to fight for the creation of an EU-funded public agricultural insurance scheme , which would enable farmers to be guaranteed a minimum income in cases of natural disaster .
in writing . - ( SK ) The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) faces a whole series of challenges - some of them specific and others unexpected - as a result of which the EU must adopt strategic decisions relating to the long-term future of its agriculture and its rural areas .
In order for the CAP to respond effectively to these challenges , it must be implemented within a framework of sound economic policies and sustainable public funding , contributing to the achievement of the EU 's objectives .
In the future , the CAP must remain a strong common policy that strives to secure the long-term food security of European citizens .
It must also support agricultural communities which provide European citizens with a wide range of high-quality and wholesome foods .
Last but not least , it must contribute to maintaining viable rural communities , for which agriculture is an important economic activity , creating local jobs .
The ongoing reform of the CAP should aim to achieve more sustainable , more intelligent and more inclusive growth for Europe 's rural areas .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Deß report on the common agricultural policy , which evaluates the communication from the European Commission on the CAP towards 2020 .
Of note , the Deß report stresses the important role that agriculture can play in the Europe 2020 strategy .
In particular , it emphasises the importance of agriculture as a source of employment in rural areas .
While containing both favourable and unfavourable elements , the report provides a good , solid basis for a reform package .
In my opinion , the most important element at this stage in the reform process is to maintain the current budgetary support for the CAP for the period 2014 to 2020 .
Hopes are high regarding the very important and sensitive matter of the common agricultural policy .
We are in the middle of what will be a long and complex journey , because we have to give answers to farmers and , at the same time , tackle the global challenges of food security .
Progress and technological innovation will play a key role in the new CAP .
Another crucial point in the report is the endorsement of a decisive reduction in red tape for farmers and national authorities , in order to simplify the numerous administrative obligations in the sector .
The CAP also needs to contribute towards the achievement of the ambitious objectives contained in the Europe 2020 strategy ; in other words we need a greener and more sustainable CAP that will guarantee additional funding for farmers while recognising their role in protecting the environment , and that will help them choose environmentally friendly farming techniques .
Lastly , it is important to develop transparent and efficient instruments that can help farmers to run short production chains , promote quality and provide information to consumers , thereby promoting fair and transparent price formation .
I voted in favour of this report on the future of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
As a result of the negotiations and the vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , this document , though still too vague , has evolved significantly and is now trying to bring about real reform of the CAP .
More particularly , maintaining the CAP budget after 2013 was an essential point .
Indeed , we want to see the EU 's agricultural budget remain unchanged until 2020 to encourage farmers to guarantee the security of food supplies and the protection of the environment , to create new jobs , and to ensure a competitive agricultural sector .
I then voted against the paragraph on payments to support genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) and for the paragraph on the withdrawal of GMOs , and I supported the paragraph opposing the funding of the production of food from cloned animals and their offspring and descendants .
With regard to the reform of the wine market , I am in favour of retaining planting rights .
Finally , and very importantly in my view , I voted in favour of retaining the scheme to provide support for the poorest members of society .
This scheme is a strong symbol of the solidarity between the citizens of the EU , and I hope that the appropriations allocated to this scheme can be maintained .
The Dess report adopted by this House is entirely consistent with the guidelines already set by the European Commission .
It calls for the common agricultural policy for 2014-2020 to be reviewed in order to meet the challenges of environmental sustainability , job creation and guaranteed high-quality , safe food .
In adopting this text , the European Parliament is demonstrating its opposition to regressive tendencies and proposing that the future CAP budget remain at least at the same level as the 2013 budget , thereby ensuring that farmers receive the support they need to invest in new technologies , a crucial step if this sector is to remain competitive .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has made a decisive contribution - partly as a result of the numerous amendments tabled both in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and in plenary - to achieving a convincing result , thereby sending a clear message to the European Commission ahead of the legislative proposals scheduled for October .
in writing . - ( FR ) I believe that this report is a definite step forward for a strong , sustainable common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and , for that reason , I voted in favour .
We have sent out a clear message , which is structured around three priorities : to enable all European citizens to access food ; to encourage farmers to change their working methods by focussing on biodiversity issues , the management of water and soil pollution problems , and the recycling of waste ; and , finally , to protect employment in farming while at the same time minimising its impact on the territories .
This could be done through better allocation of direct payments , a different type of market regulation , and prioritising sustainable development .
It is a fairer CAP that I am arguing in favour of here , one that can support the people and sectors that are most in need .
in writing . - It is important that we have a strong and sustainable CAP and the ongoing work on its reform is one of the key issues before this Parliament .
The agriculture sector must be innovative and competitive , and those working in my own country remain committed to playing their valuable role in the wider European sector .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document , because a sustainable , productive and competitive European agricultural sector can make a vital contribution to meeting the objectives set by the Treaties for the CAP and the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , and it can also help to meet new political challenges such as security of supply of food , energy and industrial raw materials , climate change , the environment and biodiversity , health and demographic change in the EU .
I very much welcome the Commission Communication ' The CAP towards 2020 : meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future ' .
I believe there is a need for further reform of the CAP in line with the changing nature of the farming industry in the EU27 and the new international context of globalisation .
In the future we must maintain a strong and sustainable CAP with a budget commensurate with the ambitious objectives to be pursued in an effort to meet the new challenges .
I firmly believe that the most important objective is to distribute assistance fairly among the Member States and the different categories of farmers .
At present , new Member States , like Lithuania , receive less financial assistance than the old Member States .
I am convinced that harmonising direct payments is one of the preconditions for creating a single European agricultural market .
Last spring , together with a group of fellow MEPs , I addressed a statement to the European Commission , the European Council and Parliament on the harmonisation of direct payments for the farmers of all Member States of the Community .
Today 's resolution is a step in the right direction , so that after its reform , the common agricultural policy can be fairer and more effective .
We have made significant progress on the issue of direct payments , emphasising that it is essential to define appropriate minimum and maximum support levels , expressed as a percentage of the EU average , which farmers of every Member State may receive .
This will help to alter the current absurd and unfair situation , where the amount of support can differ by up to a factor of as much as six , thereby putting farmers from several Member States in unequal circumstances and distorting competition between European farmers .
I should like to emphasise that the transition period must be as short as possible , and I consider that for those Member States whose farmers receive the smallest direct payments , the equalisation process must begin as early as 2014 .
A transition period that lasted up to as late as 2020 would mean that a whole generation of farmers would continue to be forced to work in circumstances of unfair competition .
We must , however , recognise that the European Parliament still has important work ahead of it , for there are questions the solutions to which are sketched in general terms only in the Dess report , as Members ' opinions on the solution to the relevant problem differed or were even diametrically opposed .
in writing . - ( DE ) In voting on the CAP report , we are deciding on the cornerstones of future EU agricultural policy .
I welcome the decision that agricultural policy is to become more sustainable , that the competitiveness of European agriculture is to be strengthened and that a balance is to be sought between old and new Member States .
I am vehemently opposed to cuts in the EU agricultural budget because I believe that the common agricultural policy must remain a key area in the EU budget .
For the citizens of the EU , the services are essential for food quality and safety , animal welfare and environmental standards and for the vitality of rural areas .
The market does not reward these additional services .
Agricultural funds are service-related payments that enable reliable planning for farming families .
It is essential that we should adhere to the established ' two-pillar model ' .
Only the interplay between the first and second pillars enables both innovative competitiveness and sustainability .
The second pillar is a strong element for sustainable agriculture .
Switching compensatory allowances for disadvantaged areas to the first pillar would have disastrous consequences for most regions .
I welcome the fact that small farms are to receive greater support by grading payments .
A ceiling for direct payments is also open to debate .
Today 's fundamental decision by Parliament defines the parameters to be used by the European Commission as a template when drafting the legislative package .
Agricultural policy must remain a key element of European policy .
I voted in favour of Mr Dess 's report , which is a document of strategic importance for European agriculture .
An intense debate has been taking place in recent months in order to reconcile the requirements , expectations and needs not only of farmers but also of European citizens as a whole .
The CAP is a policy of and for everyone .
It includes resources for the competitiveness of businesses , for food security , for guaranteeing fair prices for consumers and for providing society with public goods that are protected by ever more safeguards .
From its beginnings until now , the CAP has undergone a number of reforms that testify to its support for agriculture that is constantly evolving in order to better respond to the numerous challenges that we have had to face .
I welcome this vote , which is an achievement for the European Parliament .
For the first time , it is expressing the wishes of 27 countries with regard to the future of EU agriculture .
I supported the report by my fellow Member , Mr Dess , on the future of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) after 2013 .
With this document , the European Parliament has once again demonstrated its determination to maintain a strong , ambitious CAP with a high level of funding .
The aim of the CAP is to support our farmers and to respond to major challenges : to produce enough food to feed our 500 million fellow citizens and to contribute to feeding the rest of the world .
Since the CAP was last reformed , the challenges have evolved : growing world demand for food , internationalisation of agricultural trade and price volatility , climate change , energy crisis , scarcity of available natural resources , and questioning of the role and purpose of the CAP by our citizens .
All these issues should be included in the CAP after 2013 and should be taken into account when it is reformed .
I also welcome the European Parliament 's desire to help small farmers as well as young farmers , especially when they are starting up .
Finally , it is important that the CAP guarantee farmers better incomes , the latter having dwindled steadily in recent decades and standing now at half the incomes of urban households .
Economic growth and the development of society are to a great extent dependent on the health of the citizens .
The quality of the products we eat and the way in which they are produced have fundamental significance for our health , and this is therefore why the health of the European Union 's citizens should be an important aspect of our agricultural policy .
By introducing a more informed common agricultural policy , we will be able to be more effective in combating the diseases of civilisation associated with an unhealthy lifestyle and poor diet .
Obesity , diabetes , cancers and different forms of circulatory disease are a real threat to the citizens .
Statistical data show that every year cardiovascular disease is the cause of around 4.3 million deaths in Europe , and over 1.7 million people die of cancer .
I think the report on the CAP towards 2020 : meeting the food , natural resources and territorial challenges of the future is moving in the wrong direction , so I voted against it .
I voted for the Dess report , since I am in favour of a common agricultural policy reform that reflects the changing nature of the EU 's agricultural sector .
The report provides for a simplified CAP structured around two pillars : the first pillar being fully financed by the EU budget and the second pillar providing for multiannual programming and a cofinancing approach .
This pillar-based model helps to clarify the CAP for the agricultural operators concerned and to eliminate overlapping .
Furthermore , I support this report because it mentions the need to maintain the EU 's agricultural budget for the next - post-2013 - financing period .
Adequate financial resources are crucial in order to meet the challenges of food security , environmental protection , climate change and territorial balance in the EU following its enlargement to the East .
The Dess report also calls for the development of food quality policy with geographical indications ( protected designations of origin ( PDO ) and protected geographical indications ( PGI ) ) , a necessary measure if we are to ensure the authenticity of local and regional food specialities .
I support the report because it includes the gender dimension of the CAP .
It states that both spouses should enjoy the same rights when working in the agricultural sector .
Forty-two per cent of the people working in agriculture are women , but only one holding in five is managed by a woman .
I voted in favour of the report on the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) after 2013 to ensure that the CAP budget is kept at its current level until 2020 .
I would also like to see farmers rewarded for their work on biodiversity .
We would like the protection of biodiversity to be a priority for the European Union through its various fields of competence .
Most farmers are sensitive to this issue and choose environmentally friendly production methods .
The contribution of agriculture to the protection of the environment should therefore be recognised and included in the objectives of the CAP post 2013 .
In this respect , I support the Commission proposals for a system of incentives financed by the EU to support farmers who move towards sustainable development .
This report aims to replace the link with production in the new system of direct support for farmers with environmental and social criteria .
It calls for the introduction of a degressive model of direct payments according to the size of an agricultural holding , and for these to be reserved exclusively for active farmers who use farmland for production and maintain it in a good agricultural and environmental condition .
A step is thus being made towards halting the awarding of absurd subsidies to feudal landowners .
It makes changes relating to price volatility , and calls for solutions to be created , at global level , to combat speculation on agricultural commodities and extreme price volatility .
It also advocates a safety net and promotes the association of small farmers .
Some of the problems caused by the market are diagnosed , and greater emphasis is given to environmental and social issues .
The benefits of these points should be recognised , and they should be further fleshed out .
Nevertheless , the solutions tabled in the report are along the lines of deepening these same market mechanisms that are responsible for the current crisis of volatile prices and unequal distribution of profits throughout the production chain .
That is why I abstained .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the adoption of this report because I believe that , as such , the compromise that Mr Dess has drawn up is a good one and it demonstrates a great deal of sensitivity in relation to the situation of Europe 's farmers .
However , we should continue to ensure that we do not simply pay lip-service to a reduction in red tape , but actually implement it .
in writing . - ( FR ) This document proposes several interesting developments such as freedom from fossil energy , support for short production chains , strengthening producers ' negotiating power , and the establishment of a worldwide notification and coordinated action system for agricultural stocks .
Unfortunately , it does not put a monetary figure on any of these advances .
It does not question the abolition of milk quotas or the dismantling of agricultural market protection mechanisms .
I voted against this document .
The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) should be reformed so that it can better respond to the challenges of food security , climate change , the sustainable management of natural resources , landscape management and maintaining a vibrant rural economy .
It is necessary to make the sector more competitive and the CAP fairer , ecological , profitable , effective and efficient .
It should be formulated in easily understandable terms , so that it can be understood by everyone , by which I mean not just farmers but also consumers and taxpayers .
The report represents a move in the right direction in that it makes every effort to make farming more dynamic and competitive , so that it is better equipped to meet the objectives set by the Europe 2020 strategy .
In addition , the report provides for the maintenance of appropriate budget resources after 2013 , which is , in itself , a victory .
The common agricultural policy has historically been the main and most important area of EU intervention , and it is still crucially important today .
This report , which I fully support , does well to highlight the value of agriculture , from both a food and a rural development and land preservation point of view .
The CAP has already been radically ( and rightly ) reformed in the past : the new challenges that we face concern its further simplification and compliance .
Smaller agribusinesses often incur heavy costs when complying with health and environmental rules .
I therefore welcome the request for a possible adjustment of these rules to reflect the varying conditions on farms .
The CAP can lend itself to fraud and deception , so it is also right to identify genuinely ' active ' farmers at European level in order to prevent an unacceptable waste of resources .
Lastly , I should like to stress the need to strongly oppose speculation by the international markets on food prices : I consider it unacceptable for high finance to be able to influence at will a strategic sector such as this , which ensures people 's food supply and very survival .
I voted in support of Mr Dess 's report , which envisages a fairer CAP after 2013 .
The report supports the reduction in the differences between the funds received as direct payments by the various Member States , regions and sectors .
This step , albeit a small one , is going in the right direction , and I support it .
Mr Dess 's report also takes into account the problem relating to livestock farmers in the countries applying the Single Area Payment Scheme ( SAPS ) , the majority of whom do not own the land and , therefore , do not receive direct payments .
I hope that the Commission will consider this issue and suggest a solution to it .
During the vote I also expressed support for small agricultural producers , as well as the provision of cheaper fuel and lower excise taxes for agricultural producers .
Mr Dess 's report also supports my proposal for greater flexibility in the second pillar .
This is also one of the reasons why I voted in favour of this report .
Member States and regions must be able to set their own priorities themselves so that genuine development can be achieved in rural areas .
Flexibility is important because the situation varies in the different Member States .
I also welcome the measures proposed in the report supporting young people in the agricultural sector .
I believe that this offers an effective method of combating depopulation in rural areas .
in writing . - The ECR supported this report because it is a significant improvement on the Commission communication and keeps the spirit of previous market-based reforms alive .
It also focuses on the challenge of greening the CAP through primarily rural development measures .
However , the ECR does not support the capping of payments to large farms or proposals to extend market intervention to other sectors .
We believe that these will institutionalise inefficiencies in the farming sector .
We therefore supported all amendments opposing capping .
In general , the Deß report is more positive than the Commission proposal .
The Commission proposal includes greening of payments in Pillar 1 , the reintroduction of set-aside , a focus on social policy and an increase in the role of Article 68 , which allows for the reintroduction of coupled payments in some sectors .
These are all backward steps which will further complicate the CAP and do nothing to help farmers respond to market forces .
Although the Deß report includes weaker elements of some of these proposals , unlike the Commission communication , it does not undermine the pro-market direction of travel of previous reforms .
The ECR group therefore supported the final report , although we do not support all the provisions contained in it .
in writing . - ( LT ) A sustainable , productive and competitive agricultural sector guarantees security , in terms of food and natural resources , as well as territorial balance .
Given the fact that world populations are only set to increase , global agricultural production will also have to increase accordingly .
We must therefore strive to ensure that we create a strong and sustainable CAP that matches the changing nature of the agricultural industry in all Member States .
We must make the best decisions to help combat rural decline and counter the possible pressure on the agricultural economy from third countries .
There should be a greater focus on SMEs .
Disparities in the provision of aid and assistance for farmers must be eliminated .
Direct payments are a legitimate source of income for Europe 's farmers .
The general scheme must therefore ensure that direct payments are distributed correctly and a level playing field is created throughout the EU .
Each Member State should receive a minimum percentage of the EU average direct payments .
In order to achieve this a ceiling should be set .
It is crucial for market regulation measures and intervention mechanisms to be implemented , in order to ensure that products are fairly priced and that farmers receive an adequate level of income that guarantees the continuation of production and a regular supply of food .
This report aims to replace the link with production in the new system of direct support for farmers with environmental and social criteria .
It calls for the introduction of a degressive model of direct payments according to the size of an agricultural holding that are reserved exclusively for active farmers who use farmland for production and maintain it in a good agricultural and environmental condition .
A step is thus being made towards halting the awarding of absurd subsidies to feudal landowners .
It makes changes relating to price volatility , and calls for solutions to be created , at global level , to combat speculation on agricultural commodities and extreme price volatility .
It also advocates a safety net and promotes the association of small farmers .
Some of the problems caused by the market are diagnosed , and greater emphasis is given to environmental and social issues .
The benefits of these points should be recognised , and they should be further fleshed out .
Nevertheless , the solutions tabled in the report are along the lines of deepening these same market mechanisms that are responsible for the current crisis of volatile prices and unequal distribution of profits throughout the production chain .
That is why I abstained .
in writing . - I particularly welcome the proposals in this report to protect and encourage young farmers , through grant schemes and other measures .
The age profile in farming remains skewed towards the older age group : 34.1 % of farmers in the EU are over 65 , while only 6.1 % of farmers are under 35 .
A reformed CAP must account for this .
Reform is needed in other areas , which will mean big changes for some farmers .
Because of this , the new CAP must include transitional arrangements in established sectors subjected to radical change going forward .
Change is always difficult but the agriculture sector must adapt to market realities .
Global demand and greater realisation of the need for food security means agriculture will be a growth area for the EU going forward and particularly important for less developed economies .
The new CAP needs to effectively target the areas of inefficiency by incentivising new practices .
For instance , in Ireland there is a need for greater scale on our farms and throughout the EU changes to traditional uses of land offer great opportunities .
For instance , tourism and recreation can be important drivers of rural economies .
That means the CAP budget must be maintained at its current level and index-linked post-2013 .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting against the inclusion of the wine market reform - and other specific sectors - not because I am generally against the idea , but because individual branches of production should not be mentioned at this stage of the common agricultural policy .
What we should be doing at the moment is negotiating the future principles of the common agricultural policy .
in writing . - ( FR ) The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is the only truly European policy .
While it may have been a shield against supply shortfalls and sectoral crises for a long time , it is no longer a refuge for farmers and their families , who have been hit hard by the volatility of raw material prices and global competition .
I cite as evidence the continuous decline in the number of agricultural holdings in Belgium and the staggering decrease in the number of jobs ( down 56 % in 30 years ) .
That is why the CAP should be reformed and respond to today 's challenges of food production and security , the protection of the environment and the production of renewable energy .
The Dess report , which was voted on at noon , is in line with the main guidelines established by the European Commission in favour of a gradual reform based on a system of more balanced and more targeted payments and with a marked ' ecological ' orientation .
This is good news .
It is clear that rules need to be laid down to regulate the market and that small farms , which have so far been forgotten in successive reforms , need to be helped .
This is the only path open to us to restore hope to young people , to motivate them to take over family farms , to convince them that agriculture is , quite simply , a sector with a future .
In response to rumours about a cut in funding under the second pillar of the common agricultural policy , I repeat that I am in favour of guaranteeing adequate financial resources for rural development , also .
We must keep the EU agricultural budget at the current level until 2020 to ensure that farmers receive incentives to provide stocks of safe food products , to protect the environment , to create new jobs and to ensure the competitiveness of the EU agricultural sector .
This vote sends a clear and strong message to the Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development , Dacian Cioloş .
Although EU agricultural policy aims to provide safe , high-quality food products and contributes to the protection of the environment and to renewable energies , it must be adequately financed so as to encourage farmers to use modern , environmentally sound techniques .
The fight against speculation on agricultural commodities and extreme price volatility require a global-level solution to ensure greater stability for farmers and the large-scale supply of safe food products .
I therefore support a worldwide system for the notification of current stock levels , in order to tackle uncontrolled speculation on agricultural commodities .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although the idea of introducing an upper ceiling for direct payments in the light of the size of the agricultural holdings may appear laudable , I am in no doubt that it would simply result in the implementation of technical arrangements by those agricultural holdings that would otherwise exceed the authorised limit in order to continue to receive European subsidies .
However , I am all in favour of introducing another system to allocate more funds to small agricultural holdings , for example by introducing a system of degressivity of direct payments in the light of the size of the holdings .
That is why I voted for Amendments 10 and 11 and for paragraph 25 .
In addition , I am pleased that , in this report , Parliament calls on the Commission to consider proposing that planting rights in the wine sector be maintained beyond 2015 .
This is very important for the many wine producers in south-west France , and that is of course why I voted as I did .
Finally , as regards the milk market , the final text is , in my opinion , very balanced .
The report therefore has my backing .
in writing . - ( FR ) In favour .
As Mr Bové said , in so voting , Parliament has given Commissioner Cioloş a vote of confidence .
To become concrete , his proposals should now be transposed into the legislative measures to be proposed in October 2011 .
There are going to be real difficulties when it comes to striking a balance between , on the one hand , measures to promote employment , the maintenance of activities over all the territories involved , the protection of the environment , and the prevention of climate change and , on the other , the threadbare argument of competition , competitiveness and liberalism .
The risk of a wide gap is quite real .
After this historic vote by the European Parliament , Europe is committed to putting this obsession with productivity in agriculture behind it .
The Member States still need to assume their collective responsibility and the Commission still has to transpose this new direction into legislation .
After the failures of the reforms of 1992 , 1999 and 2003 , another capitulation to the interests of lobbies would spell the end of the hopes of millions of farmers and of 500 million European citizens .
I voted in favour of this report because I share the rapporteur 's views concerning the focal points of the common agricultural policy reform for the period after April 2013 .
Firstly , if the CAP is to contribute towards the achievement of the Europe 2020 objectives , the EU agricultural budget for the next financing period should be maintained at least at the same level as the 2013 agricultural budget .
In particular , the CAP needs to be simplified : there must be less red tape for administrative bodies and farmers , and the costs of managing the policy at Member State level must be reduced .
Lastly , if the European Union is to continue to play a leading role in this sector , then food quality and safety , which are the raison d 'être of agriculture at EU and world level , must be strengthened further .
in writing . - ( FR ) The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is one of the oldest policies at Community level .
While it needs to be adapted to meet new needs and new expectations , it must not disappear .
It is a policy that has proved its worth and one that I am determined to support , as are many colleagues and citizens .
This report , which I supported in plenary , clearly demonstrates the developments in the agricultural world , which bring with them new challenges for the future .
They include demographic trends , such as aging farming populations and the obstacles faced by young farmers to starting up .
There are also new concerns , such as the need to combat the volatility of agricultural prices in order to guarantee greater food security , or the need to take account of environmental protection .
In the face of all these challenges , the solution can only be found at European level .
This solution is the one advocated by this report : the CAP must remain a truly Community policy , but its operation needs to be reviewed so as to make it fairer and more effective .
in writing . - ( NL ) The common agricultural policy of the future must guarantee everyone access to healthy and locally-produced food .
I am standing up for family-run farming businesses , fair and stable prices for both farmers and consumers and for a switch to sustainable and social agriculture with respect for the limits of our natural resources .
I advocate that an end should be put to the dumping of Europe 's overproduction on the markets of the South because this market-disrupting practice devastates local producers there .
They cannot compete with Europe 's underpriced exports .
We need to restructure our cattle farming into animal-friendly and ecological production that ends our dependence on soya imports for animal feed .
I therefore voted in favour of all amendments that limit the subsidies on a per person per business basis and also of those amendments that ensure a greening of the subsidies .
I therefore also supported those amendments that back ecologically ' low input ' agriculture and gave my backing to those amendments that tackle the enormous concentration of the market in favour of agribusiness and retailing .
I therefore also supported those amendments that back small , family-run businesses and I voted against the pernicious mass imports of soya into Europe .
I therefore support food sovereignty .
The main objective of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , enshrined in Article 39 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , is ' to increase agricultural productivity by promoting technical progress and by ensuring the rational development of agricultural production and the optimum utilisation of the factors of production , in particular labour ' .
I am voting for this report because I believe that it contains measures that strengthen and guarantee the post-2013 CAP 's sustainability whilst also contributing to achieving the objectives enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy , and that it takes into account the clear differences between new and old Member States .
I consider it crucial that the CAP foster the development of safe and healthy foodstuffs , intended , not just for the general public , but also for the food industry in particular .
Administrative measures cutting red tape when farmers are preparing their applications should also be introduced , in order to facilitate access to EU funds .
Finally , I voted for the amendment on milk , as I do not agree with the European Commission 's call for the milk quotas system to be abolished , which will only exacerbate the already precarious position of national producers .
In voting against the report , the Greek Communist Party voted against the CAP as a whole , both current and ' new ' , which has ruined small