Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 1 February 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this sitting , as agreed by the Conference of Presidents meeting on Thursday , 8 February 2007 , in accordance with Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been circulated .
It has been requested that the draft be amended as follows :
- Tuesday :
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that the report by Mr Lehne on the exercise of certain rights attached to voting shares , which was to have been voted on in accordance with Rule 131 , be debated and put on the agenda for Thursday afternoon at 3 p.m.

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , it is repeatedly made clear to us by the various discussions in the media that this is an important subject ; it is one that we should not simply let pass on the nod , and I hope that the rapporteur , too , can agree with us on that .
As you mentioned , there are two possibilities : Thursday afternoon might well be one of them , but , as there are - or so I gather - fewer Members pressing to speak on Thursday morning , that might be another option , and then the vote could be held at Thursday lunchtime .
Both are workable options .
We would prefer Thursday morning , but have no objection to the afternoon .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not , of course , have any objection to this subject being debated ; I am happy to see one .
I would only ask , though , that the vote on it should be held this week , since the committees have come to an amicable agreement on this and the Council intends to agree to whatever we adopt in this House relatively rapidly and promptly .
If we are to take this legislative report on Thursday afternoon , it would probably not be advisable to vote on it at the same time , and hence my request that the debate be scheduled either on Thursday morning or on Wednesday evening , since there are windows left on both days .
If we do that , we could vote on Thursday at midday .
( DE ) Mr President , yes , of course , we can have the vote on Thursday afternoon .
There is a reason why I find Wednesday problematic , and it is that I gather that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats would like to have Darfur put on the agenda , the plan being , I believe , for this to be discussed on Wednesday evening , but we would like to have the Gahler report moved to Wednesday , on the grounds that a large number of Members have indicated their desire to speak to the reports by Mrs Batzeli , Mr Goepel and Mrs Hall , so we are not going to manage with the time available .
We would be very satisfied if it were possible to discuss Mr Lehne 's report on Thursday morning and to vote on it at noon .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has asked that Mr Gahler 's report on budget aid to developing countries be moved to Wednesday evening .
Mr Swoboda has the floor in order to explain why .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , as I have just explained , I am working on the assumption that Darfur - which also has to do with development issues - is going to be debated on Wednesday evening .
We would like the Gahler report to be debated that evening as well .
We have informed our group of this , but I do not know whether the rapporteur is aware of this or whether he can manage that time .
The fact is that we will be having a lot of speakers to the other reports , particularly to Mrs Batzeli 's , wine being such an important subject , especially in terms of Europe 's agricultural development , and so , if that were possible , we would be very much in favour of it .
Mr Gahler has indicated his agreement , and so the formal requirement has been met .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
- Wednesday :
The Group of the European People 's Party and the Group of the Liberals have requested the inclusion of statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Darfur , with a debate to be concluded by motions for a resolution .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I should like to speak briefly in support of this motion from the PPE-DE Group and the ALDE Group .
Darfur should be a priority debate in Parliament this week and we believe it would be a missed opportunity to delay that debate and resolution until next month .
What continues to happen in Darfur is an international scandal in humanitarian terms .
The Council has today released its conclusions on Sudan and the UN Human Rights Council is trying to get an assessment mission into Darfur as we speak , so the international focus is on Darfur right now .
This Parliament should also be having its say .
That is why the PPE-DE Group and , I believe , the ALDE Group are so insistent on a debate as well as a resolution this week .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , needless to say , the Social Democrats wholeheartedly endorse the request for a debate on Darfur , since the emergency situation is critical and violations persist .
The problem is extensive , and we - the European Union , its Member States , and the European Council - have an important part to play in this .
That is why it is important that we have this debate .
The problem , though , is vast , and our fellow Member was right to point that out .
He made a valid point when he asked the Council and Commission to make a statement .
As I understand it , we have to hold a debate on Wednesday evening , and neither the Council nor the Commission will be present or provide a statement .
We will be thrashing things out among ourselves , and that will , of course , be very unfortunate .
Whilst I , on behalf of the Social Democrats , wholeheartedly support the request , I very much hope that we can also have a serious debate involving the Council and Commission .
That is , after all , what gives our debate real substance and political meaning .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
Mr President , may I enquire why you have not made use of Rule 156 of the Rules of Procedure in relation to the reports from the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners ?
Given the extraordinarily large number of amendments tabled , it would be appropriate to make use of a rule that was tailor-made for this sort of situation .
Rule 156 was added to the Rules of Procedure in the reform three years ago in order to provide a filter when we are faced with a very long voting time .
This would enable the committee concerned to vote and to see which amendments have a sufficient degree of support to merit this House 's time being used up in voting on them .
All those amendments that have almost no support would be filtered out and save the rest of us an enormous amount of time .
Mr Corbett , this matter was discussed in the Conference of Presidents last week and the majority was against using that procedure .
In that case , Mr President , I just wonder when on earth we would ever make use of that rule .
It was added to the Rules precisely to save the time of this House in this sort of situation .
I must express my surprise at the decision of the Conference of Presidents .
You have every right to express your surprise at this decision .
There are two aspects : first , the majority in the Conference of Presidents ; and then , regardless of that majority , the fact that the President can take a decision one way or the other .
This is a further aspect of the question and one which will certainly be considered in greater depth in future in the light of your remarks .
( FR ) Mr President , if my memory serves me correctly , the Conference of Presidents objected to the report being referred to committee .
However , if I have correctly understood what Mr Corbett just said , this is a different matter .
If I have understood him correctly , he is proposing not to submit to the vote amendments that received an extremely low number of votes in committee , which is a different matter .
I do not believe that we spoke of this aspect in the Conference of Presidents .
OK , but even that would require a meeting of the committee responsible .
( FR ) Mr President , I understood what Mr Corbett was proposing , and that was for the committee to meet tomorrow evening in order to sift through the 180 amendments , so as not to submit in plenary those that did not receive at least 10 % of the votes in committee .
If I have understood him correctly , Mr Corbett feels that this requires a meeting to be held in committee tomorrow evening .
The problem is that his committee ceased to exist at the end of January .
Now , if I am not a complete fool , we are in February , and the mandate given to the committee by Parliament expired at the end of January .
Therefore , I should like Mr Corbett to explain to me how a committee can vote on things that no longer exist .
In theory , we would need to reinstate this committee , which could then meet tomorrow evening , and sift through the amendments .
I really do not care ; I am simply saying to you that this is the problem .
Mr President , I think the answer is easy : Rule 156 gives complete discretion to the President of our House .
If he chooses to reconvene the committee at a special meeting tomorrow to filter the amendments so that we here only need to vote on those that get more than 10 % support , then he is free to do so under Rule 156 .
Rule 156 gives the President enormous power in this respect , even if the Conference of Presidents disagrees with him .
That is , in principle , the case , but the President does of course regard the consent of the majority in this House as important , especially when dealing with such thorny issues , and that is why the Conference of Presidents ended up , in agreement with him , deciding as it has done .
I think the vast majority of us would like to vote on Wednesday , and that is the idea behind the whole discussion .
For the future we will go deeper into the discussion and keep in contact with everybody who might have remarks to make .
( The agenda was therefore adopted . )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
We now come to the one-minute speeches on important political issues .
( MT ) Mr President , last week the European cruise industry organised a one-day conference in Brussels for all the stakeholders in the industry .
During this conference a report was presented concerning the extremely important contribution that this industry has to make to Europe .
Amongst other things , it was announced that the cruise industry is responsible for providing around 190 000 jobs within Europe .
I believe , Mr President , that this Parliament ought to recognise the importance of this industry , and , consequently , the European Union must do its utmost to pay greater attention to it and place it within the policies it develops .
Thank you .
( EL ) Mr President , the Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink was murdered recently by extreme nationalists in Istanbul .
The constant threats against his life forced the writer Orhan Pamouk to leave Turkey and take refuge in the United States of America .
The unchecked activities of extremists and the worrying increase in nationalism are not just an internal problem for Turkey ; they are a matter for every European democrat .
It is a question of solidarity with the democratic movement in Turkey which is fighting under difficult conditions for an area of freedom of expression and dignity .
Rhetorical declarations of sympathy are no longer enough .
Collective initiatives and action are needed on the part of the European Union and , in particular , on the part of the European Parliament .
Initiatives must be taken immediately towards the Turkish Government by you , Mr President , and by all the political groups .
I therefore propose that plenary should adopt a motion for a resolution as a first specific step in the condemnation of the nationalism and terrorism threatening the weak democratic fabric in Turkish society .
( LT ) Mr President , 16 February is the day that Lithuania celebrates the Restoration of Statehood ; however , in the calendar produced for the Members of the European Parliament , it is indicated that we celebrate our National Day not on 16 February , but on 1 February .
Furthermore , in this calendar the dates of four of my country 's public holidays are mixed up .
Just imagine : the calendar states that St John 's Day , which all of the Christian world celebrates on 24 June , is celebrated in Lithuania on 1 June .
This is absurd , total carelessness on the part of parliamentary staff .
I understand , Mr President , that you were not responsible for these mistakes at the time ; nonetheless , I would prefer that , in future , you and other managers of Parliament do not allow such errors to occur .
The purpose of these calendars is to enable us to get to know our colleagues from other countries better , including their public holidays .
But in regard to Lithuania , the calendar is a total collection of errors .
We will check that and get the right date put in , namely 16 February .
The twenty-fourth day of June is the Feast of St John the Baptist .
( PL ) Mr President , the events of the last few days have shown once again what the meat dispute between Russia and Poland is really about .
It is political and it is about , on the one hand , an attempt by Russia to punish Poland for the independent and democratic direction of Poland 's political changes and the withdrawal from Russian influence , and on the other it is a test of the unity of the European Union and an attempt to undermine its solidarity .
The Russian political elite is watching carefully to see whether or not the European Union will unite to stand behind one of its members .
I am convinced that the time for the European Union to grasp the nettle , to state its position and to deploy effective instruments to resolve this dispute is long overdue .
All previous attempts have been fruitless .
The only solution is to raise the issue in no uncertain terms and to show Russia that it has to deal with the might of the entire European Union .
( DA ) Mr President , last Friday , something happened that ought not to have happened .
Contrary to the EU 's nature protection directives , the Polish authorities gave permission for the Via Baltica road to be built .
The plan is for it to go right through a Natura 2000 area in one of Europe 's genuinely unique areas of natural beauty .
This happened in spite of the fact that , back in December , the European Commission sent a letter of formal notice to Poland .
Now , the green light has been given for contractors to begin felling 20 000 trees this week .
It is scandalous that the authorities of an EU country should be consciously infringing EU legislation .
It is not only appalling for the natural environment , it also in fact undermines legal certainty and the EU 's reputation and may become a slippery slope whereby environmental legislation and environmental considerations are set aside as people see fit .
I therefore very much hope that the Commission will live up to its responsibilities , follow up its letter of formal notice as quickly as possible and put a stop to what Poland has set in motion .
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to welcome the victory of the ' yes ' vote in yesterday 's referendum in Portugal on the decriminalisation of the voluntary termination of pregnancy in the first ten weeks , on the woman 's volition .
This result puts an end to all the false obstacles thus far created , including yesterday 's referendum , blocking the Portuguese Parliament from exercising its legitimate legal powers on this issue .
The time has now come to make up for years and years of lost time .
I should like to thank all the MEPs from the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , who for years have shown solidarity with the struggle of Portuguese women , many of whom suffer the undignified and inhumane experience of being put on trial for abortion .
Yesterday 's result is an important victory for Portuguese women and for all those who , like us , have fought for decades for an end to backstreet abortions , for the promotion of women 's health and for free , aware and responsible parenthood .
( PL ) Mr President , despite the European Union 's purported task of establishing a zone of freedom , security and justice , the European media make accusations and persistent attacks against public figures , particularly when they are ideologically inconvenient .
For this reason we are appealing for , and have drawn up a petition asking for media persecution and terrorism to be treated as acts of violence that threaten human rights .
Without any proof , the media have lynch-mobbed a Polish archbishop for the purpose of preventing him from becoming the Metropolitan Bishop of Warsaw .
Similarly , the European media have been pillorying Pope Benedict XVI and have for years been slandering the charismatic monk who created the only truly free radio station in Poland , along with others who oppose the ideas of the logic of disintegration that characterises the new left .
We appeal with the greatest insistence for the values on which the European Union is based , namely human dignity , freedom , democracy and equality , human rights and the right to profess one 's religion , to be respected .
Mr President , this is the third time I have taken the opportunity to use a one-minute speech to bring to the attention of this House the fact that another poultry-processing factory in Northern Ireland has closed with a substantial loss of jobs .
It seems to me that we are continuing to lose jobs within the European Union .
We are allowing cheap poultry meat to be imported into the European Union , produced at lower standards than those imposed on our farmers and our processors within the European Union , and putting our own people out of jobs .
In my opinion we are also risking the health of the people of the European Union because this poultry meat imported into the European Union does not meet the same high standards that we expect here .
There is a lot more I could say on this .
It seems that we continue to ignore the dangers of this , and I have to warn this House that we do so at our peril if we put our people , farmers and workers at risk .
The Commission must investigate this and try to put a stop to it .
( FI ) Mr President , since the 1960s , 14 people have died in Italy in football riots .
Last week , a policeman with a family was killed in Sicily when spectators threw a bomb at him .
There are problems , however , all over Europe .
It is sad and shameful for Europe that football breeds violence both on and off the pitch .
All those involved in football need to work together to defend the sport 's tarnished reputation .
Zero tolerance on racism and violence would seem to be the only way to combat these problems .
Penal measures are not working : we have to come down hard on the clubs in terms of financial penalties , as has now been done .
Suspending matches and playing to empty stadiums will hurt the clubs ' pockets .
This way , they will not be able to neglect their responsibility to improve security for long .
This way , the clubs will also start to show a genuine interest in keeping their supporters under control .
Mr President , today I would like to link two issues together .
First of all , the comments from President Barroso with regard to the holding of referenda on the draft constitution .
His inference was that countries might consider not holding referenda .
Well , coming from a country where a referendum must be held on these issues , I find this extremely puzzling to say the least .
On the one hand we have Commissioner Wallström talking about plan ' D ' for democracy and dialogue and debate and engaging our citizens ; on the other hand we have the comments from President Barroso .
At the end of the day , are we supposed just to inform and consult and debate and discuss with our citizens , but not to trust them when it comes to voting ?
The other issue I wish to highlight is that a bill is currently being debated in the Irish Parliament that would give sweeping and retrospective powers to ministers to create indictable offences in order to comply with European legislation .
In this context , the directly-elected Irish Parliament would be bypassed .
So , on the one hand we are bypassing citizens ; on the other hand bypassing national parliaments .
I have to say , as a committed European , I think these are worrying times for the EU .

Mr President , last week the Russian authorities presented new charges against the former Yukos managers , Mr Khodorkovsky and Mr Lebedev , who were already sentenced two years ago on highly questionable grounds .
Many Members of this Parliament have followed with great concern the fate of these two men , who can be classed as political prisoners .
A new sentence will probably mean their moral and political execution .
I suggest that a temporary committee should be set up to investigate politically motivated trials and murders which , unfortunately , are continuing in Russia , despite the concern expressed today .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to raise an issue relating to European policy , which is of the utmost importance : the fight against extremism , which is sadly developing throughout Europe right now .
The democratic parties on the right and left , the Liberals , the Greens - all the parties represented here , in this House - have unanimously declared the need to distance themselves from any form of extremism , xenophobia , anti-Semitism and minority exclusion .
We have managed , in this House , to quarantine-off extremists .
That is a huge achievement .
Ladies and gentlemen , can you imagine the vice-president of the UMP in France or the vice-president of the CDU in Germany taking the floor during a demonstration in which extremists are present and banners with neo-Nazi slogans are brandished , and not distancing himself ?
I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that all the parties present in this House should stand back from the extremists on all sides , who are wreaking havoc throughout the countries of Europe .
( ET ) Although today is 12 February , I would like to return to the end of January for a moment .
On the evening of 25 January , Galina Kozlova , wife of Vladimir Kozlov , Chairman of the Council of Mari El and 2006 winner of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought , was brutally attacked in Yoshkar-Ola .
Galina Kozlova was brought to the neurosurgery department of Yoshkar-Ola City Hospital with cranial damage and a concussion , as well as damage to her sight resulting from the use of nerve gas in the attack .
In spring 2005 , Parliament passed a resolution on the violation of human rights and democracy in the Mari Republic in the Russian Federation .
As you remember , this resolution stated that journalists that are not part of the state-controlled media continue to be attacked , persecuted and disregarded .
In 2001 , three journalists were killed , and on 4 February 2005 , Vladimir Kozlov himself was seriously beaten .
I regret , Mr President and esteemed colleagues , that I must inform you that the situation with regard to minorities and human rights in the Mari Republic has not improved since that time .
( PL ) Mr President , MEPs are not subject to anybody 's orders .
That is what the electoral rules say in our countries .
But what is the situation like on the ground ?
We have in recent days been observing infringements of the independence of MEPs .
Parliament has undergone a crisis regarding the election of the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
On the basis of earlier decisions by the CD coalition , this post was awarded to the Polish Member , Mr Saryusz-Wolski .
Since then the Poles have been subjected to disgraceful pressure .
The German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , telephoned the head of the party applying to chair this committee of the European Parliament and asked him to withdraw the nomination .
The ex-chancellor , Helmut Kohl , telephoned a Polish politician for the same reason .
Furthermore , former Austrian Chancellor Schüssel , together with the prime minister of Luxembourg , sent a special letter about this to the EPL fraction .
All of this in an effort to ensure that the European Parliament 's foreign policy is conducted by the previous president , the German politician , Mr Brok .
Is that what is called free and unfettered exercise of the duty of an MEP ?
I think not , Mr President .
Interference in this matter by the highest authorities in Germany , Austria and Luxembourg is an infringement of the independence of this House , and makes a mockery of democracy .
I ask that the independence of this House be protected in the future .
( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to mention the political detainees Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev , who have been charged again , on the basis of obscure accusations , in order to prevent their early release , for which Russian law makes provision .
It is by these means that the justice system is continuing its absurd and clearly politically motivated show trial of Yukos ' former owners .
Khodorkovsky 's commitment to a more democratic Russian society made him an opponent of Putin , and , their major oil group having been broken up , the greater part of the owners ' shares are now in the hands of the state .
If Russia disregards basic human rights - and we have just heard of it doing so in Munich too - then that makes it a very problematic partner for the EU .
We in this House should monitor this trial on the ground and protest against such practices .
( SL ) On 1 February this year , unidentified persons set fire to a nursery school in Trieste for children from the Slovene minority .
As a result , the children had to be moved to other , temporary premises .
Similar incidents directed against the Slovene minority have taken place in the past , for instance when a Slovene primary school was set on fire .
Despite six years of promises , the building has still not been repaired .
For this reason , Slovene parents fear that the same thing might also happen in this case .
The Slovene minority demands , quite justifiably , that the authorities in Trieste find and punish the arsonists and protect the Slovene minority from similar incidents in the future .
They also expect the children 's nursery and school to be repaired as soon as possible .
I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that , despite many recent promises , the Italian authorities are still failing to implement in full the legal protection granted to the Slovene minority .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , Ahtisaari 's Kosovo report is complete .
In Munich , President Putin explicitly stated Russia 's objectives in the world and in Europe .
The time for waiting is over ; now is the time to act .
The EU 's help in leading the Western Balkans towards stability will be the moment of truth for the European Union 's foreign and security policy .
The best way to solve the Kosovo question is to obtain Serbia 's support , and in order to do that we must support the democratic forces in that country .
We must confirm that we support the continued rapprochement between Serbia and the European Union as soon as that may be possible .
We must state which criteria will decide whether the continuation of that process is possible .
The Serbian Government , which is implementing the fundamental values of the European Union - democracy , human rights and the rule of law - must merit our support on their journey towards joining Europe .
Thus we will be able to foil Russia 's threat to veto the Kosovo plan in the UN and use Kosovo as a pretext to support separatists in countries that are part of the European Union 's neighbourhood policy .
( SV ) Mr President , as a former fellow Member stated , a significant referendum took place in Portugal yesterday .
As you are no doubt aware , it was about no longer treating women who terminate a pregnancy up until the tenth week as criminals .
The Portuguese people voted in favour of the proposal .
I wish to congratulate the women of Portugal on having taken this step towards taking charge of their own bodies .
I also wish to thank our Portuguese fellow Members and those parties that have conducted such an objective , serious and informative campaign .
Each Member State is entitled to take its own decisions concerning reproductive rights .
These are matters that each country has to decide for itself .
However , it is extremely important for us to be able to reach across national borders in providing information , putting forward shared opinions and showing solidarity with women .
I hope that Malta , Poland and Ireland will be able to follow Portugal 's example .
( SK ) On 22 January radio broadcasting by the BBC was discontinued in Slovakia on the grounds that it was broadcast in English , which is not permitted under a notoriously anti-European national language law enacted in 1995 .
Under this law , no radio frequency may be allocated to broadcasts in a foreign language .
The termination of BBC broadcasting has caused great disappointment among Slovak citizens , all the more for the fact that the current government has been emphasising the need to improve foreign language education , of which the BBC was a model .
Although the culture ministry too realises how absurd such regulations are , it is planning to impose stricter controls and sanctions , rather than coming up with a positive solution .
The free movement of services is one of the basic principles of the European Union , and information dissemination cannot be made conditional upon the language in which the information is conveyed .
This case proves that the language law in question does not comply with the principles of cultural and linguistic diversity or the values of the European Union .
Mr President , I wish to raise the event last week in Paris where the International Treaty to outlaw enforced disappearances by governments was opened for signature .
Fifty-seven states signed it and I congratulate them .
I regret that my own country , Ireland , was not among them .
Over 50 000 people have been disappeared by governments over the last 25 years .
Forty thousand of them are still missing and their families do not know if they are dead or alive .
It is astonishing to me that only eight EU Member States signed last week , given that it was agreed last November , following five years of negotiations and a twenty-year campaign .
There are also worrying reports that the United States and some EU Member States are going to refuse to sign this Treaty .
The reason I am raising it here , Mr President , is that I would ask you to have the Commission and the Council clarify in this House that all EU Member States are committed to this Treaty and will sign it without delay .
( HU ) The Cuban dictatorship , through the medium of its party newspaper Gramma , accused some new Member States of conspiracy against Havana .
True , the accused states , for example the Czech Republic and Poland , have often raised their voices recently on behalf of Cuban democracy .
However , their efforts can only be crowned with success if the European Union takes a united stand in defence of the island state 's democratic forces .
Even in the midst of its own reforms , the EU has to find a way to lend support to those dissenters , inside as well as outside of Cuba , who are raising their voices ever more loudly .
Indeed , the role of Europe in the world will be defined not only by its economic performance but by its commitment , expressed in actions , to the cause of freedom .
Though hundreds are still in prison for political reasons , in my opinion the Fidel Castro brand of socialist dictatorship is already on its last legs .
But for this to herald the advent of democracy , the international community , including the European Union , must stand up unambiguously for fundamental freedoms .
I would like to explain that one factor borne in mind when choosing speakers is who spoke last time .
You may be wondering why one person or another has not been called .
It always , to some small degree , works on the basis that if you got the floor last time , you do not necessarily get given it today , and so the last speaker to be called is Mr Papastamkos , who did not get the chance to speak last time .
( EL ) Mr President , five years on from the introduction of the euro , the Union is still not offering equal terms of competition , be it for credit cards or when changing banks by transferring an account to another bank or for other banking transactions .
Consumers throughout Europe are forced to bear unjustifiably high charges .
Also , charges are subject to impressive fluctuations of up to 400 % for commercial transactions on credit cards .
According to the Commission , bank charges cost European companies about EUR 25 billion a year .
The message I wish to send the Commission is about whether it intends to exercise all its powers under Community legislation , by which I mean in practice and not just with declarations of a proclamatory nature .
It is high time a single payment area was created .
That concludes this item on the agenda .
Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community ( INSPIRE ) ( debate )
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , finally , we are about to reap the rewards of more than two and a half years of sustained commitment by a huge number of people , both in the Commission and in Parliament , who firmly believe in the added value of the INSPIRE Directive for environmental policy in the European Union .
I know for a fact that this is not the sexiest issue we have ever discussed here , and given the highly technical content , everyone assumed that an agreement at first reading was on the cards .
This was , however , overlooking the fact that some Member States were dead set against any form of harmonisation of spatial environmental information , and that were , above all , also concerned about compensation and licences and saw this initiative as a threat to national monopolies .
No fewer than five Council presidencies had INSPIRE listed as a priority , but it was the Finnish Presidency that managed , during the night of 21 November 2006 , to persuade the Member States to end their resistance .
I should also like to take this opportunity of warmly thanking everyone who has done their bit to achieve this success , not least the Commissioner and his staff .
They have done much of the groundwork , in tandem with an international team of experts that has responded with particular enthusiasm , as a result of which no time has been lost .
I should also like to make a point of thanking the shadow rapporteurs and their staff , Parliament 's Legal Office , the Secretariat of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the conciliation secretariat , the Council presidency and all their staff .
Having discussed the procedure , I should now like to turn to the content .
As you know , INSPIRE seeks to set up an infrastructure for spatial information in Europe in an attempt to assist environmental policy at every level .
Everyone will be agreed that sound policy can only be adopted on the basis of information that is reliable and of the highest quality .
When drafting fresh policy measures , policy makers must allow for the fact that problems that affect today 's quality of life have become ever more intertwined and complex .
The areas to which the Sixth Environmental Programme gives attention are this reliable knowledge along with informed participation on the part of the public .
The directive that we hope to approve tomorrow sets down the objectives , and the Member States now have two years to fine-tune their national legislation and administrative procedures .
In other words , by the next European elections , INSPIRE will be a fait accompli and will be based on the existing infrastructure for spatial data of the different Member States .
After all , via a geo-portal , INSPIRE will offer Member States the opportunity of making all geographical databases available as a first step towards harmonisation .
This idea , which everyone obviously welcomes as such , was , however , the cause of heated discussions within some Member States that were anxious to protect their returns on the sale of geographical data , but also with regard to access to information , wanted to impose stricter restrictions than provided for in the Treaty of Aarhus .
It is precisely these two latter challenges that have prevented Parliament from reaching agreement with the Council at second reading .
I should like to repeat to the House that I am delighted that during the conciliation procedure , we managed to ensure that in general , services for searching and consulting spatial information must be made available free of charge .
Only if the conditions are clearly formulated can compensation be applied for so as not to jeopardise the financial viability of some government services .
As for intellectual property rights , Parliament has decided to impose the provisions of the Treaty of Aarhus concerning access to information in environmental matters to the letter and thus not to admit any stricter restrictions on the basis of confidentiality , in line with the Council 's request .
I think we have struck an honourable compromise , and I hope that tomorrow , Parliament will be supporting this agreement unanimously so that implementation can really start in the Member States .
I would like to add a brief comment about the scope of applications .
This is virtually inexhaustible once the loopholes have been plugged and inconsistencies between European geographical databases have been resolved , which at the moment , often make planning impossible and , in certain cases , even cause chaos .
The system as it stands is essential to improve and manage the water quality in Europe .
The information collected can also help prevent and control floods .
All in all , I would go so far as to say that INSPIRE is a valuable addition to existing environmental legislation in the European Union , and we will follow its transposition in the Member States from close range and with much interest .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity of congratulating you on your election to the office of president ; I am sure that you will meet all the expectations of European citizens and of those who elected you .
I shall be very brief .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my warmest thanks to the parliamentary delegation involved in the compromise proceedings with the Council on 21 November 2006 .
In particular , I should like to thank and congratulate Mr Vidal-Quadras , who headed the parliamentary delegation and , of course , the rapporteur , Mrs Brepoels , whom I should like to praise and thank in particular for her exceptional contribution to the discussions throughout the negotiations .
We have secured a sound basis on which to build an integrated infrastructure for spatial information in Europe .
We need this infrastructure for the following reasons :
First of all , good legislative arrangements are based on good information .
Good information means integrated analyses of the environmental problems we face , the reasons for them and the possible repercussions of various solutions .
These analyses depend on geographical data .
At the moment , our policy making is hampered by the fact that these data are scattered over various databases which are difficult to access .
In addition , different data storage rules are used , with the result that it is impossible to combine them with other data , which would facilitate policymaking .
I am delighted that we managed to overcome the final difficulties and reach a satisfactory result .
The Commission approves the text of the compromise unreservedly and I would like to urge Parliament to accept the good result achieved by its negotiating team .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Dimas .
Speaking personally , let me say that I am very appreciative of your good wishes and we will continue to work well together .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , first , as a member of the Conciliation Committee , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Brepoels , and the delegation chairman , Mr Vidal-Quadras , for their excellent work .
The Finnish Presidency also deserves credit for the conciliation process .
The success of the Community 's environment policy is largely dependent on the availability of scientific information and the smooth flow of such information .
So this proposal for a directive , which has come about through conciliation , and which will establish a legal framework for establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe , is a precondition for scientific evaluations carried out on the basis of environmental legislation .
At various stages of the debate on INSPIRE , the main aim was to remove some of the barriers that in particular hamper the shared use of environmental data among authorities .
In conciliation , general agreement was reached on the principles enabling authorities and other Community bodies to use cartographic and other special data within the scope of this directive and now in the possession of other authorities .
A good end result was also achieved with regard to public access to information .
In the future , a wider range of Internet services relating to the environment will be available .
These services , meant for the general public , will in most cases be free .
It will be permitted to charge for rapidly changing information , such as certain weather information services .
Even before INSPIRE , the Community used certain instruments to enable it first to promote the accessibility of reliable information , especially information on the public sector , and later on to harmonise information in order to make comparisons possible at Community level .
One of them is the Directive on Public Access to Environmental Information , for which I was rapporteur .
The problems noticed during the debate on this have been taken into account in preparing INSPIRE , and I would like to thank everyone warmly for that .
All in all , the directive will create a sound and viable basis for developing spatial information infrastructures in the European Community and making it possible to maintain quality data and services in the Member States .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) I would like firstly to congratulate Mrs Brepoels and the other Members for their work on the drawing up of this report .
I believe the result to be positive , thanks to the work of this House , which has improved it considerably , to the efforts that the Commission has made in helping us - I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Sornosa - and also , lastly , to the understanding of the Council in the Conciliation Committee .
I have absolutely no doubt about the usefulness of this proposal as a fundamental tool for drawing up , applying , monitoring and evaluating environmental policies at all levels and policies or activities which may directly or indirectly affect the environment .
Furthermore , we believe that it is appropriate to base this Community infrastructure on the spatial data infrastructures already established and managed by the Member States , in full application of the principle of subsidiarity , particularly when the Member States have several levels of public administration , as is often the case , in my country , Spain , for example .
Network services are necessary in order to share spatial data across the various levels of public authority in the Community .
Those services must make it possible to locate , process , view and download spatial data , and also to access spatial data and electronic commerce services .
This instrument must serve to exploit as far as possible the benefits and possibilities that the globalisation of data and services offer to governments , to private enterprise , to universities , to society as a whole and , most importantly , to the citizens .
I believe that it is essential because it brings us up to date with something that is already common as a result of the Internet and the information that it provides .
I also believe that it is crucial that it has been designed as an instrument for providing public information .
In this regard , we hope that INSPIRE complements public sector information and the directives on access to environmental information adopted in application of the Aarhus Convention , which we approved recently , and that it deal with a series of issues not provided for in those directives , such as the sharing of data amongst public authorities and issues of interoperability .
Finally , I must express my satisfaction with the agreement reached by the Council with regard to free-of-charge access to the service , in the majority of cases , as well as the chapter relating to the confidentiality of data , which in the end will coincide with the provisions laid down in the Aarhus Convention , on public access to information on the environment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Women in Turkey ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Bozkurt , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on women 's role in the social , economic and political life in Turkey .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in two days ' time , it will be Valentine 's Day , day of love and affection .
I could not imagine a nicer Valentine 's present for women in Turkey than the adoption , tomorrow , of the report on women 's rights .
There are 40 million women in Turkey .
They want to be given the opportunity of developing and improving their living conditions .
My report alone will not be able to bring this about , but it is a means for the women and the women 's movement in Turkey to claim their rights in respect of their husbands and their fathers , the Turkish Government , but also the European Union .
My report is building on last year 's findings .
I have taken note of what has happened since then and what has not .
Legislation , by and large , is now as it should be , even though a few things still need to be done in that area .
The second step is creating a framework in which legislation can be implemented , that is to say sufficient funds and a well-trained government apparatus , with a government that shows sufficient commitment and is not afraid of making that commitment public .
Only if the second step has been taken can we move on properly to the third step , when women notice improvement in their daily lives - a step which we have not yet reached .
People are still working very hard on step two , and that is why women are still seeing little in the way of practical improvements to date , although the government is committed .
Whilst two years ago , women 's rights were not yet really an issue , these days , Prime Minister Erdogan opens nearly every speech with it .
The different ministries too devote more attention to women 's rights .
Our report of last year has contributed to this , and we in this House should be proud of this .
There are also better government instructions to officials and police on how to deal with women 's rights .
The police and the army are being trained and memos contain clear instructions for ministries and municipalities .
These instructions , which are desperately needed , focus on blood feuds and violence against women .
Indeed , the number of sentences that have been passed with regard to blood feuds is still giving a mixed picture .
Some judges are tougher in their sentencing , while others are more lenient .
This has got to stop .
The report also contains other areas that need attention .
Fighting violence against women must be priority number one in government policy for women .
More refuge centres must be created which I intend to visit so as to monitor whether these places of safety meet the quality requirements .
This year , a committee on women 's rights and gender equality must be set up in the Turkish Parliament .
A committee of this kind is indispensable if legislation is to take real account of gender issues , and is also an important and essential interlocutor for the European Parliament and the Council of Europe 's Parliamentary Assembly .
More objective and accurate data are needed about the situation of women in Turkey , particularly in relation to violence , illiteracy and discrimination .
Fortunately , this is an area that is being addressed by Turkey and the Commission together .
Finally , there is a need for proper anti-discrimination policy if women are to be given full access to education and the labour market .
I should like to make a brief comment about one compromise amendment that has been jointly tabled by the European People 's Party , the Socialists , the Liberals and the European United Left , and about which I am sure you have received a huge number of letters .
It is about the use of the words ' Kurdish minority ' in the report .
Kurds themselves , as well as the Turkish Government , have indicated that they have difficulty accepting these words .
In order to avoid confusion , we have now decided to say that all women , irrespective of their race , language , origin , religion or political persuasion , must have access to women 's rights programmes .
In this light , I would urge you to support the compromise amendment .
Ladies and gentlemen , 2007 will be an important test for Turkey to see how seriously this country is taking women 's emancipation .
That country has parliamentary elections coming up in November .
Far too few women are taking part in politics at the moment .
It is not that they are not there .
Only two weeks ago , I spoke with women of nearly all political parties , but their names are not yet included in the electoral lists .
How Turkey solves this , is up to Turkey . If , however , the political participation of women does not increase , then Turkey will not be able to say that it did not know what to do .
The report contains suggestions , including temporary measures of positive discrimination .
Temporary , because I am convinced that once women become more visible in politics , this will have a snowball effect .
Girls need role models so that they can see that they too may be able to carve out a career in politics .
I am hopeful for women in Turkey .
The country is moving in the right direction , but should not backpedal .
This is why I would make a plea for accelerating the implementation of reforms , and also for actually carrying them out .
The accession negotiations with the EU can work as a catalyst in this respect .
I hope that our report will be able to do its bit .
I would like to thank you all for your support in advance .
I am persuaded that the women in Turkey will also be indebted to you .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , first , I would like to congratulate Parliament and you , Mrs Bozkurt , on the report .
It is an accurate and carefully balanced description of the situation as regards women 's rights in Turkey and it is also a valuable contribution to the debate on women 's role in the social , political and economic life of the country .
There has indeed been progress in the area of women 's rights : legislation has been passed ; an Advisory Board on the Status of Women has been established ; an official circular has been issued by the Prime Minister , instructing the administration to deal with domestic violence ; a joint EU-Turkey project is setting up a database on violence against women ; and the ' Let 's go to school , girls ' campaign has resulted in the enrolment of 177 000 girls in school .
All this is positive and is acknowledged in the report .
However , we also very much share your concerns as regards women 's rights in Turkey .
Women 's participation in the labour market , political representation of women , education for girls and violence against women are areas of main concern and we concur with the thrust of the analysis and recommendations of the report .
Low levels of participation by women and low employment rates , together with the large size of the informal economy , represent a major employment policy challenge .
We also agree that political participation by women in Turkey is dramatically low and that important efforts have to be made to deal with this issue .
In addition , we cannot agree more with the importance education has for the economic independence of women .
You will know that gender equality is a major theme in the context of the political criteria .
That is why the Commission follows all these issues closely as part of its regular monitoring .
We also cover them in the context of the negotiations .
We report regularly on the situation in the annual progress reports .
Inadequacies are also raised in our bilateral monitoring meetings with the Turkish authorities .
In the framework of our pre-accession assistance , the Commission also funds a number of projects aimed at promoting women 's rights .
Particular emphasis is given to violence against women .
In 2007 we will support the establishment of eight shelters for women who have been subject to domestic violence .
Gender equality is also given a high priority within the civil society dialogue between the EU and Turkey .
This dialogue aims at improving mutual knowledge and understanding .
Several projects have already been funded , including some involving women 's NGOs .
The Commission will continue to promote actively non-discrimination against women in all areas of life .
This will include future projects .
We will also continue to encourage civil society initiatives aimed at increasing public awareness , such as the ' Stop the Violence Against Women ' campaign .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to our rapporteur for her work , and I welcome the lively and fruitful debate that took place within the committee responsible on women 's role in the social , economic and political life in Turkey .
I should like to make three points in connection with this debate .
Firstly , there is still some misunderstanding in terms of the difference between the simple act of debating the role of women in Turkey and that of concluding from the debate whether Turkey can or cannot join the European Union .
This merging of the two does not help us to focus on the role of women in Turkey , which is an issue in itself .
In this House , we regularly debate the role of women in Afghanistan , the Maghreb and Africa , without Afghanistan , the Maghreb or Africa necessarily being called on to become members of the European Union .
The same applies to Turkey .
From this perspective , I also call on our counterpart from the Council of Europe to demonstrate responsibility and to conduct a dialogue with Turkey as a Member State of the Council of Europe .
I call on my fellow Members to continue to focus on the role of women in Turkey .
We , as women , represent added value for the common good of society ; we bring about peace , we have knowledge to share and a special kind of wisdom to pass on , wherever we are , including in Turkey .
Secondly , the debate on the role of women in Turkey reminds the EU Member States of their own responsibilities .
How can we lecture Turkey when we are incapable of fulfilling our duties in our own countries ?
We will only be able to criticise Turkey when we are ready to criticise ourselves .
So let us not pretend to sermonise .
Thirdly , we cannot tackle the situation of women by disregarding the role of men .
The fact is that no one dares mention this obvious fact which , politically-speaking , is a very accurate one , but men also have a very important role to play where gender equality is concerned .
During our meeting in Istanbul , Prime Minister Erdogan clearly confirmed his opposition to violence against women .
I called on him to express himself publicly on this matter and to set a good example to Turkish men .
It is not enough to be deeply convinced that violence is not a solution ; he has to say it out loud , bolstered by his political reputation .
That is why I am repeating my call to Mr Erdogan from this Chamber .
Take a public stand against violence against women , including in your country .
Mr Erdogan , set a good example of which men can be proud ; we can then take a step forward together and improve the situation of women in your country .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to say ' thank you ' to Mrs Bozkurt for having now presented the second report on behalf of the women 's committee and for her very judicious and expert approach to the subject .
The possibility of Turkey joining the European Union means that we in this House must give pride of place to respect for human rights - and in this specific instance women 's rights as an integral element in them - as an indispensable precondition for its accession .
Speaking as a member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I see three great blocks on which work is urgently needed .
The first is education and the world of work ; the unfortunate fact is that the presence of women on the labour market has decreased from 35 % in 1998 to 25 % today , even though there are hopeful signs in some areas - in the number of women practising as lawyers and physicians , for instance - but , if the Lisbon Strategy 's targets , which include 60 % participation of women in the labour market , are to be met , none of this fits together , and , if Turkey wants to be a candidate , it has to be well aware of that .
Education is a key to bringing about development and change ; unfortunately , particularly in eastern Turkey , a very large number of women are still excluded from it , and 25 % of them are still illiterate .
More also needs to be done - and as a matter of urgency - where the combating of violence is concerned .
Mr Erdoğan has committed himself to more being done on this front , but that is far from enough ; the establishment of women 's refuges would be another step in the right direction , and the public debate on violence against women and ' honour crimes ' must go on .
Finally , I have an appeal to make in relation to the Turkish elections ; it is that there has to be discussion of quotas if Turkey is to continue to make progress .
The existing level of women 's participation in parliamentary life - 4 % at the national level and 1 % in the municipalities - is unsustainable , so urgent action , including such things as a quota system , needs to be taken to deal with this , and that will do a great service not only to women but also to cooperation between Europe and Turkey .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we are , today , discussing the situation of Turkish women , making recommendations and suggestions to Turkey , making demands of it and insisting that it make changes .
This report by Mrs Bozkurt is a good one ; it will move democracy forward and help to improve the conditions under which Turkish women live , yet all the things that we , this week , are enjoining on Turkey as it seeks accession are things that we would do well to act on ourselves .
Let us , then , once and for all , stop denying fundamental rights to an ethnic group here in Europe .
Let us enable them to put forward their demands and claims here in this House .
Let us , at last , allow them to trade with the EU and with the rest of the world .
Let us allow them to attend schools and universities legally , and let us recognise their qualifications .
Let us allow them to participate in European sporting events .
Let us do away with this discrimination within the EU .
You will be aware of whom I am talking ; I am talking about an ethnic group that , in 2004 , and by an overwhelming majority , said ' yes ' to the European Union and sought reunion with the other ethnic group in their homeland , and whose isolation we then promised to end .
I am talking about the Turks in Cyprus .
What is the winning card up the European Union 's sleeve ?
What is that thing of which we are rightly particularly proud ?
It is that the European Community is a peace-building project .
How is it that we can become so indifferent as to look away when an EU Member State has serious problems with getting two ethnic groups to live together peacefully , when it needs UN troops and is over-militarised and full to bursting with soldiers and weaponry ?
If Christian and Muslim cultures cannot manage to co-exist in Cyprus , how is that going to be possible in the far more complicated structure of the European Union ?
The EU is losing credibility by being insufficiently committed to addressing its own problems .
It cannot be united in peace for as long as Cyprus remains a divided island .
Let us help not only the women of Turkey , but also the Turkish women of Cyprus , to avail themselves of their rights .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must congratulate the rapporteur on the well-structured report that she has presented to us .
It is a document that addresses subjects of prime importance and highlights the status of women in Turkey and hence in the European Union .
Many people say that the progress made by that country on its journey towards EU accession should be judged first on respect for human rights and then on equal rights for men and women .
We agree with that , but I believe that women should gain equal rights in Turkey regardless of any aspiration to join the European Union .
This is an issue that lies at the basis of any modern , democratic country , but unfortunately , in this context , the European Union is not particularly well qualified to stand up as a champion of safeguards and rights .
The rapporteur specifically points to the extreme scarcity of Turkish women in positions of power , and item 41 suggests that adopting a mandatory quota system would be a short-term remedy .
I remain sceptical : if the quota system has proved ineffective for us in the European Union , why should it ever work in Turkey ?
I have two contrasting reactions to the approach taken in the report : on the one hand , I am pleased to see that there is no reference to cases of torture or of excessive policing during demonstrations , but on the other I am concerned to note that a great many problems like female illiteracy and honour crimes are still worryingly common .
I am afraid that the time to put them right is still a long way off , much further off in fact than any optimistic prediction .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mrs Bozkurt for her report , which described the situation of women in Turkey very well .
Even two years on from its first publication , and despite the small amount of progress that has been made , I see that there are still serious deficits as regards the equality of women and men in Turkey .
The problem lies mainly in the high level of illiteracy , which stands at 25 % , rising as far as 40 % in some regions - and the still very small number of women in decision-making positions at local and national level .
What I find even more appalling , though , is the continuing violence against women .
Mrs Bozkurt rightly takes a critical line in her report on the regrettable and continuing lack of exact data on this , and what I find disconcerting in this regard is the fact that , in Turkey , which has a population of 70 million people , there are no more than thirty women 's refuges , even though Turkish law requires that a refuge for victims of violence be set up in communities with over 50 000 residents .
As regards honour killings , one gets the impression that the number of them has decreased since the penalty was made tougher , but I cannot dispel my own concern that the increased incidence of suicide in some regions might well conceal honour killings .
The Turkish Government cannot - it must not - stand idly by and let these things happen .
It must compile reliable data and set up women 's centres offering women facing the threat of violence not only protection but also emotional support .
That is the only way to offer women and girls , from the very outset , the prospect , most of all , of coming out unscathed from a situation that appears to be hopeless .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the report on the role of women in the social , economic and political life of Turkey calls for a more effective implementation of community concepts as regards the equality and rights of women .
At the present stage , however , it is obvious that the great diversity of the European Union means that many of its recommendations have not had the desired effect and create various conflicts as well as being - contrary to the slogans - a denial of freedom .
There are huge cultural as well as religious and moral differences between the two societies , which is why it would be more relevant to give Turkish women the tools to resolve their own problems in their own way , rather than imposing a mindset and solutions on them that are alien to their traditions and culture .
Our Community is based on the principles of dignity and freedom of nations , as set out in countless documents , and our task should be to provide support to combat poverty and violence and to promote education , rather than imposing an alien world outlook on the Turks , which in itself constitutes coercion of the kind the European Union supposedly does not tolerate .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , although the legal situation of women in Turkey has improved to some degree , we are a long way from being able to talk in terms of success .
If one considers how things work in practice and the attitudes of the broad majority of the population , it is at once clear that most of these improvements have been accomplished only on paper .
In theory , for example , domestic violence - which statistics show is frequently resorted to - now constitutes grounds for divorce , yet the incidence of divorce is lower in Turkey than in many other developing countries .
In what sense can the rule of law be said to apply when the state discontinues prosecutions when the suspect objects to them , and when women under threat only very rarely get protection from the police ?
What is the point of making improvements to laws , when court rulings take them to absurd conclusions ?
I also believe that the high level of illiteracy among women , and the high incidence of forced marriage , not to mention the increasing number of honour killings disguised as suicide , speak volumes , and , in the event of the poorly educated women losing their jobs - in which they may well work under conditions analogous to those of slavery - they do not even appear in the official statistics .
This falsification of the unemployment rate and the consequent threat of large-scale migration is reason enough for the EU to step on the emergency brake , for the way women are treated in Turkish society and their position in it constitute , as I see it , yet more proof that Turkey is not a European country and will never become one .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I will begin with a word of apology for my late arrival , since I was detained in a meeting of the coordinators of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I very much welcome the report put forward by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality under the guidance of Mrs Bozkurt , for it is even-handed and constructive , highlighting not only the progress achieved on women 's issues but also the deficits that still remain , and spelling out the need for continued and consistent progress down the road of reform on which Turkey has set foot .
Turkey 's Prime Minister , Mr Erdoğan , would therefore be well advised - despite having many elections to fight - to press on with the gender justice policy and encourage women to work independently .
The report gives a good overview of the role of Turkish women in their country 's social , economic and political life .
It is good that measures are being planned to combat violence against women , among them the initiative to prevent violence during military service or training in the police force .
The principal exponent of this approach is the Turkish Minister for Women , and it is an important and good one , for it is only by means of initiatives such as these that attitudes can be changed - and they need to be .
Mr Erdoğan 's decree in response to the Turkish parliament 's report on violence against women and killings on the alleged grounds of honour and morals is another move in the right direction , in that it incorporates many different aspects of policy on women 's issues and instructs all ministries , public institutions and local authorities to be consistent in counteracting violence against women .
It must be said , though , that it now has to be followed up by binding and specific instructions on how to implement this , which have still not yet been forthcoming , for his circular will remain a toothless tiger for as long as there are no specific details of how to implement the necessary measures or proper sanctions against the event of them not being put into effect .
The most recent experience gained in the combating of violence against women indicates just how important it is that such public bodies as the courts , the administration , the police or the health authorities should be involved in it , for , here too , a change of thinking is urgently needed ; it has been a too frequent occurrence that women seeking protection have been turned away by the authorities and fallen victim to domestic violence , and that is why we are urging the Turkish government to afford women affected by violence all the protection they need and , where public institutions fail to protect its victims , to set in motion a judicial inquiry and cause those responsible to be prosecuted .
State institutions must also work more closely with independent women 's organisations and support the latter financially .
Mr President , this debate is not really about women in Turkey .
Turkey had a female Head of Government 14 years ago .
Eighteen of the 27 Members of the EU have not yet reached this landmark .
Yet that does not stop this Chamber from hectoring Ankara about women 's political representation .
No , this report is really about Turkey 's membership bid .
It demands , for example , that Kurdish women 's groups be explicitly recognised as such : a deliberate provocation to Ankara , which has long maintained that all Turkish citizens are equal before the Constitution .
Once again the bar is being set higher for Turkey than for any past applicant .
We hector the Turks in the most importunate manner about Cyprus , about the status of minorities , about the Armenian massacre .
We damn them either way .
If they repress signs of Islamic devotion , we call them authoritarian .
If they do not , we call them fundamentalists .
The truth is that there are many in this House who are determined , in Gladstone 's infamous phrase , to ' turn the Turk , bag and baggage , out of Europe ' .
Their real concern is not about human rights .
It is that the accession of a populous , proud and assertive Muslim country would retard their dream of a federation , of a country called Europe .
Although I do not share their position , I recognise that it is a legitimate point of view .
But it would have been better for all concerned had Brussels been honest , had it said ' no ' at the outset and then settled down to work out an amicable bilateral relationship .
Instead we shall string Turks along for perhaps another ten or fifteen years , wring painful concessions from them on foreign and domestic policy , force them to assimilate tens of thousands of pages of the acquis communautaire and then , only then , turn them away .
This is no way to treat an allied nation , colleagues , a nation that guarded Europe 's flags for a half a century against the totalitarianism of the Soviet Union and whom we may look to one day to do the same against the totalitarianism of the religious fanatics .
Turks are as entitled as any other people to their pride .
By abusing them in this manner the EU risks creating the very thing it purports to fear : the rise of anti-western sentiment among a people who have long been our friends .
( HU ) It is extremely important for Turkey 's system of democratic institutions to be further strengthened , achieving those reforms which promote European integration .
A report of the European Parliament at the end of last year noted the slowing down of the reform process , and gave special emphasis to the fact that there is insufficient progress in guaranteeing women 's rights .
It is unacceptable that Turkish women suffer discrimination in nearly every area of life : in the labour market , in decision-making and in education , and that they experience considerable disadvantages in comparison with their male counterparts .
Rights guaranteed by law are of no use if their implementation in practice is not ensured .
The political will of the Turkish Government can best ensure implementation of these rights .
For this to happen , a social dialogue is necessary , involving organisations of civil society .
Information campaigns would be the most effective way of drawing society 's attention to guaranteeing the rights of women .
The continued violence against women is shocking , and is unacceptable in a country which seeks to adopt the basic principles of European integration .
It is the task of the Turkish Government to find suitable instruments for solving this shameful problem and for gradually phasing it out .
To this end , the European Union can offer help by sharing the experiences of its programmes and best practices .
I am hopeful that Turkey is willing to accept a helping hand , and will truly take action to tackle this problem .
I thank my fellow Member Mrs Bozkurt for her work , for the report is excellent and I recommend its adoption .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Bozkurt wholeheartedly for her excellent and important report , one which I feel is even more important because it comes from a brave European woman of Turkish origin who knows and understands the special circumstances and norms of a Turkish , Islamic , partly secular and partly fundamentalist society .
Looking back many years ago , women in Turkish society were regarded more as objects than human beings .
They have suffered enormously and it is only in recent years that this sad situation is beginning to be remedied .
But although steps have been taken in the right direction , there is still very much that needs to be done .
It is my view in fact that progress is not as much as we would have hoped for .
Indeed , in large parts of Turkey , especially in the south-east , women are still treated as second-class citizens and are grossly discriminated against .
Illiteracy amongst Turkish women is at record levels for a European-orientated country .
Additionally , the degree and extent of violence against women is still unacceptably high and unfortunately is in many cases accepted as the norm by large sections of Turkish society .
The despicable criminal and offensive activity of honour killings still happens only too regularly in Turkish villages and cities .
It is true that the Turkish Government is making some efforts to correct matters .
For example , much attention has been focused recently on better education for women and on educating the police and the judiciary in order to deal more appropriately with violence against women .
A country-wide information campaign and stricter implementation of the law are taking place , but are not having the desired effect , because drastic changes also have to happen at a core political level .
Prime Minister Erdogan himself recently drew attention to the ' deep state ' in Turkey that is opposing his Government 's reforms and is fighting against parliamentary democracy .
This deep state , supported mainly by the army and other extreme nationalist elements , is impeding progress in Turkey - and incidentally , Mrs Resetarits - is keeping Turkish Cypriots isolated and Cyprus divided .
Such forces do not want liberated women equal in all respects to men .
It is our duty to support this report and bring liberation to Turkish women .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , apart from being clear , this report by my fellow Member , Mrs Bozkurt , has the great virtue of summarising the sad reality of women 's rights in Turkey .
Indeed , despite all the declarations of intent from the Turkish authorities and the pseudo-reforms undertaken in the area of human rights , the reality is that domestic violence , honour crimes and forced marriages keep increasing , and that discrimination against women in the workplace and in education still goes on .
However , this finding should not make us forget that , while it is true that these violations of women 's rights are incompatible with the concept of human rights , as they are laid down , for example , in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the fact remains that Turkey is not European and that its future should not lie in the European Union .
Indeed , even when it turns out that all the economic , legal and social criteria laid down at the Copenhagen Summit have been met , Turkey , 99 % of whose population is made up of Muslims and 94 % of whose territory is located in Asia , will still not share our values , which bear the stamp of Christianity and humanism .
Turkey is a beautiful country , a great country , with a courageous , proud and hospitable people .
We should , of course , preserve the privileged relations that we already maintain with Turkey as part of the customs Union , but Turkey cannot and must not under any circumstances join the European Union .
( PT ) Mr President , the process of assessing Turkey 's compliance with the EU 's accession criteria involves frequent evaluation of the progress that has been made , not least on human rights .
In this context , Mrs Bozkurt 's excellent report places great emphasis on how the situation of women in Turkey is evolving , for which the rapporteur deserves commendation .
I should like to highlight a few of the report 's recommendations : incentives for the social partners to promote the involvement of women in social dialogue , calling on the Turkish authorities to establish a monitoring system to keep girls in the education system , a quota system operational in various countries - from the Iberian Peninsula to Scandinavia - to guarantee fair representation for women on electoral lists , instructions for judges to deliver severe sentences for ' honour crimes ' and forced marriages , a campaign to promote the image of women as players driving economic and social development , and the inclusion of the social partners and some NGOs in the Advisory Board on the Status of Women .
Mrs Bozkurt 's report is thus an excellent contribution to progress in assessing the situation of women in Turkey .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must take this opportunity to tell you that there can be progress on the situation of women throughout Europe .
Yesterday in Portugal , the Portuguese people voted in a referendum to decriminalise the voluntary termination of pregnancy .
This was a great day for Portugal , and an absolutely marvellous day for women .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was probably not the rapporteur 's intention , but there is actually no denying that the Bozkurt report is yet another illustration of the fact that Turkey simply does not belong in Europe .
Indeed , it is wrong to think that Turkey is simply a country where a couple of things need fixing and that everything can be solved with a few new laws and rules or with the absorption of some tens of thousands of pages of acquis communautaire , whereupon a new European Member State is allegedly created .
This is absurd .
First of all , Europeans are people who live within a very specific geographical European framework , and that framework does not include Turkey .
In addition , Europeans are also people who form part of a very defined community of law and a community of values , which comprises , among others , gender equality .
Other areas that play a role are culture , mentality and even religion , when this religion , as is the case with Islam , is not restricted to internal perception but wants to impose its outdated and , in many cases , totally reprehensible rules on the whole of the community .
Returning to the subject of this report , I would say that Turkey is without a doubt the most modern Islamic country , but it remains , where women 's rights are concerned , a backwater .
Indeed , it is an Islamic country , where women are deemed inferior , something which will not improve as Islamicisation gains ground ; quite the reverse .
Let us therefore stop treating the symptoms , rather than the cause , which is the fact that Turkey may well be a neighbouring country , but can never become a European one .
( PL ) Mr President , the lack of female involvement in Turkey 's social , economic and political life is mainly the result of a lack of proper access to education .
While appreciating the changes that have been made , it needs to be said that there is still a high level of illiteracy among girls and women in Turkey .
Estimates provided by UNICEF show that every year between 600 000 and 800 000 Turkish girls do not attend school because their families forbid it or because just getting to school is difficult .
However , Turkish women face other problems as well .
Violence against women is common , and honour killings as well as forced marriages violate the fundamental human right to make one 's own decisions about one 's life .
In some parts of south-eastern Turkey , girls are not even registered at birth , as a result of which they are deprived of rights such as access to education or health services .
Women play a very small role in Turkey 's political life , and the Turkish parliament does not have a permanent committee on women 's rights and equality .
The Turkish Government must implement women 's rights legislation as soon as possible so that those rights can be effectively implemented in practice .
Public institutions such as the courts , the police and the health system must guarantee to protect and afford all assistance to women reporting violence against them .
The social partners should also play an important role by promoting the rights of women and organising debates or courses to promote the image of women as equal citizens of Turkey with an important role to play in their country 's economic and political life .
Finally I would like to congratulate Mrs Bozkurt on her important report , which I hope will contribute to further positive changes in the situation of women in Turkey .
( ES ) I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Bozkurt on her work and on her monitoring of the situation of women in Turkey .
Thanks to her good work , the issue of women 's rights is being treated on a par with other policies .
I believe that you are making history in that regard , Mrs Bozkurt .
Congratulations !
As someone who has been closely following this process , your first report , the extremely interesting working meetings that a delegation of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality held in Istanbul and Ankara , and now this second report , I must say that I agree with you that we must now ensure that the legislation on women 's rights is not revoked .
Although the improvement in the legislation in this field has , generally speaking , been a success , it is urgent that we create the appropriate environment to make it possible for the legislative reforms to be applied .
It is very difficult to carry on making progress if the important changes introduced into the legislation are not implemented in practice .
Women must be able to see their situation improve in their daily lives .
It is not just a question of their having rights , but also of their being able to complain in practice when they are not respected .
Only by speeding up the practical application of the legislative reforms throughout the territory will we be able to ensure that the new legislation on women 's rights is maintained .
I would also like to stress that the Turkish authorities ' willingness to tackle cases of violence against women and to accept the use of positive action measures with a view to combating gender inequalities is particularly significant .
I would finally like to highlight the government 's willingness to hold dialogue and to better coordinate with women 's organisations active in the field of gender equality , and therefore the rapporteur 's request that the European Commission provide support in order to facilitate that cooperation seems to me to be highly appropriate .
Congratulations once again , Mrs Bozkurt .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament for this discussion and the Members for their remarks .
I think we can all agree that despite recent positive developments , the situation concerning women 's rights in Turkey needs to be improved .
While progress has been made towards improving legislation , implementation remains a challenge and needs to be speeded up .
We are now looking forward to further positive developments and hope that the work of the European Parliament and the Commission will support this process .
Last but not least , I would like to underline the importance of the participation of civil society in this effort .
I shall briefly mention some figures which might be of interest to you .
This is in relation to the funds allocated by the Commission .
Combating domestic violence against women : EUR 2.968 million .
Strengthening civil society in the pre-accession process : EUR 2.5 million .
Establishing shelters for women subjected to domestic violence : EUR 8.5 million .
Through these and many other activities the Commission will continue to support that which is focused upon in this report .
Let me once again express my gratitude to the rapporteur for the excellent work which has been done .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.05 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Inaugural address by the President of the European Parliament
Former Presidents of the European Parliament , Madam Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel , President of the European Council , Mr Barroso , President of the Commission , Mr van der Linden , President of the Assembly of the Council of Europe , Presidents and representatives of the European institutions , honoured guests , and , above all , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the European Parliament , electing a new President every two and a half years - a short time by historical standards - has been the tradition of the European Parliament since its first direct elections in June 1979 , but let us not forget that one President of the European Parliament lives through five European Council Presidencies - in this case Germany , followed by Portugal , Slovenia , France and the Czech Republic - and so the responsibility borne by our Parliament is self-evident , particularly at this time when the task of uniting Europe has come a long way , but is not yet complete and indeed , given the current failure of the constitutional process in France and the Netherlands , is still in danger .


Being aware of this responsibility , the European Parliament cannot allow itself to be outdone by anybody when it comes to completing this task of unifying our continent .
( Applause )
We all live within a continuum including those who went before us and those who will come after , and so I would like to thank my predecessor , Mr Josep Borrell Fontelles , most warmly and sincerely on behalf of the whole European Parliament and , in particular , also on a personal level , for his great commitment and indefatigable work as our President over the past two and a half years !
( Applause )
I also extend warm and sincere thanks to the former Presidents who are with us today :
Mr Emilio Colombo , President of Parliament in the days before it was directly elected , and then his post-1979 successors Mrs Simone Veil , Lord Plumb , also known as Henry Plumb , Mr Enrique Barón Crespo , who is still with us here , Mr Egon Klepsch , Mr Klaus Hänsch , who is still an MEP , Mr José-María Gil-Robles , Mrs Nicole Fontaine and Mr Pat Cox .
( Vigorous applause )
I extend a very warm welcome to all of you .
It is a cause of great joy to us that you have all accepted the invitation to be here .
Mr Pierre Pflimlin and Mr Piet Dankert are no longer with us .
We remember them with gratitude .
I share with Mr Klaus Hänsch , Mr Ingo Friedrich , Mr Karl von Wogau , Mr Francis Wurtz and Mr Jens-Peter Bonde the privilege of having been a Member of the European Parliament since its first elections in 1979 .
Since then we have lived through highs and lows in European politics .
The greatest success has been overcoming the division of Europe .
Our shared values have prevailed .
The accession to the European Union of the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Slovakia and Slovenia - and of Cyprus and Malta - on 1 May 2004 , and of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January this year , together with the reunification of Germany on 3 October 1990 , remain for me the miracle of this generation .
We all have reason to be extremely happy about this , now as always .
( Applause )
We all , however , still have to learn from each other and to strengthen our respect and understanding for each other .
We should stop talking about the ' old ' and the ' new ' Member States .
All of us , together , constitute the European Parliament , and the nations that we represent are the community of the European Union .
( Applause )
In the 1980s , there was talk of ' Eurosclerosis ' .
Then , however , along came the single market and the single European currency .
We in this House fought to secure our rights , and will continue to do so .
Today this Parliament is influential and self-confident .
Experience , then , teaches us that we can win successes for Europe when we want them ourselves , when our will to achieve unity for our continent while maintaining its diversity remains strong and determined .
I would like , today , to ask you all to continue in this determination .
We shall only succeed in this , though , if the citizens of the European Union - alongside their attachment to home and their own country - understand and are aware , as Europeans , of what binds them to one another .
A sense of community and a sense of being ' us ' are necessary conditions for our shared future .
European unification is not simply a desire dictated by our minds ; European unification is also an affair of the heart .
Making this clear to people is perhaps the greatest challenge that we must meet together .
What we have to do is to serve the citizens of the European Union .
Europeans should be proud of what they have achieved by their labours over the centuries in terms of values , freedom , law and democracy .
It has been a long haul .
We know that our European roots lie in Greek philosophy , Roman law , the Judeo-Christian heritage , the Enlightenment - in other words , in our shared European culture .
Together with those , though , there have also been tragic European civil wars , and in the 20th century the totalitarian ideologies , with their contempt for humanity , and then , in 1945 , the courage of the founding fathers in following the path of forgiveness and reconciliation , in building a new , better , more peaceful , shared Europe .
We should still remember this today , and rediscover the things that are common to us all .
The great French European Jacques Delors followed Robert Schuman in speaking of the ' European soul ' .
The great Polish European Władysław Bartoszewski once said : ' Europe means above all else freedom of the individual and human rights - both political and economic ' .
They were both right .
I would like to talk about European values .
They are , in essence , founded upon the idea of human dignity .
It is in the dignity of the individual that we respect the other , place ourselves under obligations , and thus build a system based on responsibility and solidarity .
In our practical political activities we should always serve the cause of human dignity , and I would like to encourage all of us to defend that , and human rights throughout the world .
That is not an abstract plea .
We are not the world 's teachers , but our humanitarian image and our values become more convincing to others if we live our own lives with credibility .
This has very concrete implications for our policies :
we want partnership with a Russia that is democratic and capable of action , and so we expect the Russian authorities to make visible efforts to ensure that the murderers of Ana Politkovskaya , who did so much for press freedom in her country , are punished appropriately .
( Applause )
We shall never forget that without the United States of America neither National Socialism nor Soviet communism could have been vanquished , but we also have to say to our American friends that Guantánamo is incompatible with any legal order founded upon our European principles .
( Applause )
We protect human life .
If anyone - as , for example the President of a nation with a great history of civilisation has done - denies the Holocaust , we will firmly repudiate such assertions in order to ensure that the horror of a new holocaust is not visited upon us .
( Applause )
It is our conviction that the people of Israel and Palestine are linked by their common human dignity .
We therefore support equally the right of Israel to exist and the right of the Palestinian people to live in a State of their own .
( Applause )
We stand alongside those who are fighting peacefully for freedom and democracy , and that explains our solidarity with the Sakharov Prize winner Alexander Milinkevich and his fellow fighters for a democratic Belarus free from fear and oppression .
We stand in the same solidarity with our other Sakharov Prize winners , ' Las Damas de Blanco ' ( The Ladies in White ) in Cuba and Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma / Myanmar .
We defend human dignity and human rights .
We , in the European Parliament , are utterly convinced that the death penalty is irreconcilable with these .
I urge us all , the institutions of the European Union and the Member States , to stand up , the United Nations , for the abolition of the death penalty .
If we want to achieve our goals , we must continue to work on building a European Union that is capable of action .
We must endow ourselves with a constitution that ensures that we can represent our values and interests in Europe and as a respected partner in the world .
The great speech given by Louise Weiss on 17 July 1979 , here in Strasbourg , in her capacity as Oldest Member of the first directly elected European Parliament still rings in my ears .
She said : ' In any event , let us never forget that we are heirs and executors at one and the same time : the heirs of an intellectual world and its executors for the benefit of coming generations '
I cannot put it better myself .
Our feelings today are scarcely any different from those expressed in 1979 and yet at the same time we live in a world of new challenges that are peculiarly our own .
The idea of uniting Europe has for the most part been carried through successfully since the signing of the Treaty of Rome 50 years ago .
It has become the outward expression of one of the happiest periods in our long European history .
To begin with , after the Second World War , the idea of Europe drew its strength from the desire for peace and freedom .
Then strengthening prosperity and achieving social equality became the tasks and motivations for European union .
In both ideas Europe remained true to itself , as the unifying of our continent afforded a unique opportunity for the two halves of the continent , which had been divided for far too long , to grow together in freedom .
Today , Europe is motivated by its citizens ' desire for security , and is respected by them on that account .
This is our very serious concern , thrust upon us , unasked for but unavoidable , by the need to combat terrorism .
For this we need answers to the questions that weigh heavily on the minds of our citizens .
The need for security also includes the task of providing employment and social protection in a rapidly changing world .
We cannot make ourselves safe from globalisation .
We must construct a cushion by strengthening our competitiveness while retaining the European social model .
It includes not just talking about the dramatic change in climate , but taking the necessary measures - together with our partners in the world - and enforcing them with determination , before it is too late .
Security involves such things as a shared supply of energy and a common immigration policy that takes as much account of human rights as of the need for integration in our society .
We must not allow people to go on dying in the waters of the Mediterranean .
We cannot find the security we seek in a world that is going up in flames , in which people live in poverty and subject to social pressure , a world in which disorder prevails and in which the natural environment continues to be destroyed .
If we in Europe wish to live in security , we must commit ourselves as a partner to every aspect of the world 's security , and we must be aware of the fact that , without European solutions , most of the challenges faced by this continent and the world can no longer be met .
Paradoxical though it may seem at first sight , Europe 's unity has always been strengthened by crises .
I am not saying that we need crises because we are incapable of extracting good results from good circumstances .
The European Union needs a new departure , a renewal .
The road is a hard one ; that is true , but I am firmly convinced that our continent is better equipped today for its future in the world of the 21st century than it was 15 or 20 years ago .
We ourselves shall be judged on how well we set the newly achieved European unity on a lastingly good and safe path .
Politicians , such as ourselves , are expected to exercise leadership ; we must give better reasons than we have so far for why Europe is good for us all , what added value European union brings and what the aims of our efforts are .
We must overcome the impression that European policies only have a technical function , with no long-term goal or enduring meaning .
We must persuade by what we do , and if we are to do that , we must concentrate on essentials .
It is our common task to prepare for the future in such a sustainable way that it is as safe as humans can make it for our children and our grandchildren .
For this we need to make a new start , for a better Europe , a stronger Europe , a Europe that looks to the future .
Above all , though , we need a Europe that believes in itself , that draws its strength from its values and that wants to , and can , be a good partner in the world .
Without the media we cannot convey Europe to the public .
I would like specifically to thank the correspondents and journalists here in Strasbourg for their fair and objective reporting , but I appeal to the national media , particularly the television channels , whether private or public , to play their part in relations with the European public .
It is no longer appropriate to the times to portray European union only from a national perspective .
I ask the national broadcasting corporations to open their studios to European themes and to invite Members of the European Parliament there as guests to talk about them .
( Applause )
We need a new pact between the citizens of Europe and their political institutions in the European Union .
The ' Citizens ' Europe ' and the credibility of the European institutions depend upon each other .
The ' Better Lawmaking ' programme can make a contribution to this if it achieves more democratic oversight , transparency in the Council , reliable transposition into national law , social , environmental , economic and administrative impact assessment , and simplification of the legal texts .
When planning a piece of European legislation , we should always ask ourselves : Does it serve people and the environment ?
Is it necessary in the light of the subsidiarity principle ?
Does it make us more competitive ?
Does it reduce red tape and costs ?
Only if these questions can be answered in the affirmative should we , the legislators in the European Parliament , go into action .
We , the European Parliament , should not only be at pains to represent citizens ' interests .
We should also show our respect for the dedication of European citizens who by their work are raising Europe 's profile - in Europe and in the world .
We should introduce a European Parliament award for that .
Why , too , for that matter , should we not also pay particular honour to commitment on the part of young people to the European idea ?
High-ranking European awards have had such a good effect on public awareness , why do we not create awards for the younger generation , for young Europeans who are showing exemplary dedication to the European ideal ?
In national museums , European history is nearly always represented in purely national terms .
I would like to suggest a locus for history and for the future , where the concept of the European idea can continue to grow .
I would like to suggest the founding of a ' House of European History ' .
It should not be a dry , boring museum , but a place where our memory of European history and the work of European unification is jointly cultivated , and which at the same time is available as a locus for the European identity to go on being shaped by present and future citizens of the European Union .
A ' House of European History ' such as this should be established in the seat of the European institutions and should network with comparable foundations in the Member States .
The ' Declaration on the Future of Europe ' , to be adopted jointly by the European Council , the European Parliament and the European Commission on 25 March 2007 in Berlin - an event over which you , Mrs Merkel , will preside - could create the conditions for this .
The European Union is the largest grouping of nations in the world , consisting of 27 nations with almost 500 million citizens .
Europe is a complex continent , one that presents us with enormous challenges , and the European Union can no longer be governed by the instruments of current Treaty law , which have become inadequate .
If our community of values is to endure , it needs fundamental reform .
The Constitutional Treaty strengthens both the European Parliament and the national parliaments , strengthening both parliamentary life and democracy .
Communal self-administration as the basis of our European democratic order is recognised for the first time .
The distribution of powers defines European competencies .
I will be quite frank in saying that I say to you quite openly that I do not understand people who on the one hand criticise ' Brussels ' - and sometimes that is just as justified as it is to criticise national politics - but at the same time reject the Constitutional Treaty , which is the very instrument we need to help eradicate and rectify the perceived deficiencies .
( Applause )
This House stands by the Constitutional Treaty - about that we must not allow there to be any doubt .
We want to help make the principles and substance of the Constitutional Treaty , including its values , a legal and therefore political reality .
The consensus arrived at here in the European Parliament on the services directive and on the limits of the European Union 's ability to enlarge is a constructive response to people 's concerns .
The ' Declaration on the Future of Europe ' scheduled for 25 March 2007 in Berlin could be another important milestone on this road .
At its heart should be commitment to our values and to the necessary reforms ; an undertaking to rise jointly to the challenges of the future of which I spoke earlier ; a commitment to solidarity among the nations of Europe and to the supremacy of law as the basis for our actions .
No country , no nation of the European Union is to be left alone with its fundamental problems .
That also , however , rules out national selfishness .
Anyone who serves only the interests of his own country will ultimately squander these as well , because he will destroy the solidarity that is needed if they are to be defended .
( Applause )
We intend to help to ensure that under the German Council Presidency a road map and a mandate are agreed at the summit in Brussels on 21 and 22 June , as the outcome of which full implementation of the substantive core of the European Constitution will be in place by the next European Parliament elections in 2009 .
I would like to remind you that the Constitutional Treaty was signed by all 27 governments and has already been adopted by 18 countries .
Of course , we have to respect the results of the referenda .
Quite apart from that , though , if a change of government in a country calls into question that which has been agreed by the European Union , not only is society split in that nation , but our continent , which is already quite complicated enough , is increasingly incapacitated .
We must commit to our European legal principles : pacta sunt servanda - treaties are to be honoured .
Our will to implement these necessary reforms must be strong and determined , and we must drive forward these reforms in such a way that the nations of the European Union are brought together rather than driven apart .
We insist that the European Parliament must be appropriately involved in the work .
We in this House must also be prepared to reform ourselves .
In the first instance that will make great demands on every one of us , for example in terms of being present for votes and important debates .
As we are all aware , a lot remains to be done in this respect .
I wish the House were always as full as it is this morning , although there is still room for a few more , and so , on Thursday , the day after tomorrow , I shall be submitting a proposal to the group chairmen for a comprehensive reform of the way this House works .
The Conference of Presidents , in other words the group chairmen - and they are important people - have already set up a working party on how to improve the way we work .
I can see smiles on the faces of the Group Chairmen , who are pleased to hear that confirmed .
I ask you , fellow-Members , to start work and to present us with its results as soon as you possibly can .
This House is efficiently run , and I should like to thank Secretary-General Julian Priestley , who will be leaving office on 1 March after ten years , most warmly and sincerely for the great dedication he has shown !
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt about the fact that , from time to time , and perhaps more frequently than that , there is cause to criticise the administration ; we positively welcome such criticism .
Those , though , who have worked closely with Mr Priestley and his staff come to recognise just how aware of their responsibilities they are and how great their commitment is , and I have never known any of them to act contrary to the President 's intentions .
I do of course hope that things will go on like that throughout my term of office , and , in order that we may all go in the same direction , I shall maintain close contact .
My warm thanks , then , go to Mr Julian Priestley , and let me say that the only yardstick by which the administration should be judged is the way that it serves our European convictions - without party political bias , fairly and objectively .
I can tell this House that Europe 's future is largely dependent on successful coexistence between the cultures and religions within the European Union and between the European Union and our neighbours , first and foremost in the Arab and Islamic world .
We must therefore do our part to ensure that dialogue among cultures and religions is the hallmark of Europe .
We live in the continent of the three great cultures and religions - the Christian , the Jewish and the Islamic , and we have fellow citizens who come from one of the world 's other great cultures and who are adherents of the world 's other religions .
We , in this European Parliament , must encourage and support examples of European civil society that are dedicated to dialogue between cultures .
In Seville I made the acquaintance of the work of the ' Tres Culturas ' organisation , and I say to you - not only to honour my Spanish predecessor , Mr Josep Borrell - that we must actively support every example of coexistence in Europe of Christians , Muslims and Jews - and also , of course , of those who do not belong to any of these religions .
This is a crucial investment in our intellectual development .
At the same time , it is the best contribution we can make to encouraging dialogue between cultures across the Mediterranean and beyond , to the Middle East and North Africa .
We do not want the ' clash of civilisations ' , we want peace in freedom and justice among all nations and beliefs .
This means building an intellectual and cultural bridge across the Mediterranean .
This dialogue must be grounded in tolerance and truth .
Tolerance does not mean accepting anything and everything .
Tolerance means peaceful coexistence through respecting the convictions of the other while maintaining one 's own .
On one of my many visits to Arab countries , I was asked by a senior Islamic dignitary how Muslims live in Europe .
My answer was that they are often not sufficiently integrated , but that they can live out their own beliefs and have their own mosques and places of prayer .
I went on to ask him if it was true that in his country a Muslim man or woman could be put to death for converting to Christianity .
The fact that I received no answer was an answer in itself .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am firmly convinced that the Dialogue of Cultures can only succeed if it is based on truth and mutual tolerance .
( Applause )
It is my intention to visit the European Union 's neighbouring Arab states and , when visiting European Union countries , to try to have talks with ethnic minorities , particularly their younger members .
We have an important parliamentary institution for dialogue with the Middle East , including Israel and the Arab world , in the shape of the Euro-Mediterranean Assembly .
We must use this institution effectively for peace , partnership and , if possible , friendship .
Last weekend , the four presidents who govern the Europe-Mediterranean Assembly , namely the presidents of the parliaments of Egypt , Tunisia - which is currently presiding - of Greece , and I myself , met in Tunis and agreed that the dialogue between cultures and the problem of unemployment in the countries around the Mediterranean would be the theme of the forthcoming dialogue in March , and that we wanted , in June , to give particular attention to the Middle East and to the peace process there , which we hoped would actually be up and running at the time .
As soon as circumstances permit , I shall visit Israel , Palestine and Lebanon .
I am grateful for the invitation I have received to address the Israeli Parliament , the Knesset .
When inviting speakers to address the European Parliament , we should place the emphasis on the Dialogue of Cultures .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is the task of us all to strengthen democracy and the European parliamentary system , and so we intend to collaborate with the national parliaments in constructive partnership for the good of our nations and of the whole European Union .
Helmut Kohl , honorary citizen of the European Union , once said , ' We do not have much time .
The world we live in is not prepared to wait for us to solve our internal problems ' .
He was right .
To this I would add that failure to act , indifference , would be the greatest wrong we could commit .
At the end of my term of office a new European Parliament will be elected .
If we do convincing work and if good things are said about Europe in the national capitals as well , then the turnout for the European Parliament elections will go up again .
It should be our ambition to achieve this .
Our work is often unglamorous , it can be stressful and not particularly spectacular , but our goals are great , and so much is expected of us .
We seek to live up to that .
In this task I would like to represent you all in such a way that the dignity of the European Parliament , the unity of our continent of Europe and the effectiveness of the European Union are strengthened .
I ask you for your help , thank you for your confidence and hope that together we can achieve our goals .
( Sustained applause )

Mr President , Mr Poettering , former Presidents and present Members of the European Parliament , Mr Barroso , President of the Commission , you , Mr President , are one of the Members of your House who witnessed its first hours ; it could , I think , be said that you have helped shape this House in its remarkable growth from its earliest infancy to becoming what is now a very emancipated parliament with confident Members , clear party structures and parliamentary groups , and hence a demanding partner in European debate , and one we cannot imagine ourselves having to do without .
The development of this Parliament is one of the European Union 's success stories , and we now know that without the work of the European Parliament , much of what we have achieved for Europe 's citizens would have taken another form .
I would like to call to mind , from recent history , the work on the chemicals legislation REACH , the elaboration of the services directive and the debates on the financial perspective , in which we constantly strove to set forward-looking priorities and managed to push them through , in tough negotiations with the Council and the Commission in some cases .
In your speech today , you drew our attention to the next European Parliament elections in 2009 .
We will face the citizens of Europe together - we as representatives of the nation states and you as representatives of the European Parliament - and will have to give an account to almost 500 million people of what concerns us , in what way this Europe of ours benefits them and why it matters .
It has to do with peacekeeping , with solidarity within the European Union and with prosperity and social security in a global world in which competition has become much tougher for all of us .
It is for this reason that we must not lose sight of the whole picture in the midst of all the specific routine parliamentary work .
With your work programme you have emphasised the role which you envisage for the European Parliament as well as for the European Union in the world .
We agree that the issue of the constitutional treaty will be the crucial issue for the 2009 elections - both in connection with our self-perception and our relationship to our citizens , and , secondly , also in terms of a 27-member European Union 's capacity for action .
It is for that reason that the German EU Presidency , together with the Commission , Parliament and the Member States , will do everything in its power to set a timetable for completing this project so that people in 2009 know what kind of Europe they are voting for and how this Europe will be able to act in future .
( Applause )
My plea is that we should continue our discussion on how we can further clarify the structure of the respective relations between the Commission , Parliament and the Council , even though it still sparks controversy in some areas .
For that reason too , as I mentioned in my opening speech , I have put the issue of discontinuity on the agenda , because I believe this topic will be important in the longer term .
How does a newly elected Parliament - or , for that matter , a newly-elected Commission - perceive itself ?
What has to be achieved , and how ?
Even the Constitutional Treaty does not fully answer these questions , and that is why I believe the debate must go on .
( Muted applause )
Turning to the problems of substance , it is clear that the subject of energy will play a quite central role at the Spring Council on 8 and 9 March .
I would like , today , to tell you about our efforts to organise this Council meeting , but not before expressing my sincere thanks to the Commission , which has given us ambitious packages of directives and findings on energy and climate protection for the agenda .
In the upcoming councils to prepare for the Spring Council - the Competition Council and the Environment Council - we now have to establish the decisive conditions for a fruitful debate within the Council .
I support the goal of the Commission to reduce CO2 emissions by 30 % by 2020 as long as we find international partners .
I believe that our international travels give us all encouragement to draw attention to the fact that Europe generates 15 % of CO2 emissions , while 85 % are generated outside the European Union .
Europe must be a pioneer - a goal to which I think we should commit ourselves - but Europe must also make clear that no problem illustrates more visibly than this one how this world interacts and that the action of one continent is not sufficient to dispel the threat posed to the whole of humanity .
( Applause )
We will have to hold discussions on developing a competitive internal market ; we can already sense that these will be very difficult , but that will come as no surprise to anyone who has studied the subject .
We will not shy away from these debates , for a functioning internal market within the energy market is essential .
We intend to put the issue of energy efficiency on the agenda , and we will talk about renewable energies . The German EU Presidency will appeal for the adoption of specific figures and reduction approaches which are binding .
I want to make it absolutely clear that no Member State can evade this responsibility .
For this reason the Federal Republic of Germany , if I may say so as Chancellor , has already had to make compromises with the Commission , and we did not find that easy .
We did this quite deliberately because I believe that each Member State must do its part .
It would be foolish to believe that climate protection works without anyone noticing , and that is why that erroneous belief must be abandoned .
( Applause )
We will have to give our attention to the topic of external energy policy , particularly in the negotiations on a cooperation agreement with Russia .
Here , too , I have to say that we hope and are working to ensure that these negotiations can commence .
We have not , alas , got that far yet , but I am optimistic that we will have taken a positive step forward by the time we meet for the EU-Russia Summit in May , and we will put the issue of ' better regulation ' on the European Council agenda ; here , too , I would ask for your House 's support in order to ensure that we do not become bogged down in vague assurances , but that we commit ourselves to quantitative reduction objectives .
I am aware of the concerns and the fears that less regulation may also entail less protection .
That is not what we want , but there is room for improvement in the way in which we organise bureaucracy today , and I would add that , from the perspective of Europe 's citizens , improvements are needed on that front .
That does not mean that a regulation is not valid if we do not use the most complicated form to verify it .
( Applause )
Mr President , our consultations in connection with the declaration on the Europe of the future on 24 and 25 March are going well .
We intend that they should continue to do so .
In your comments you emphasised very clearly what people expect from the European Union with regard to its external relations and its security and defence policy , and I share your commitment to human rights , of which your House has a great tradition , and I am pleased to note your desire to make dialogue between cultures one of your priorities .
During my recent trip to the Middle East I was made aware of the great expectations which people have placed in the European Union and all its institutions .
One can , in the Middle East , almost physically feel the yearning for peace and the concern about Iran 's nuclear programme .
In this area we have a great responsibility to do everything we can - with the players in the region as well as the United States of America and Russia , of course - to set in motion the peace process which people await with such longing .
I have said before , and will say again , that the end of the Cold War brought something unexpected into the lives of Europeans such as ourselves .
We have seen that today , now with twenty-seven Member States , we can again work and contend for peace and freedom in a democratic process with almost all European countries , even though it is not always easy .
This , the wonder of our age , should encourage us to strive for miracles and opportunities in other regions of the world .
That which Palestinians and Israelis have not experienced for decades - a life in peace , a life in two neighbouring countries which are not at war , a life with the prospect of prosperity - must also be our goal , because we have simply seen firsthand that peace and friendship can emerge from seemingly insurmountable differences .
This experience brings with it an obligation for us as Europeans to become involved in this process .
That is why I am very grateful that you , together with all your colleagues in the European Parliament , have set this as one of your priorities .
Mr President , you quoted Mr Helmut Kohl and said that we must hurry and cannot afford to constantly focus on ourselves . For people in the European Union expect us to continue to shape this successful continent successfully in the age of globalisation in the interests of its citizens .
Millions , indeed billions , of people in the world expect the European Union , with its experience and prosperity , to do its part in enabling the world to enjoy more peace and more freedom .
Let us work together to that end .
Thank you for your speech ; I look forward to good cooperation with your House .
( Applause )
My warm thanks to you , too , Chancellor Merkel , for that encouraging speech .
We will do everything in our power to ensure that the Council , the Commission and this House work together successfully for our continent , for the European Union .
President of the Commission .
Mr President , Chancellor Merkel , former Presidents of the European Parliament , Presidents of the European institutions , honourable Members , this year we celebrate what the European Union has achieved over the last 50 years : a history which has seen the European Parliament increasingly come to embody European democracy .
I salute the presence here today of the former Presidents of the European Parliament .
On my own behalf and on behalf of the Commission , I thank you all for your individual contributions to Europe .
I want to congratulate you , Mr President , for this initiative .
It is indeed important .
Some politicians believe the world did not exist before they were born .
I think that it is important that we who are serving our citizens through institutions keep this institutional memory .
A decent and civilised society pays homage to its history and respects the institutions .
I want to thank you for your speech , which had both vision and substance .
I share the views and commend the commitment .
Honourable Members , you have elected a President whose experience and commitment to our common European project is second to none .
Our European values underline the essence of the Europe we want and treasure : a Europe of peace , freedom , democracy , prosperity and justice .
The enlargement and integration of Europe to include 27 countries , free of war and free of totalitarianism , underlines the strength of these values and the lessons we have drawn from history : only through a shared undertaking are we able to provide the answers to our citizens in the global world of the 21st century .
Cultural and religious pluralism is a strong European value .
In this sense , I particularly welcome the emphasis by President Poettering on intercultural and religious dialogue .
The European Union is well placed to promote this dialogue .
We are steeped in diversity : diversity of traditions , of cultures , of language , of nations .
It is one of our precious gifts as Europeans .
We are to some extent a success in globalisation .
We , better than anyone , can shape this globalised world .
Dialogue is the way to ensure that diversity , far from causing division , enriches our unity .
I strongly believe that cultural diversity is a source of Europe 's strength and of its ability to promote its values and interests in the world .
This dialogue has to be nurtured properly .
We intend to make next year 's Year of Intercultural Dialogue the platform for this dialogue .
The Commission has long pursued a dialogue with religions , churches and communities of conviction , including those who do not have a religion .
I would like to take this forward in partnership with the European Parliament , as a visible demonstration of how European institutions , working together , take European integration forward .
To signal the importance of this dimension , last year I invited the President of the European Council to participate in a meeting with religious and church leaders .
I welcome the agreement to hold a summit in May this year , with the three Presidents of the European political institutions and leaders of the main religions and churches , which I will be honoured to host .
On 25 March , we have the opportunity to celebrate both our achievements and our values .
I am delighted that the European Parliament and the European Commission are playing a full part in the preparations for the Declaration on the future of Europe , following my proposal last May .
This Declaration , to be signed in Berlin , represents a real common point of reference - a confirmation of what the European Union is for and a mission statement for what we want to achieve in the 21st century .
Last month , in this House , I made proposals I would like to see in the Berlin Declaration .
I did not do it for the sake of making proposals .
They correspond to results that European citizens want us to achieve .
And I believe that it is by focusing on the goals of our common project that we will be able to reach a strong and enlarged consensus , including a consensus for an institutional settlement .
I am convinced that if Europeans see the European Union addressing globalisation , promoting economic growth and jobs , showing social solidarity , tackling climate change , increasing democratic legitimacy , bringing security to its citizens , defending our values and interests worldwide , then they will trust the European Union to reform itself to meet tomorrow 's challenges and to deliver practical results .
We are all here to serve European citizens .
If we are to enjoy public consent , we need to target our activities on citizens ' priorities and we need to work in a way that justifies their confidence , particularly respecting the principles of subsidiarity and transparency .
We set out exactly this approach in our Citizens ' Agenda Communication of last May .
In order to achieve results , we need to preserve and develop institutional partnership ; a partnership founded on the separation of competences , but also on the idea of institutional interdependence .
While respecting the autonomy of each institution , we need to stress the commonality of our European principles .
Despite some natural political and ideological differences , those who are committed to these principles should build a truly European partnership .
I believe that cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission is working well .
It has proved itself against some stern tests .
Over the past year we have seen difficult dossiers resolved on services , chemicals , REACH and the financial perspectives , to name but a few .
This was a result of the three institutions working together with this spirit of partnership .
I am committed to working closely with you , Mr President , as well as with Chancellor Merkel and her successors at the helm of the Council .
I am convinced this is the best way to deliver the results our citizens demand .
The resolution of the debate on the future of Europe is not a sideshow : a more efficient and democratic European Union goes to the heart of our ability to deliver policies and results .
We all know this is what the constitutional treaty would have achieved , and there are limits to what we can achieve without it .
As I often say , we cannot build tomorrow 's Europe with yesterday 's tools .
The Nice Treaty is not enough .
( Applause )
I know that the European Parliament shares the commitment of the European Commission to give full support to the work of the German Presidency to find the right way forward .
The energy and commitment of Chancellor Merkel gives us real hope that we can find a consensus and make a compelling case for reform and progress to European citizens .
But the Presidency of the Council can only achieve results if it is supported by all the Member States .
Today , where all the European institutions are here reunited , I wish to repeat my call on Member States to find a solution as regards the constitutional treaty .
I know , after the ' no ' votes in two Member States , that it is difficult , if not impossible , to ratify exactly the same text .
But let us not forget that all the governments signed the treaty .
This has at least a double implication .
First , Member States recognised that the Union needed to solve common problems and common challenges .
And we have not solved them yet .
Second , the act of signing a Treaty also implies a responsibility towards the other Member States , towards European institutions and towards European citizens .
It is the duty of all European governments to be constructive and active in the search to find a common solution .
And I would like to stress the word ' common ' .
At a historical moment like this , when we celebrate the peaceful unity of Europe , we do not have the right to divide it again .
Regarding their positions about Europe , sometimes some politicians remind me of James Mill , the father of John Stuart Mill .
John Stuart Mill once said that his father loved mankind in general , but hated each person in particular .
( Laughter )
We also see many politicians in Europe that profess their love for Europe in general , but then resist European solutions to energy , climate change , immigration and , of course , the institutional settlement .
Let us be frank : we do not need declarations of intent ; what we need is commitment .
( Applause )
And we face decisive tests in the near future , starting with the energy and climate change package in the European Council in March .
I very much welcome the statement Chancellor Merkel made just now .
Let us be honest with ourselves .
Coherence is a requisite for credibility .
We are not credible when we say that we want to speak with one voice to the outside world on energy and we keep speaking among ourselves with 27 voices and 27 markets .
We are not credible when we set the fight against climate change as one of the most important priorities for Europe and afterwards we are not able to agree on specific goals for our policies .
So , we need to be coherent and credible .
Mr President , Madam Chancellor , honourable Members , I have high hopes for the period between now and the end of this parliamentary term .
I believe we have established the right priorities , and the right foundation of partnership to make them work .
I look forward to working closely with President Poettering and with this Parliament , and with colleagues in the European Council , to deliver real reform in Europe and real change for Europe 's citizens to the end of this decade .
I believe we can build a Europe that will be able to shape the future of our world around the values of freedom and justice that are so important for us .
( Applause )
President Barroso , I should like to thank you for your statement and especially for your commitment to partnership with the European Parliament , which is most welcome .
I should like to thank you on my own behalf as well .
We look forward to the continuation of our good cooperation .

Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to offer my wholehearted congratulations to you , my dear Hans-Gert , on your brilliant speech on how Europe needs to regroup and once again join forces .
Addressing , on the one hand , the speakers from high office who took the floor before you and whom I take this opportunity to greet , and , on the other , representatives of all Europe 's institutions , you expressed your vision of the future of the EU .
It is a vision of a united , integrated Europe , but also a Europe that is open to the world and aware of its international responsibilities , a Europe with which the citizens will more readily identify and to which they will feel closer .
It is a vision that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats shares deeply .
I appreciate the proactive , positive and constructive tone of your proposals .
The time has come to stop talking negatively about Europe and to stop asking what we will become . Rather , we must channel our efforts into doing what we have to do .
The European Project is a success .
Not only has it led to the development and prosperity of our countries , it has also guaranteed peace on our continent .
We have changed the course of history thanks to this project and those who feel that this is not enough should take a look around them in their daily lives , and they will see that the benefits of Europe are to be found everywhere .
It would be churlish not to acknowledge this , but it is certainly true that we need to state more strongly the convictions that we have in our deeds and must learn to accord them their due worth .
This applies to the euro , which has been a success , and also , on a broader level , to our work as lawmakers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have every reason to be confident in our future within the EU .
We will face the challenges ahead as a united and determined Europe , and certainly not as a morose , inward-looking Europe obsessed with its past .
Mr President , our group shares your priorities , which we believe address both the major challenges posed by the modern world , and our citizens ' day-to-day concerns .
The two are interlinked .
What do European citizens want ?
They want more freedom - true in particular of young people - and more security and protection against the threats we face .
They want to be able to work and to enjoy the fruits of their work .
They also want Europe to defend and promote the values of our civilisation and our culture .
They are in favour of environmental protection and the fight against climate deterioration at European level .
They are in favour of a common energy policy guaranteeing safe , affordable supplies , and do not rule out any energy source that may guarantee our independence .
They want a fair agriculture and food policy offering prospects for the countryside and guaranteeing food safety , whilst remaining at the forefront of technological developments .
They also want a research and development policy that places Europe at the cutting edge of innovation on the world stage , as we proposed in the Lisbon objectives .
Personally , I wish to emphasise today the importance of being close to the citizens and of the need to marry this objective with that of dialogue between cultures and religions , which is the positive side of the fight against racism and intolerance and against exclusion and xenophobia .
It is not enough to speak out against these wrongs or to fight against these scourges .
What we need to do is to demonstrate , in a positive way , the advantages of exchanging knowledge , the benefits of social mixing , the nobleness of hospitality , the greatness of tolerance and the mutual enrichment of the meeting of cultures .
At the same time , the EU must be very clear about its geographical limits , about its borders and about a common immigration policy .
The EU must also define its strategy on globalisation .
This strategy must not be based on the survival of the fittest , but on a mix of competitiveness , high employment levels and social protection .
What we need is controlled globalisation .
I should once again like to commend the German Presidency , and in particular Mrs Merkel , on pursuing all these issues with such determination .
These challenges are not only for the next six months , but for the next ten or 20 years .
The 25 March Declaration , on the occasion of the Union 's 50th anniversary could be an opportunity to propose the rebirth of political ambition for Europe .
In accordance with the long-term project of the founding fathers , that ambition involves a relaunch of the institutions .
I am aware , Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Barroso , the extent to which you set great store by this objective .
We trust the Commission and its President , Mr Barroso , to be up to the task of addressing the issue of the institutions .
The Commission is both Guardian of the Treaties and guardian of the Community 's general interests .
We will always stand foursquare behind the Commission as it carries out this dual role responsibly .
It is by joining forces and sharing our convictions that we will be able to pull the EU out of its rut .
To finish , I could have quoted Mr Pierre Pflimlin , former President of the European Parliament , whose hundredth birthday would have been this year , who dearly wanted to see a Europe of the values of the spirit .
I shall instead turn to that most Europhile of our 20th century writers , Stefan Zweig , who in his superb biography of Erasmus , handed a key to the builders of the Europe of the past and the future : ' There will always be a need for those who show people what unites them over what divides them , and who renew in the hearts of men the belief in a higher form of humanity . '
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , former Presidents of this honourable House , ladies and gentlemen , it is in order to avoid the impression that we are at a European People 's Party congress that I , a social democrat , have now taken the floor , and what I am now putting myself through is a difficult exercise .

You will be aware that I take the view that the speech of this House 's President must do justice to everyone in it - or at least approximate to doing so - and that it should not become the subject of partisan political debate , for that is the sort of speech to be delivered , not by the one who convenes all , but by one who puts forward an individual 's view for the purposes of debate .
I want to acknowledge , Mr President , that you have delivered a speech behind which the whole House can unite , one in which you have described the essential tasks that lie ahead of us , and that your term of office falls in a decisive period for European politics .
There is no way of putting it other than to say that the reforms will either succeed or fail , and if they fail , if the Constitution does not come to pass , if we are thrown back onto the incomplete Treaty of Nice , then - as you brought out very well in your speech - it will be not only a Treaty that will have been brought low , but also an ideal .
In your speech , you gave a description of what the European ideal is , explaining that it is in cooperation between cultures that we find solutions , that religious intolerance is to be overcome by dialogue between religions , that it is on economic and social integration that peace and peaceful coexistence are founded , and that the surrendering of territorial claims can be accomplished through territorial integration .
If we set this ideal against the challenges we face , then the nature of those challenges becomes clear ; they are hatred between races and peoples , which we find everywhere throughout the world , religious intolerance , which is everywhere on the other side of our borders , and , alas indeed , renewed claims to power over territory .
If you want peace throughout the world , with peace established within Europe and between it and its neighbours , you need more than ever the ideal of Europe to counteract such cause of warfare as hatred , intolerance , exclusion and oppression .
To these things we respond with integration - both social and cultural - with solutions arrived at between religions and across ethnic divides , and these you described well ; my group can do no other than give them its full support .
At the same time , though , we face the challenge - as you so rightly said - of dealing with day-to-day conflicts .
People want more than just formal sittings , although I congratulate you on this one , for which we have all been preparing for a long time , and , however sceptical I might be , I will concede that it has gone well .
It is not every day , though , that we assemble in formal session .
The public want us to come up with solutions to day-to-day conflicts .
When the echo of what is said in formal session has died away , everyday life wastes no time in catching us up .
There are three things that people want from us : First , they want us to say what is what ; secondly , they want us to come up with suggested solutions to it ; and , thirdly , they want us to be decisive and to act - together in so far as that is possible , but , if it is not , to do so by a majority decision of the kind that is customary in a democracy .
That , too , must be possible , and - by the way - in the Council as well .
Turning to you , Madam Federal Chancellor , before you tell us more about discontinuity , I have no objection to us discussing that , but the greatest generator of discontinuity is the Council over which you preside .
That is the problem !
( Applause )
We are , of course , caught out by our own problems , the ones that we all have to address - us here in this House , you in the Council and the Commission with its own .
On New Year 's Day this year , Mrs Merkel , the magazine ' Cicero ' published a marvellous interview with you , which I read with a great deal of attention .
One tremendous thing you said in it was this : ' Another thing I aim to do in 2007 is to make more progress on dealing with climate change . [ ... ]
With that in mind , I will be giving particular attention , within the international context , to environment issues ' .
And quite right too !
You said the same thing today .
Let me now quote what you said elsewhere , something that - if I remember correctly - you said in the German Bundestag , to the effect that you would be vigorous in preventing a single threshold value for the emission of CO2 from new cars with effect from 2012 .
Voilà - the grim reality of everyday life has caught up with us again .
( Interruption by Mr Cohn-Bendit : ' Discontinuity ! ' )
That , too , is indeed , discontinuity .
We must ...
( Interruption by Mr Ferber )
Mr President , you can see that what I feared is coming to pass ; this formal sitting could become a lively debate , but Mr Ferber 's CSU has so much of its own stuff to deal with that we will allow him an interruption .


Mrs Merkel , Mr Poettering , we must try to meet both demands . We must not only organise formal sittings characterised by high-flying rhetoric , but must also make things happen from day to day .
That is what we are calling for .
In every speech I have heard today , I have heard reference to the social Europe being the core and basis that holds our society together .
Two and a half years ago , when I said that in my first speech as chairman of my group , what I got for it was mocking laughter from certain quarters in this House .
Our having made that sort of progress in two and a half years , with all of us now agreed on it , gives me the hope that we will , by the end of your two and a half years in office - and that is how long you have said you will stay there - have moved on even further .
I should like to make just two brief closing comments .



I do not , Mr President , share your view that it was the United States of America that defeated Communism or helped to overcome it in Eastern Europe ; it was not the United States that did that , but the courageous men and women in Poland ; it was they , the Hungarians , and the people in the Baltic States , who defeated Communism , not the Americans , and that , more than ever , needs to be said in this House , with gratitude to the Members from those countries , who represent the new democracies .
( Applause )


My last comment I shall address to you , Mr President , for , since you have turned your attention to the issues of our future , and delivered a speech that is , to my mind , one of the best in this House for many years , it is to you that I will say that I also have the confidence that you will put that into practice .
As President of this institution , you will have a weighty task , particularly as regards the Constitutional Treaty , and if you can help to find common ground between the highly divergent views of the Heads of State or Government , in the same way as you managed , as chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ) to hold the conflicting interests of that group together , then I am confident that your Presidency will be a good one .
( Applause )
Mr Schulz , It is not for me to judge your speech , but I would like to say that , for one who did not actually want to speak , you managed to do so with a great deal of conviction .
Thank you very much for doing so .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , your experience in this House since direct elections in 1979 has qualified you well and has given you a rare sense of perspective for the post you occupy .
I congratulate you on your speech this morning .
You have seen the European Union grow from 9 countries in the 1970s to 12 in the 1980s , 15 in the 1990s , 25 and then 27 in this decade , with a queue of countries waiting to join .
You have seen the Treaty of Rome supplemented by the Single European Act , the Treaties of Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice , and now the draft constitutional treaty , as the common market has been enhanced with a single market , a single currency and policies in justice and home affairs , foreign and security arrangements and now energy .
You have also seen - as have some others of us of more recent vintage - a profound change in what the European Union is all about .
It is no longer a Union to guarantee peace and security of food supply , but a Union which has to be capable of meeting the three big challenges we face : rapid world population growth and migration , energy resources and climate change , and internationally organised crime linked to terrorism .
Hitherto , the drive for the building of this Union has come from within .
Increasingly , it comes from beyond our borders and the response of our institutions has been uncertain .
There is a malaise affecting our Union which has led to squabbling between the Member States , who , in the name of preserving national sovereignty , are too often giving free rein to global anarchy ; and squabbling between our institutions , which turns our citizens cold , like different denominations of the church , arguing about substantiation rather than asking why nobody comes to church any more .
Mr Poettering , you have the opportunity to lead this House at a time when it is increasingly becoming the dynamo of European integration .
It is increasingly to the European Parliament that Europeans must look : a House resurgent and outspoken , holding the Council and the Member States to account when their action against terrorism rides roughshod over the rights we cherish ; forging consensus - which escapes the Commission - on the single market in services or on consumer protection measures ; working with national parliaments to scrutinise the executive , ensuring the law is respected .
In short , this House is coming of age .
Ideology has surpassed nationality as the main determinant of voting behaviour .
It is true that this House does not yet possess a right of initiative or the right to propose the President of the Commission , but neither is now unthinkable and increasingly people believe that both would enhance our Union 's culture of democracy .
Therefore , Mr Poettering , I hope that you will use your two and a half years to grasp the need for reform of this House ; to give us a Parliament better equipped to provide such leadership ; a House that meets in full session every week ; a House that concentrates on profound political choices rather than voting on hundreds of amendments to move semi-colons ; a House that uses its new powers of scrutiny to the full to recall and re-examine our laws .
When you were first elected , this Parliament was a consultative assembly , designed to give a pro forma cover to decisions taken by bureaucrats and diplomats .
Now it is a cornerstone of our European home .
In 13 years of codecision , that one function has developed the organs of this body , and transparency has given oxygen to our bloodstreams .
I should like to say to Chancellor Merkel that codecision is now needed in all areas of policy-making if the checks and balances of democracy are to work at European level .
The fact is that the Union makes decisions that are binding on Member States without proper democratic or judicial control , exposing us to censure by the Court of Human Rights or the constitutional courts .
We had a close shave when the German Constitutional Court examined the framework decision on the European arrest warrant and came very close to contesting its legitimacy .
If the German Government , which blocked the use of the passerelle clause in Article 42 just a few months ago , really wants to promote democracy in Europe , you will recognise the imperative of qualified majority voting in the Council and codecision with the European Parliament as a basis for all law-making , otherwise in your time at the helm you risk looking like the mime artist , Marcel Marceau , appearing to climb a wall but actually going nowhere .
Mr President , the years 1914 to 1989 on our continent were a 75-year rage of self-mutilation .
This year , with Bulgaria and Romania in our Union , we can put to rest the ghosts of that period .
However , the roots of freedom lie in courage .
I believe there is a German word ' Zivilcourage ' : you , Chancellor Merkel and President Barroso need to muster the collective courage to take our Union forward as a true democracy , to create what Winston Churchill called in 1945 ' a wider patriotism ' and a common citizenship for the distraught people of this turbulent and powerful continent .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Watson .
When you spoke about the vast numbers of amendments I saw smiles on the faces of many of the former Presidents !
I think this is a problem which the former Presidents also faced .
The worst , however , was when it started in 1979 - as President Simone Veil will remember - when in some cases we had more than a thousand amendments , but we did not have the electronic machinery in place to deal with them .
thar ceann Ghrúpa UEN . - A Uachtaráin , tá tú i do bhall den teach seo le fada anois agus tá tú ar dhuine de na baill is mó a bhfuil taithí aige ar obair an tí seo .
Thug tú riamh , agus tabharfaidh , tacaíocht láidir d 'Institiúid na Parlaiminte ag leibhéal na hEorpa agus ar an stáitse idirnáisiúnta .
Chuir tú polasaí polaitiúil uaillmhianach don dá bhliain go leith atá romhainn amach os ár gcomhair anseo inniu .
Tá tacaíocht iomlán tugtha ag mo ghrúpa polaitíochta don iarracht pholaitiúil riamh agus is mar sin a bheidh amach anseo .
Mr President , today is a day that we should reflect on where we have come from , but also give a vision for the future .
I think that in your speech to us today , you presented not only a report card of the past , but also a clear pathway to the future .
You raised a number of points in your speech that so far none of my colleagues has touched on .
The first , which is in one sense the most impressive of all , is the fact that the President of the Council , Chancellor Merkel , and the President of the Commission , President Barroso , have shown you and this House the respect to be here today to share in this occasion .
It reflects well on you obviously as a German to have your leader here , but reflects still more so on this House that Angela Merkel has taken the time to be here with us , despite all the work and efforts that she is soon to take on as President of the Council .
I think it behoves us to respond to that , not just because of the presence of the office holders , but most importantly of all because of the responsibility which the voters of the European Union have placed on us as their advocates and their voices .
Sometimes that brings us into conflict with the ideals of the technicians of the establishment of a new European Union .
Sometimes it brings us into conflict with the demands of Member State governments .
But our one sacred duty as a Parliament is to be that voice , to be the voice of reason , to be the voice of peace , to be the voice of vision , but most importantly of all , to be the voice for the voices .
We must remember those who have been lost or forgotten by our societies and ensure that they can be brought forward towards that new future and given that new opportunity .
In your speech today , Mr President , the one thing I thought was fantastic - and it is the first time that I have heard it from anybody in this House with such real sincerity - was what you said about the role of young people within Europe : your idea of having a new programme for young people , a prize for young people , to allow the new generation to appreciate and understand what we already can understand from our own history .
As my colleagues rightly said , we speak about America 's defeat of communism and Nazism .
They played a role .
Let us not deny that Europe would have died without American assistance in the 1940s .
Let us not forget that Europe would have died without American assistance in 1918 .
Let us not forget that , without the assistance of the US in the 1960s and 70s , we would have been under constant and immediate threat from further war and violence .
But , let us not also forget that those men and women of vision - whether it was in Solidarity in Poland , the Hungarian uprising , the Spring Revolution , the Velvet Revolution or Pope John-Paul II - all brought a belief in the dignity of human beings , the dignity of difference and the right for people to speak up and to be free in all walks of life .
That not only defeats totalitarianism , it defeats all ills which face humankind today and that is why your idea of a cultural dialogue , of an understanding of different faiths and traditions is so important for the future development of Europe .
If you read about us , Europe does not present a threat to anybody , of any faith or of none .
Indeed , in a lot of ways we tend to become so liberal that we forget about pluralism .
We forget about understanding some people who have strongly-held beliefs of a non-violent nature and tend to hound them out of office or out of positions , but at the same time , we can show accommodation to those that have a fairly radical viewpoint in life and give them a space for themselves .
The last two points I would like to make are in relation to the comments made by some colleagues and by the Presidents of both the Commission and the Council in relation to the development of European policy in the future .
Maybe I am misinterpreting what the people are saying , but European citizens are fed up with the nitty-gritty talk about institutional change and reforms .
What European citizens want to see is action ; what European citizens want to see is a positive response to the problems that face us .
We have had some progress towards tackling climate change , social policy and other issues of importance in the single market , but citizens want to see action being taken on a real level that affects their lives in real ways , rather than mere reaction to problems when they arise .
Too often in this Parliament we look back and say ' that was done wrong in 1979 ' or ' this was done wrong in 1992 ' or something else was done wrong in 1997 or ' we missed an opportunity ' .
Let us not forget that politics is an art , whereas economics is a science and you get the right result every time if you use the right formula .
Politics is an art because it must respond to the needs of society , to the wants and desires of people and , more importantly of all , to the volatility of society as a whole .
Lastly , the most pressing task that we have before us in creating a fairer area of peace and understanding is in the Middle East .
I applaud your desire to visit Lebanon , Palestine and Israel and to start to build that process .
Europe must be re-involved at a central level in finding the solution to peace in the Middle East .
I would just like to say to you , Mr President , for the next two and a half years , despite the travails that we have brought against you and even though rough winds will blow on your face , you should always realise that you have the support of this House at your back .
( Applause )
Thank you Mr Crowley .
You spoke for longer than the time allotted to you .
I would not say that you got more time because you said many nice things , but subsequent speakers will have to stick to the time allotted to them even if they do not always share your position .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we certainly recognise and respect the seriousness and depth of your European commitment , and your speech , today , sets out some priorities with which - even though they remain a little vague - the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is substantially in agreement .
You rightly recalled this Parliament 's history , and I am very grateful to you for having brought into the Chamber today past presidents of our Parliament .
I was able to meet some of them when I arrived in Parliament , as a young and enthusiastic federalist , and to collaborate with many of them on their work : I am therefore truly happy to see them here today .
Despite this , Mr President , we await concrete evidence , and this evidence confronts us with very specific choices , which cannot remain vague . Our Parliament will have to decide whether to remain silent and disciplined or whether to be the forum where action is taken in the name of European interests and values , today almost lost behind diplomatic manoeuvring and national interests .
This is our institution 's responsibility : to be a platform for European debate and for proposals for a democratic Europe .
In this context , Mr President , the contribution of our institution to resolving the constitutional deadlock must not simply be - as you said , repeating word for word , and surely not by coincidence , what Mrs Merkel said to us - ' saving the substance of the Constitution ' .
We cannot be content to ' save the substance of the Constitution ' in a purely rhetorical fashion .
As a matter of urgency , we must do two things which in the past , under the presidency of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and under the presidency of Mr Schulz , this Parliament has not been able to achieve - no , I refer to the two presidents of the majority groups - and that is , firstly , to find a consensus on what to do exactly , as Parliament , in a fully autonomous way , with regard to the Constitution and , secondly - more importantly - to fight for the European Parliament to retain the constitutional role won for it by the Convention .
If there is to be debate on a timetable or on a proposal , we wish to act , Mrs Merkel , Mr Poettering , as codecision-makers and not observers .
Mr Poettering , I want to see you fight for this right of Parliament 's .
( Applause )
Mr President , you spoke of values and cited specific cases relating to the defence of human rights , which is a subject of the utmost importance for our institution .
You also spoke of tolerance , a word of which you are very fond .
I must tell you , speaking personally , that sometimes this word worries me , because behind the word ' tolerance ' crimes are committed and individuals ' rights are infringed - crimes and infringements that are , precisely , ' tolerated ' - and this is something that we absolutely must not forget .
This is why we prefer to speak of ' rights common to all men and all women ' , which are equal for everybody and must remain so .
To speak of relations with Russia means bringing up the subject of Chechnya and , responsibly , opening a debate on decreasing energy dependency , which involves strong criticism of those countries - and there are many of them - that are running in a disorganised fashion to the court of ' Czar ' Putin .
In our dialogue with the United States we must not forget the death penalty in force in that country , CIA flights , the issue of passenger data , and pre-emptive war .
Finally , with regard to the defence of human rights we must not forget , by means of small emergency resolutions , to defend those individuals who by themselves , forgotten in some prison or some forest , are defending those rights .
Merely speaking of security , Mr President - and you spoke at length of it , in the name of our Parliament - cannot make the resolutions that have been adopted in favour of disarmament and a code of conduct on arms progress to the second stage .
Mr President , we will be very active in the work on internal reform .
There are two subjects that you did not mention and that seem to me to be fundamental : the first is the debate on Parliament 's seat .
I hope that you , personally , and the parliamentary groups will have the courage to hold a debate in this Chamber on the European Parliament 's seat .
Perhaps the home of European history may best be located here , in this very beautiful building .
Who knows ? I think , however , that it is important for you to truly take the initiative in tackling the problem of where Parliament should meet .
The second subject - and I know very well that I will have to work hard here to convince you - is making this institution greener , not from a political point of view but in terms of its environmental sustainability .
I will succeed in convincing you , I am absolutely certain of it , since every day the resources wasted even by this Assembly in terms of water , light and official cars is something that , if we want to be true to our commitments on climate change , we cannot tolerate .
In conclusion , I would briefly like to address Mrs Merkel .
Your proposals on bureaucracy , on discontinuity and on better regulation leave us rather cold and concerned .
The problem of bureaucracy is national rather than European : how many people are there in the delegation accompanying you today ?
It is certainly more substantial than that accompanying President Barroso , and those complaining of excessive regulations are the multinationals , not the citizens , who say - going by successive Eurobarometer surveys - that they want more laws to protect them , not fewer !
Finally , the proposal on discontinuity in fact brings in an opportunity for your institution to boycott and delay all the laws that you do not like .
Mr President , I wish you success in your work and I believe that we will have fun over the next two years .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mrs Frassoni .
With regard to human rights , we have always agreed with each other .
As for the issue of where Parliament should sit , I have indeed given thought to whether I should talk about that , but came to the conclusion that I should not .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , former Presidents who remind me of many times spent together , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , it is not often that we have a chance to take a step back and enjoy the opportunity that is given us today , however briefly , to exchange views on the entire period between now and the next European elections .
True , it is no secret that my group does not share the political options of the majority of this Parliament .
I will nevertheless deliberately use some of the key points of your speech to make several specific proposals .
They are limited measures with nothing revolutionary about them , and I sincerely think you do not necessarily have to sympathise with the European United Left / Nordic Green Left to identify with them .
If the President of the European Parliament simply took them into account that would send a positive signal to important sections of our public opinion ; it would say that you have heard them .
Thus , referring to the aspirations of Europe 's citizens , Mr President , you stressed and I quote : ' we must preserve the European social model ' and , more importantly , you went on to say ' our acts must be convincing ' .
That is in fact essential if we are to dispel a deep malaise that is being fed by the idea that instead of protecting the citizens from the effects of today 's globalisation the European Union is too often helping to make everyone 's existence increasingly insecure .
A significant act to begin to dispel this feeling of inevitability would be welcome .
I suggest , Mr President , that you call on the Council , Commission and Parliament to abandon a proposal for a directive that affects the entire population of the European Union and that seems so dogmatic , so unjustified and so devastating for the future of public services that it is likely to provoke a new Bolkestein effect if nothing changes in the next few months ; I am speaking of the proposal to liberalise postal services on 1 January 2009 , six months before the next elections .
More generally , you stressed another idea which I consider very right and very important .
You say we need ' a new pact between the citizens and the institutions of the European Union ' , then , about the future European treaty , you say : ' we need a thoroughgoing reform of the European Union ' .
Everyone agrees this is necessary , but opinions on the substance of the future European basic law differ .
Mr Barroso has just addressed the Netherlands , saying to them : please help us , everyone has to move .
I am suggesting to you a method that will allow everyone to move , to help relaunch Europe .
Let the process which is starting be an opportunity for a real public debate across the Union , a candid debate , as close to the citizens as possible , on the meaning of Europe 50 years after the Treaty of Rome , on the purpose of our common policies , on the commitments we are prepared to assume together in the future .
If the President of Parliament sets himself the task of bringing such an initiative to fruition , he will instantly have fulfilled his mandate .
Finally , Mr President , you made some apt remarks about intercultural dialogue and more particularly the Middle East , where you hope to go as soon as possible , you said .
That does not surprise me , and I thank you for it .
With this in mind , of all the initiatives I would like the President of Parliament to take , the most symbolic in my view , following the almost unhoped-for Mecca agreement , in which the whole of Hamas promises to comply with the international resolutions and the agreements signed between the PLO and Israel , would be to solemnly call on the European Union to lift the blockade on the Palestinian Government and to give a new chance to the hope for a just peace in a region that has been bruised by occupation and war for several generations .
I know that none of these initiatives will be easy to take , Mr President , but if you do , they are such that history will remember them .
Thank you , Mr Wurtz . I am grateful for the respect that we have always shown each other .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Chancellor Merkel , Mr Barroso , esteemed former Presidents of this Chamber , whom I remember with pleasure from the Conference of the Presidents , we now have Mr Poettering as President , and he is eager for a bigger dose of the EU , even though he also cleverly talks about subsidiarity .
He should allow himself a referendum in which he might convince his fellow Germans that they too should vote in favour of a Constitution with more laws and regulations made in Brussels .
Three thousand regulations are not enough .
It is not enough that 86 % of the laws ratified in the German Bundestag are now enacted in Brussels .
Listen to the warning from the former German President , Roman Herzog , who headed our Charter Convention .
Note the results of the referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The French and the Dutch had a chance to vote in favour of the Constitution , and they threw it away .
The lesson now drawn from this is that we should never again have a referendum .
The former President of the Bundestag 's Europe Committee , Jürgen Meier , also stated in the Constitutional Convention that a voluntary referendum could be agreed in the Bundestag , with an ordinary majority sought .
Why not allow the Germans to express their opinion on the Constitution that the President and the German Presidency of the Council are so keen to see adopted ?
Officials in Brussels and the judges in Luxembourg have a pathological attachment to supersizing and have a fear of democracy .
They have not understood the modern trend towards slimmed-down organisations , decentralised accountability and outsourcing .
What is good enough for businesses is not good enough for the EU .
Nothing is to be farmed out from Brussels to the Member States or to the citizens .
Laws are much better for having been drawn up by 3 000 secret working parties in the Commission and adopted by 300 secret working parties in the Council of Ministers , as well as by 15 000 professional lobbyists .
Long live technocracy in a corporate EU !
Mrs Mussolini can spare a friendly thought for her grandfather 's dedication to corporatism .
The voters can be allowed to go to the polls every five years and vote in favour of someone who can neither propose nor adopt laws .
Elected representatives can only advise the Commission by tabling amendments .
That is what it all comes down to at present , and a similar mindset is also at the heart of the Constitution - only in many more areas .
If something cannot be adopted by Council ministers and officials , there is always the possibility of going to the Court of Justice in Luxembourg with proposals that neither the electorate , national parliaments nor governments will know anything about .
Unanimously adopted penalties in connection with environmental issues are deemed unlawful because the judges want to see such penalties adopted by majority decision-making and well within their own control .
Enshrined as it is in treaties and draft constitutions alike , property law is clearly a matter for the Member States .
However , the obligation incumbent on farmers to reside on their own farms is judged to be unlawful , despite the unanimous verdict of the Danish Parliament to the contrary .
Voters and their parliaments are regarded as incapable , and family holdings are seen as being out of date . Let us , rather , have a bunch of jumped-up Prussian-style Junkers running agriculture everywhere in the EU .
Farmers are not good enough , and nor are employees ' and employers ' collective agreements , penal legislation , national judges or the voters .
The EU grandees know far better .
We have won many small victories for openness , and the Bundestag in Berlin has introduced the best rules yet for scrutinising the EU .
The time has now come when the threefold division of power into openness , proximity and democracy needs to govern the whole of the EU .
There must be no more laws that cannot be amended by elected representatives .
There must be no more laws that cannot be amended by the voters at the next election .
There must be no more treaties and constitutions that have not been adopted by the voters in referendums held throughout the EU , and preferably on the same day .
The President mentioned our electronic voting equipment .
I fondly recall the time when the new system from Olivetti was introduced .
It is a system I should like to have back again , for then my proposals could actually be adopted .


Ladies and gentlemen , those who are less familiar with the details - particularly our guests in the galleries - may perhaps not be aware that elections in Denmark are held on Thursdays rather than on Sundays , and Mr Bonde always takes that to mean that he has been a Member of this House for longer , even though that is wrong in legal terms , since he and I both became Members of it on 17 July 1979 .
His constant insistence on this does , however , give me hope that he cannot be that lacking in affection for the European Union and for this House if he so readily asserts that he - as he understands it - has been in this House for longer than anyone else .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , former Presidents , Mrs Merkel , Mr Barroso , the President of Parliament has just done a skilful job of describing the kind of political programme that one might perhaps have expected to hear from a President of the European Council or , indeed , of the Commission than from a President of Parliament in his role as arbiter .
In view of the group dynamics that often prevail in institutions , your speech , Mr President , concerning the will of the peoples no doubt reflects the opinion of the majority of this House .
You will allow me , however , to express what lawyers in the English-speaking world call a dissenting opinion .
You spoke of the ' temporary ' hitch - the word ' temporary ' was yours - involving the draft European Constitution as it was received in France and the Netherlands . The impression you gave was that this was merely a hiccup limited to two Member States .
However , everyone knows , or ought to know , that if this project had been submitted directly to the people of the Member States and not merely to members of the national parliaments , the document concerned would , in all probability , have been rejected much more widely .
We need , then , to know once and for all why , when nations express themselves freely in opposition to the dominant way of thinking , they go on being presented with the same menu that they have rejected .
When , however , they come out in agreement with the dominant trend , it is emphasised that their commitment is apparently definitive , irrevocable and perpetual and that they will not be entitled to backtrack .
In your speech , you mentioned several important features of our European tradition , and four in particular : Greek philosophy , Roman law , Judaeo-Christian spirituality and the Enlightenment .
That , however , is a crucial element of the problem : how faithful is the European Union to these components of its intellectual , moral and spiritual heritage ?
Is the European Union now inspired by Christian values or by a general hedonism that is out to destroy these same values in the name of a human rights ideology that brooks no resistance but of which variable geometry is always a feature ?
Are the structure and operation of the EU governed by Greek philosophy 's demand for clarity and simplicity and by the Greek political tradition of citizens ' direct participation in the affairs of the city state ; or are we instead seeing the implementation of a heavy , centralised and shortly to be outmoded structure that is ostensibly designed for governing almost 500 million Europeans but that , in practice , disregards their differences ?
Is European legislation inspired by the precision and concision of Roman law or is it a concoction of thousands of obscure and wordy texts involving detailed restrictions ?
Are we genuinely respectful of the tradition of public debate handed down to us by the Greeks and Romans ?
As for the Enlightenment , I would not conceal from you the concern we felt last month on hearing Chancellor Merkel quote freely from Voltaire in this House but then say to us - not literally , admittedly , but in essence - that there should be no tolerance for the enemies of tolerance - a statement that recalls the words of the French revolutionary Saint-Just , spoken before the revolutionary court that instigated the Terror : ' no liberty for the enemies of liberty ' .
To conclude , Europe is the only region in the history of humanity to have invented the liberty and equality of nations .
It is the region in which the people have always risen up against putative dictatorships - a fact that explains their current distrust of the wayward direction taken by the EU .
We do not need a Eurocratic superstate to guarantee the mutual security of our nations and borders , to launch detailed industrial , cultural and research cooperation projects and to protect us properly against migratory flows or against imports of products that have been manufactured for next to nothing and that are ruining our industries .
The instruments of international law are more than adequate to this task .
We have to rediscover the true genius of Europe and the law appropriate to Europeans .
( SK ) Mr President , may I begin by offering my sincere congratulations on your election to the position of president of the European Parliament , which is the most democratic and , at the same time , one of the most important of European institutions .
You have become the first president of the European Parliament after the adoption and implementation of the Treaty of Nice .
Currently , the European Union comprises 27 Member States .
I have not referred to this fact by chance , as political experience demonstrates that the implementation of one treaty is followed by preparations for another .
Two years of wavering and marking time with regard to the Constitutional Treaty have harmed the idea of a united Europe .
You are assuming office at a time when Germany , one of the founding Member States , holds the presidency of the European Union , and I therefore expect you to decide on what needs to be done next concerning the Constitutional Treaty .
Most Member States have opted for supporting the Constitutional Treaty and are willing to carry on implementing the vision of a united Europe , and their wishes cannot be overlooked because of the negative stance adopted by two of the Member States .
I would appreciate it if , following the election of its president , the European Parliament would now give some thought to introducing new rules or revising the existing Rules of Procedure .
I have respected the ' gentleman 's agreement ' made in the past by the two big political groups with regard to the election of the president of the European Parliament .
However , a democratic system should also allow a candidate from a smaller political group to be elected .
I am quite sure that in this House there are many distinguished and capable people in smaller political groups as well .
Mr President , I sincerely hope that during your term in office you will advocate greater involvement by the twelve new Member States in the shaping of European policies .
Looking at how the new Member States are currently represented on the committees of the European Parliament , I cannot help feeling dejected .
Similar discrimination against the new Member States can be seen from the number of their nationals employed by the European Parliament .
What is important here is not only the mere numbers but the positions these people fill .
There are nationals from our countries who often have two university degrees , foreign work experience and a good command of three of the EU 15 languages , and yet are in secretarial positions and therefore assisting superiors whose academic and language skills may be significantly inferior to their own .
By way of an example , let me refer to the procedure known as internal tendering to fill secretarial positions , which was carried out last year and served as the basis for assigning about 50 employees from the new Member States to secretarial jobs .
All of these people are university graduates and are currently performing at grade B and A levels but collecting secretarial pay .
The European Union is generating savings , as skilled work is carried out for low pay , but I am wondering whether this represents fairness and non-discrimination .
Non-discrimination also includes gender equality , a topic so often debated here .
We even have a dedicated committee to deal with this issue , but we are lagging behind in enforcement .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to wish you every success in your role as president of the European Parliament .
I have great esteem for you personally as well as for your rich track record and experience in European politics , and I believe that you will make a good and just administrator of public affairs .
I should like to thank Mrs Belohorská very much for her very kind personal remarks .
That brings to a close the part of the sitting including the President 's inaugural address .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I greatly welcome the remarks of both President Poettering and Chancellor Merkel .
Quoting Robert Schuman , we can say : ' the story of European integration is fundamentally a success story ' .
A failure of the constitutional process would put at risk the continuation of this success story .
If we do not succeed in creating a more efficient and more democratic Union , one that is closer to the citizens , this would seriously affect the success of the Lisbon Strategy , the creation of a more competitive Europe that nonetheless preserves its social values .
I consider an important element of this to be the creation of a more transparent , more unified legislation , which can promote the development of small and medium-sized enterprises at the European level , and thereby help create jobs as well .
Increasing competitiveness is also indispensable in order for Europe not to be forced to play the role of ' economic giant - political dwarf ' in world politics .
Today it may be more important than ever for European values , human rights , democracy , the rule of law and equal opportunities to be represented globally .
This is especially true in the year of equal opportunities , when both at European and at national levels we must make efforts to help those who suffer disadvantages .
While welcoming the importance given to the integration of migrants , I would like to add with regard to their situation : we should not forget the largest and perhaps more disadvantaged minority in Europe , the Roma .
In this regard as well , we need to tear down the imaginary economic and social Berlin Wall .
I would note especially the protection of women and children , who are the most vulnerable and suffer from a dual discrimination .
With regard to the rule of law , I wish to recall that the Union is fundamentally based on legal principles , and its functioning presupposes that every citizen respects its laws .
Members of the European Parliament must lead the way in respecting our laws - otherwise we shall set a bad example to all of Europe 's citizens .

( The sitting was suspended at 12.05 a.m , and resumed for voting time at 12.10 a.m. )
1 .
Classification of wood ( vote )
2 .
Public works contracts ( vote )
before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should just like to bring to the attention of the House a technical amendment that we should make pursuant to Rule 155 .
In the Commission 's proposal there was a technical omission under Article 2 , dealing with the transposition of the proposal .
The exact date for the transposition in the Member States is missing .
Therefore I propose under Rule 155 to add ' [ 18 months after the date of publication ] ' as the date for transposition .
This should be specified .
I should like to propose that to Members as a technical amendment .
3 .
Community action programme to promote activities in the field of the protection of the Community 's financial interests ( Hercule II programme ) ( vote )
After the vote
Mr President , it is not much use me speaking once the vote has happened , so all I want to say is that you need to keep more of an eye out in future .
I would like to thank both the German Presidency and its Finnish predecessor .
We have wrapped up this topic in just one reading , and we will be spending some EUR 100 million on fighting fraud over the coming years .
That is what I wanted to tell the House .
4 .
Rules for the implementation of the Financial Regulation ( vote )
Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reason why I have asked for the floor is that I have to make the House aware of an alarming situation in the negotiations between the Council and the Commission .
What you have before you is one of the last chances for the Barroso Commission to make headway towards an unreservedly positive statement of assurance .
We have made so bold as to pick up the Commission 's own proposals and include them in this report .
The Commission now seeks to reject it without proposing anything else to put in its place .
If , today , by doing nothing , you prevent simplification , improved recovery of wrongly disbursed funds and more efficient monitoring , you are ensuring that the Commission 's management will have a black mark against it in April 2009 .
We will then , in the discharge procedure , have an especially fault-ridden budget for 2007 to deal with - the first of the new Financial Perspective and only two months before the European elections .
If our proposals are not accepted , the Commission and the Council will be putting the brakes on and throwing the Euro-sceptics a juicy issue for 2009 .
It is regrettably the case that the Council has been on a collision course particularly since the German Presidency began ; instead of organising on a joint basis the publication of grants in aid and their recipients - which has already been agreed to - the Council has surprised everyone by saying , bluntly and without explanation , ' no ' , both to it and to research and development subsidies , that is to say , to the direct international joint administration as a whole .
In so doing , it is sowing dissent in Europe , for , without standardisation , everyone can do or fail to do whatever they please , and we are stuck with a loss of trust on the part of the European taxpayer .
The Council is robbing this Commission of transparency , which was its most visible success in the Budget sphere , and is of no value if it is not given tangible form .
I appeal to the Commission and the Presidency of the Council , as a matter of urgency , to face up to their responsibility for this legal draft , and to join us in making things simpler and cutting back bureaucracy .
The proposals are on the table before you , and I ask - I beg - you to give your assent to them .
( Applause )
5 .
Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community ( INSPIRE ) ( vote )
6 .
Waste ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 183
A Uachtaráin , ar an drochuair bhí meancóg cló ag 183 nuair a chuireamar isteach é agus ní fhacamar é go dtí an bomaite deireanach .
In ionad na dátaí 2012 - 2015 ba chóir go mbeadh na dátaí 2009 - 2012 , in ( a ) agus ( b ) .
Tá mé buartha faoin mheancóg .
I am sorry , there was a tabling error here .
The Tabling Office is aware of it .
Instead of the dates ' 2012 - 2015 ' there should have been the dates ' 2009 - 2012 ' in ( a ) and ( b ) .
Mar sin de ba mhaith liom leasú béil a mholadh faoin mheancóg cló a leasú in 183 .
- The oral amendment was accepted .
7 .
Waste recycling ( vote )
8 .
Women in Turkey ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Our aim is not to issue an opinion on the validity or otherwise of this decision to repeal Directive 68 / 89 / EEC , although , as a rule , we have our reservations as regards the Commission 's harmonising tendencies . Our view is indeed shared by most businesses and Member States in stating that they do not apply this Directive .
It is important , on the other hand , to issue an opinion on the process of which this forms part , namely the ' better lawmaking ' initiative , which , under the guise of simplification , is in practice a policy of market deregulation at national and Community level .
The Commission 's justification leaves no room for doubt : ' better lawmaking is vital to improving the competitiveness of European businesses and to achieving the objectives of the Lisbon Agenda ' . The objective , for the Commission , is to cut ' unnecessary costs and obstacles that block adaptation and innovation ' and to put into ' practice the right incentives and the basic market conditions for businesses to develop . '
In other words , the purpose of ' better lawmaking ' is to benefit business rather than to protect the consumer 's labour , social and environmental rights .
This is what we object to .
We do not want this process to lead to the repeal of any legislation that undermines the notion that competition and the profits of business are of prime importance , above all other considerations .
in writing .
( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report on Decision No 804 / 2004 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 establishing a Community action programme to promote activities in the field of the protection of the Community 's financial interests ( Hercule II programme ) .
Mr Bösch has tabled a good report .
The changes in the preamble are a better reflection of the criteria and purpose of this regulation .
The proposed change provides improved tools for implementing the action programme and strengthens supervision of its correct implementation .
Allocating an additional EUR 67 million to the Hercule II programme annually will have a significant effect on combating smuggling and fraud .
in writing . I support the Hercule II programme and the work it is carrying out for the prevention , detection and combating of activities damaging the Community 's financial interests .
The type of fraud combated under the programme must be tackled in order to retain the tax base of Member States .
in writing .
( PL ) I am voting for the report on the proposal on the Commission Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) amending Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 2342 / 2002 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities .
Mrs Gräßle and Mr Pahor , the rapporteurs , have compiled an excellent report which includes a number of amendments .
Implementing the regulation will provide greater flexibility and transparency in the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities .
It will better secure the Community 's financial interests , while at the same time giving the Committee on Budgetary Control more transparent opportunities to assess the proper implementation of the Community budget in the relevant section .
in writing . I support the amendments put forward by this report as the European Parliament 's budgetary function is vital to maintaining democratic scrutiny at the European level .
I especially support the amendments aimed at improving the comparison between the political will expressed in Parliament 's remarks on the budget and the actual implementation .

( DE ) Mr President , the INSPIRE data system is a considerable gain for us in Europe , since , for every policy , particularly in the environmental sphere , we need mutually comparable data on space , and so I would like to thank Mrs Brepoels , the rapporteur , for negotiating an outstandingly good compromise , which is the only way in which we can enable the public to inform themselves on the environmental hazards in store for them and to participate in the systems that we are setting up in Europe .
INSPIRE is making an essential contribution to this .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report as it will create a waste management policy that will help us meet our objective of reducing waste and protecting our environment .
We need to protect the environment at an EU level and this report represents an attempt to do this .
The report meets the priorities I feel we should have for our environment of reducing the production of non-reusable or non-recyclable waste , making producers and importers responsible for waste , avoiding the reclassification of energy recovery incinerators for waste disposal and introducing a requirement to develop national waste prevention programmes .
( DE ) Mr President , two things were of particular importance to us Austrians when it came to the revision of this framework directive on waste .
One was the special rule for organic waste , since both we and Germany have systems for dealing with this , which work very well and need to be maintained .
At the same time , though , we urge the Commission to keep working on this in order to establish a Europe-wide system for it .
The second thing we were concerned about was catering waste and waste from guesthouses , which can , after appropriate treatment , be reused in the husbandry of pigs .
That is quite essential if those and similar food flows are to be properly reprocessed .

( DE ) Mr President , slowly , but surely , society is rethinking its approach to waste , but , since more and more countries want to reprocess old waste and the owners of plant want to spare them overload , the consequence is that waste is transported from one end of Europe to the other .
Even if we are now paying attention to the environment , we become aware from time to time of black sheep quietly or blatantly disposing of waste in an illegal manner or claiming money for costly reprocessing that they have not actually carried out .
Not only does that do harm to the living space we all share , but it also costs the state and municipalities a lot of money , and we need to be more vigorous in dealing with this .
We also need to do more work on informing people , since some members of the public , out of ignorance , dispose of such things as medicines in the wrong way .
It also goes without saying that we have to do more about recycling , and that the EU and its Member States need to set us a good example in this respect .
Over and above that , too , we must not forget that the issue of the storage of nuclear waste has still not yet been resolved , and that is yet another reason to refrain from building more nuclear power stations .
in writing . We and the Fianna Fail Delegation in the EP have voted in favour of a stronger Commission proposal on waste favouring the five-stage hierarchy with the essential emphasis on Prevention and Reduction of waste , followed by reuse , recycling , recovery and then the safe and environmentally sound disposal of waste in this order of priority .
We have voted in favour of calling for binding targets for Member States to stabilise waste production at anticipated 2008 levels by 2012 and support the EP call for greater reuse and recycling to reduce pressure on landfill sites , for Member States to take the necessary measures to ensure that , where practicable , all waste undergoes recovery operations , to take measures to promote recycling and to set up collection schemes of different streams , to move towards a Recycling Society by 2020 where 50 % of our municipal solid waste should be recycled in addition to biowaste and industrial waste .
The issue of the distinction between Recovery and Disposal is a very important one .
We have voted in favour of amendments that clearly distinguish between recovery and disposal and have voted against amendments that would reclassify units from disposal to recovery .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to congratulate the rapporteur and Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the excellent work that they have done .
We do indeed need to take action , as waste management policies do not always advance the cause of recycling and composting . Unfortunately , dumping and incineration are still the most widespread ways of dealing with waste .
I am in favour of the five-level hierarchy applicable to waste management ( prevention , re-use , recycling , recovery and dumping ) as , in my view , the objective of reducing waste must be given priority , and precedence must therefore be given to a policy of waste prevention .
I am in favour , for example , of introducing product labelling designed to develop eco-consumption .
I am pleased that , for purposes of simplification , excavated land has been excluded from the list of forms of waste .
However , I think it necessary to make a clear distinction between recycling and recovery , and to manage incineration practices , with a view to creating genuine energy recovery , which must not constitute a risk to human health and the environment .
I support the proposal whereby , in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle , those who produce waste would , as a matter of general practice , be held responsible for it .
This report raises a number of points that are , in some cases , inconsistent .
The report proposes priorities regarding , on the one hand , waste management , with the emphasis on prevention , reuse , recycling and other recovery operations , and , on the other , regarding waste disposal .
This is something we welcome , and we hope that the final text will eventually reflect this proposal .
Unfortunately , however , some of the positive amendments that were tabled - aimed at removing incineration from classification as a recovery process , and at ensuring that using this method would automatically be null and void - were not adopted , whereas others , much more limited in scope , were adopted . Therein lie some of the inconsistencies .
Consequently , at the forthcoming negotiation stage , all our attention must be focused on the process , in order to monitor the development of the definitions and the content thereof .
Hence at this first reading we have prioritised the aspects that improved on the Commission 's original proposal .
The final vote at second reading , however , will depend on clarification of the existing inconsistencies .
in writing . I will be voting in favour of the Jackson report on waste .
It is important that we avoid burying ourselves under the proliferation of packaging consumer society imposes on us .
I am in favour of recycling to the maximum practical level , but that is not enough .
We must limit the amount of waste generated before recycling .
However much we try , there will be material requiring disposal .
Provided that it is kept to the minimum practical level , I have no problem if some of that material is burnt .
I have visited in Germany CHP schemes based on waste incineration which are to be commended .
We will help our planet and our future by utilising a variety of measures and not by making one scheme fit all .
in writing . I supported the Jackson report today because it encompassed the thrust of the Environment Committee 's progressive stance on waste prevention and management .
I am particularly satisfied that the European Parliament has rejected the Commission 's proposal to re-brand municipal waste incinerators based on certain criteria .
Sinn Féin supports those communities in Ireland fighting against the imposition of dangerous incinerators onto their communities .
The Jackson report sends out a clear signal that the European Parliament supports the principles of a recycling society - Member States should do so too .
The inclusion of the five-step waste hierarchy plan and the insistence on obliging Member States to provide waste prevention plans are also welcome .
I regret that clearer and more ambitious targets were not included , however .
The issue of waste treatment is extremely important .
The debate should focus on the idea that the excesses of those championing the environment will result in unrealistic , unworkable legislation . Such legislative inadequacy will in turn lead to environmental negligence and to an avoidable legacy for future generations .
One must , on the other hand , be mindful of the fact that , for all our good intentions on reducing pollution , the truth is that the ongoing increase in standards of living in the EU , and indeed throughout the world , will always lead to higher consumption and inevitably to more waste .
We must therefore be realistic and , more importantly , seek to obtain a positive return , as suggested here , on waste treatment , in terms of energy .
in writing . - ( FR ) Prevention is better than cure .
This adage , which ringingly endorses the desire to tackle the root causes of problems , applies perfectly to European waste policy .
What , then , are the facts ?
Between 1995 and 2003 , global waste production has increased by 19 % an average of 3.5 tonnes per person per year .
If we add to this the fact that less than 20 % of waste is recycled , that - in 50 % of cases end-of-life materials are not recycled and end up scattered throughout the countryside and that , moreover , allowing incinerators and waste that is dangerous to the environment and to public health to proliferate is not a tenable policy , what we have is a whole waste management philosophy that needs to be re-thought , and to be re-thought along three main axes : eco-design as a priority of waste prevention policy , given that 80 % of the environmental impact occurs at the time that a product is manufactured and processed ; the implementation of green taxation , which is intended to have a deterrent effect and which discourages excess packaging and energy-guzzling products ; and the closure of Europe 's 10 000 illicit rubbish dumps or the modification of these dumps to bring them into line with the 2001 EU Landfill Directive .
in writing . I welcome this report in tackling the EU waste problem .
I am pleased that a legally binding stabilisation target has been introduced for waste prevention .
I am also pleased that there has been no weakening of the principle of the five-stage ' hierarchy of waste ' : prevention and reduction of waste , re-use of waste , recycling of waste ( less than a third of waste is recycled today ) , other recovery operations and , finally , the safe and environmentally sound disposal of waste .
As we know , one of the problems of modern society is waste production .
We therefore endorse the adoption of this document , which places the accent on the primary objective of waste management , namely the protection of the environment and human health .
We would also highlight the adoption of what is referred to as the ' waste hierarchy ' , that is to say , the establishment of the following action priorities , in order : prevention , reuse , recycling , other recovery operations such as energy recovery and lastly disposal .
With the higher importance attached to the issue of prevention , the intention is to reduce as far as possible the waste created .
Let us not forget , however , that given the enormous amount of waste currently produced , measures aimed at reuse , recycling and disposal that could be implemented remain inadequate and incapable of meeting our needs .
Waste reduction is therefore a crucial issue . To achieve this , however , entails a change in standards of production and consumption .
It also involves clarifying the problem and raising awareness among the entire population .
Consequently , it must be clarified how waste management is to be paid for , and guarantees must be put in place to ensure that it is not the ' weakest link in the chain ' , namely the consumers , who have to carry the can .
We therefore feel that reference to the application of the ' polluter pays ' principle is dangerous .
in writing . - ( EL ) In Greece , there are now 3 500 uncontrolled dumps .
About half incinerate , with serious repercussions on the environment and public health .
The volume of waste is increasing and most of it is dumped in landfills .
On the other hand , the re-use and recycling of waste are still at excessively low levels and illegal cross-border transportation of waste is increasing .
All this applies to most of the Member States and is rightly pointed out in the report entitled ' Thematic Strategy on the recycling of waste ' " .
Unfortunately , instead of finding solutions to these social problems , the Commission is using confusing targets and phoney definitions and a lack of qualitative and quantitative targets to promote the interests of the manufacturers and operators of incineration plants , which are major economic interests , at a time when we know that incineration produces gaseous pollution , dangerous solids and toxic liquid waste which contribute to the greenhouse effect .
At the same time , incineration acts as a counterincentive to recycling .
This confirms that the capitalist ΕU cannot by its very nature apply a waste management policy based on the criterion of environmental protection and public health , because this is incompatible with unhampered action by capital to generate profits .
We also express our disagreement with the principle of ' the polluter pays ' and the principle of the ' waste generator 's responsibility ' , as they are tools for shifting blame from the polluter , who can basically pollute with impunity and just pay a financial price .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report as I believe we should create a waste management policy that will reduce waste and protect our environment .
I believe the basis of the EU waste policy should be the protection of the environment and not to facilitate the trade of waste .
The ' polluter pays ' principle , the principle of producer responsibility in the EU waste legislation as well as the implementation of concrete targets for prevention are important aspects of this report that I favour .
in writing . The proposal for a separate directive on sewage sludge , a revision of the waste incinerator directive and proposals on waste prevention should be welcomed .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Bozkurt report .
Whilst a number of necessary conclusions have been drawn , we in this House are passing up an opportunity to bring real pressure to bear on the Turkish Government .
The accession negotiations with Turkey could be used as a lever to make progress in the area of human rights , in this case women 's rights , but it would appear that we have made a conscious decision not to do this .
In this House , there is a majority that assumes that Turkey must be able to join the European Union at all costs .
The official line is , of course , that negotiations with Turkey can be suspended at any time if it transpires that that country is clearly flouting the human rights conditions .
It has , though , become evident to us , time and time again , that the negotiations will never be suspended .
It is a stipulation that serves one purpose and one purpose only : to pacify the majority of the voting public in Europe who are opposed to Turkey joining .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mrs Bozkurt on women 's role in social , economic and political life in Turkey .
Although the legal framework for women 's rights appears to be generally satisfactory , its actual implementation is still deficient , in my opinion : violence against women - and , in particular , honour crimes and forced marriages - must be systematically condemned .
I welcome the proposal in the report inviting Turkish institutions to build alliances with all groupings - civil and social - in society so as to initiate campaigns to spread awareness of violence committed against women and children .
I am also delighted by the adoption of the recommendation addressed to the Turkish political parties to include more female candidates on election lists as from the next elections in 2007 .
Finally , I am very pleased about the request to the Turkish Government to make it mandatory for girls prevented by their families from attending school to have access to knowledge .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Bozkurt because it reinforces the idea that the Turkish Government must adopt measures enabling women to play a more prominent role in Turkey 's social , economic and political life , despite progress that has already been made .
This report illustrates that there is a long way to go when it comes to protecting Turkish women against domestic violence and honour crimes . It also calls on the Turkish Government to build more shelters for women who are victims of violence .
By voting for this report we only wanted to endorse protection of the rights of all Turkish women , including in accession negotiations between Turkey and the EU , high on the agenda of which is the crucial issue of respect for human rights , including women 's rights .
Yet we do not consider this to be the only issue to take into account in the negotiations with Turkey .
Our opposition to accession negotiations while Turkey continues its unacceptable occupation of Northern Cyprus is well known .
We therefore object to a number of points in the report before us .
As the adopted report says , although the new Criminal Code , which entered into force in June 2005 , has substantially improved the fundamental rights of Turkish women , the European Directives on gender equality have yet to be transposed in full .
We also deplore the fact that , in some parts of South-East Turkey , girls are not registered when they are born , which hampers the fight against forced marriages and honour crimes , as the victims have no official identity .
We also join in calling on the Turkish Government to guarantee women from the Kurdish minority equal involvement in women 's rights programmes .
in writing . ( SV ) We fully share the view that Turkey , like other candidate countries , must establish a democratic constitutional state with full human rights and gender equality .
However , we are critical of quite a few individual points in the report .
For example , it is absurd for the European Parliament to propose that a mandatory quota system be adopted , ensuring fair representation of women on election lists ( paragraph 41 ) , that the Turkish political parties adopt internal rules guaranteeing the presence of women in their management bodies at all levels ( paragraph 43 ) and that the political parties in Turkey include more female candidates on election lists ( paragraph 44 ) .
The EU does not impose this type of requirement on other candidate countries or on existing Member States .
It is self-evidently absurd for a candidate country to be treated differently through the formulation of special requirements .
Moreover , it is , in the end , for individual countries to decide what type of measures are to be taken to strengthen the role of women in society .
On the basis of the above reasoning , we have each chosen to abstain in the final vote .
in writing . I and my British Conservative colleagues support the accession of Turkey to the European Union .
We also believe it is important that Turkey , as with all other candidate countries , must fulfil the Copenhagen criteria .
However , this report seems to set the barrier of membership of Turkey at a higher level than other states .
We cannot support treating Turkey differently and less favourably than other candidate states .
Of course , Turkey must also ensure it will abide by the Copenhagen criteria with regard to the rights of women and girls .
We have decided to abstain on this report as we are concerned that the long list of demands in it will be used politically by those opposed to Turkey 's membership of the EU .
By the same token , we want to make clear that we are supportive of genuine attempts to improve the position of women in Turkey .
We MEPs of the New Democracy party voted in favour of the Bozkurt report , which refers not only to the problematic situation of women in Turkey in all sectors , but also to the measures that need to be taken in order for the acquis communautaire to be adopted and applied in the candidate country .
Constant , multilateral efforts by Turkey must continue in order to defend women 's human rights , by eliminating violence , crimes of honour and polygamy , and in order to eliminate discrimination in the family , in economic and social life and in general .
We abstained from Amendment 15 .
We believe that this amendment gives no added value to the resolution .
It is a fact that the dimension of equality forms part of the acquis communautaire , which must be adopted and applied by the candidate country .
Thus , freezing negotiations , as called for in the amendment in question , would delay the application of equality between the two sexes .
We should not forget that there is already leverage in this direction at the current stage of negotiations .
We would remind the House that opening negotiations on Chapter 19 on social policy and employment , which relates directly to discrimination against women , requires compulsory developments in and compliance by Turkey , with specific targets to promote equality .
in writing . I have voted in favour of this report as it seeks to evaluate and suggest measures to evolve women 's rights in Turkey .
Cooperation with Turkish authorities and civil society is needed in order to improve women 's rights and the report suggests this .
In particular , in light of the country 's candidacy for EU membership , respecting human rights , including women 's rights must be made a priority .
There are persistent problems with women 's rights such as : Violence against women , including honour crimes ; lack of education for women and girls ; the decrease in women 's participation in the labour market .
I am pleased to support a report which recognises the need to address these issues and gives concrete suggestions for how we can achieve this .
Forced marriages , domestic violence , honour crimes , illiteracy , etc : the situation of women in Turkey is not a bed of roses .
According to Unicef , 700 000 girls are prevented from attending school by their families every year .
The employment rate among women is less than 25 % , way below the 55 % in the European Union .
These are worrying figures when Turkey 's accession to the EU is arousing controversy .
That is why Parliament is proposing constructive measures : an assessment of Turkey 's progress according to benchmarks ; the creation of refuges for women who are victims of violence ; the obligation to register all girls at birth in order to prevent forced marriage ; training the police and judiciary in the prevention of honour crimes , to encourage the systematic opening of inquiries and the necessary sentences ; a mandatory quota system for the involvement of women in political life .
I am not a fundamentalist when it comes to positive discrimination , but I am convinced that temporary measures will be useful in Turkey .
The country is crying out for women in positions of power , who will serve as models and bring about a change in traditional ways of thinking .
in writing . ( SV ) In the vote on Mrs Bozkurt 's report on women 's role in social , economic and political life in Turkey , I chose to vote in favour of the amendment designed to delete paragraph 41 on the subject of a quota system .
I think it a great problem that there are not more women in Turkish politics , but , for me , a quota system is not the right solution to this problem .
in writing . The start of talks with Turkey on EU accession should be welcomed .
However , the rights of women need to be closely monitored .
The case of girls in south-east Turkey not being registered at birth needs to be challenged .
All births should be officially registered regardless of gender .
As for women in politics , more work could be done to encourage , nurture and help women into elected office .
However , we should remember that in the EU there are still countries whose female representation in national politics falls short of the mark .
In the UK , it will take 200 years before women are equally represented in the House of Commons .
We must do all that we can to address gender inequalities where they occur .
in writing . ( SV ) Present circumstances show that the membership negotiations with Turkey have been embarked on too early .
The report highlights a number of serious problems , especially the occurrence of honour killings and violence against women .
Quite apart from whether or not it becomes a Member State , Turkey is on the EU 's doorstep and will constitute an important trading partner for the EU .
It is therefore important for the EU to continue to put political pressure on Turkey with a view to the country 's constructive development .
However , it would be extremely unfortunate if the European Parliament were to go so far as to propose a mandatory quota system for the representation of women on various election lists .
The EU does not have the power to interfere in nomination proceedings that comply with democratic ground rules .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved . )
Preparations for the European Council ( 8-9 March 2007 ) ( debate )
The next item is a statement by the Council and the Commission on the preparations for the European Council on 8 and 9 March .
Mr President , Commissioner Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , this spring summit of Heads of State or Government will , as in previous years , be primarily devoted to economic issues , the Lisbon Strategy in particular .
We are of course delighted that this year 's spring summit is being held at a time when the economy is in a good state and good things are happening on the labour markets .
From this we arrive at the cautious conclusion that the Lisbon Strategy 's first-fruits are appearing , but we are also persuaded that it would be quite inappropriate to rest on our laurels .
Far from doing that , we want to put the overall favourable trends and the incipient mood of optimism to work in the interests of further structural reforms , to join together in undertaking further efforts at securing for the long term , and building on , the successes of recent months , for it is important that we get Europe in top form ready for global competition .
Following intensive preparatory work , which was characterised by very close and very fruitful cooperation with the Commission , the meeting of the European Council on 8 and 9 March is ready to be hammered into shape .
The General Affairs and External Relations Council yesterday discussed the annotated agenda for the Council that the presidency had drafted , and I am glad to be able to tell you that the Member States wholeheartedly endorse the list of topics proposed by the presidency .
Over the coming weeks , COREPER will coordinate the contributions of the various sectoral Council formations and do further work on the draft conclusions for the Council in the light of their essential comments .
Perhaps I might remind the House at this point of the dates on which the various specialist Council will finalise their contributions . The Energy Council will be meeting the day after tomorrow in order to discuss the Energy Action Plan , which is one of the really big issues for the European Council ; the Education and Youth Council meets on 16 February , followed by the Competitiveness Council on 19 February and the Environmental Council on 20 February .
This round is concluded by the Council responsible for employment and social issues and the ECOFIN Council , which meet on 22 and 27 February respectively .
Although your House is not directly involved in these preparatory activities , I am able to assure you that the Presidency will be taking account of the opinions you have adopted in connection with the themes of the Summit .
Perhaps I might now go into rather more detail about the Presidency 's plans for this year 's spring summit .
I will also refer back to what the President of the Council said in this Chamber this morning .
We will endeavour to ensure that the European Council performs its essential role , which involves it in concentrating on core issues , setting general directions , taking decisions about the future and issuing policy guidelines to the responsible entities at European and national level .
Today 's exchange of views and , of course the in-depth dialogue with the President of your House in the course of the session are , of course , important elements in performing this function .
With these general considerations in mind , we have tried to focus the European Council 's deliberations on topics in respect of which action is generally recognised as being necessary and areas in which further efforts need to be made .
Our specific concern is with supporting the structural reforms embarked on in the Member States and moving them forward by integrating recommendations specific to the country in question .
Within the area of the internal market , we want to strengthen the shared desire to close loopholes , identify weak points , and make the EU more competitive against third countries , while at the same time pushing for the relaunch of the Doha Round .
We are no less keen to encourage innovation , research and education than to promote job creation and the further development of the European social model , central to all of which are ' flexicurity ' and demographic change .
As the Federal Chancellor said this morning , better regulation is important to all of us , for there is , in it , considerable potential for making the European economy more competitive , and so the reduction of bureaucracy is a priority issue for the German Presidency .
We have set ourselves the goal of sending out ambitious messages from the meeting of the European Council ; in practical terms , our main concern is with the simplification of existing laws and consideration of how the impact of new ones might be better assessed .
As the lawmaking authority , the Council and Parliament have a particular responsibility for ensuring that proposals from the Commission for the simplification of legislation are both thoroughly scrutinised and promptly processed .
Our main concern is that the reduction of bureaucracy be driven forward , particularly through clear quantitative targets being laid down .
Finally , the European Council , as decided last year , will give its attention to the EU 's comprehensive plan for energy , which is committed to the EU 's three fundamental goals in this area - security of supply , competitiveness , and environmental compatibility , the latter of which is always to be emphasised .
It is evident from the Strategic Energy Report , which the Commission presented in January , that only an energy policy that addresses all three points of this triangular objective will be equal to the challenges that face the EU , and that is why we are pushing for a bundle of measures without which - being taken together - the desired effect will not be forthcoming .
This package includes measures that reinforce competition on the internal energy market , that attach greater importance to renewable energies and help to develop better energy technologies and greater energy efficiency , and it is of great significance in this respect that greater weight is being given to the foreign policy components of energy policy .
I would like to make it clear that Europe must increasingly speak with one voice where energy issues are concerned .
The issue of climate protection is inseparable from that of energy .
Since climate change presents us with the challenge of the century , we are firmly determined to bring about ambitious and forward-looking resolutions , including quantitative targets , in this area too , and the proposals put forward by the Commission for full coordination on energy matters provide us with a good basis for this .
The European Council must work towards sending out a strong signal in favour of the further development of the international climate protection regime after 2012 .
Only if the industrialised countries , led by the European Union , take the lead with commitment to demanding targets and measures will it be possible to expect the emerging countries to show the willingness to accept undertakings appropriate to their own circumstances to limit their own rapidly increasing emissions .
Many thanks , Mr President-in-Office , not only for what you said , but also for having used up only half the time available to you in saying it .
That is something we should take as an example when considering the reform of the way our House works ; the Council , too , is capable of imposing limits on itself and nevertheless saying something worth hearing .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , March offers a real opportunity for the European Union .
Firstly , it gives us a chance to show citizens a European Union taking ambitious , clear decisions on subjects that they care deeply about .
Secondly , we will be called upon to agree a declaration that will not only celebrate our achievements over these 50 years , but set out what we can do in the future .
So , the two are closely linked .
A successful spring Council would provide the perfect springboard for an ambitious Berlin declaration .
Europe has to take action .
It has to be political , effective and play a key role when it comes to addressing the major challenges of today 's globalised world .
Growth and jobs , climate change , energy : these are subjects on the minds of Europeans every day .
We have a real opportunity to show what the European Union can offer , of course , in full compliance with our renewed commitment to better regulation .
I should like to focus on climate change , energy and the growth and jobs agenda .
Two weeks ago the UN Panel on Climate Change set out clearly , calmly and irrefutably the facts on climate change .
The goal of limiting temperature gains to 2 ° C is still achievable - just !
The next decade or so will determine whether we manage to bring the situation under control .
Our international partners , investors and citizens are all looking to the European Union for clear , determined action .
The scale of the problem is huge .
A bold response is the only one that makes sense and that means practical policy proposals and binding targets .
That is why we proposed that developed countries accept a 30 % emission reduction target by 2020 compared to 1990 levels .
At the same time , nobody questions the need to bring developing countries into the global efforts to cut emissions , and they can realistically be put on track to limit the growth in their emissions , to start with , and to start cutting by 2020 .
I expect the spring European Council to send a convincing and strong signal on the need for determined action on climate change .
The resolution on climate change , which this House will adopt tomorrow and which is both encouraging and stunning , contains an important and urgent message , which the Commission will pass on to the Heads of State and Government when climate issues are being discussed at the spring Council .
However , we must also show both inside and outside the EU that we are prepared to act ourselves today .
That is why the spring Council should agree a firm , independent EU commitment to achieving at least a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 .
This will be a real demonstration of our commitment .
Energy is key to cutting emissions .
However , it is more than that : secure supply , fairer prices and more choice are all issues that are central to citizens ' daily concerns for themselves , their families and future generations and , of course , to European industry .
There is also an instinctive sense that these issues can only be tackled effectively at European level .
Therefore , this is also a stern test for the European Union itself .
Last month , the Commission set out its vision of how to put European energy policy on track and I very much welcome the supportive stance of this Parliament .
Whenever we face a long-term challenge , it is essential that Europeans can look to their democratically-elected representatives to explain why reform is essential , to put short-term change in the context of long-term purpose , to convince us that every one of us can play a part , for example through doing what we can on energy efficiency .
The comprehensive resolution that you adopted on 14 December last year reflects the essential role that Parliament plays in this context .
So the ambition and conviction of the European Council are critical .
We cannot put off decisions any longer .
Europe needs to send the clearest of messages that it is committed to transforming the shape of European energy over the next few decades .
Investors are ready to step in on a massive scale , but they need a clearer signal .
That means decisive action in the internal market .
It means real steps to ensure solidarity between Member States .
It means making research in this area our top priority , for example as the first target for the European Institute of Technology .
It means a precise , ambitious and , in particular , binding target of bringing renewable energy into the mainstream by 2020 .
With a clear green light from the European Council , the Commission is ready to bring forward a wide range of precise legislative measures this year .
Climate change and energy are integral parts of the broader issue on which the spring Council will focus , the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
Real steps are being taken to invest more in innovation , to make life easier for new and growing businesses , to help citizens prepare for change .
The economic situation , as you know , is improving and Europe has shown that it is facing up to the challenge of globalisation , but these first steps now need to accelerate .
The consensus for change needs to be translated into action in all parts of Europe and in all sectors .
Modernising our economies and societies is essential if our values and quality of life are to flourish in this rapidly changing world .
The spring Council needs to give a clear message that we will press ahead with reform at all levels as set out in the Commission 's annual progress report on the Lisbon Strategy , including the country-specific recommendations .
The Commission strongly welcomes Parliament 's support on this point .
Your resolution gives a timely reminder of some of the key benchmarks by which the credibility of action will be assessed .
For example , reducing start-up time for new businesses to no more than one week , or cheaper protection of intellectual property rights .
Time is running out if we are to avoid the worst effects of climate change , tackle the global imbalance between energy supply and demand , and secure real modernisation .
It is time to put our best wisdom at the service of these objectives .
George Bernard Shaw said that we grow wise not by remembering the past , but by being responsible for the future .
At a time when we are celebrating 50 years of the European Union , this is a wise thing to remember .
Bold , ambitious and long-term decisions from the spring Council in March will put the European Union on the road to finding real answers to these most urgent questions .
Thank you very much , Vice-President Wallström , especially because you did not use all the time allocated to you .
This is a very good example from the Presidency and from the Commission .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , each generation has a duty and responsibility to do its bit for progress .
Ours too is facing a challenge , namely that of globalisation .
We are living in a world that is changing fast and is opening up .
In the European Union , we need to face up to worldwide , sometimes aggressive , competition with an ageing population and against the backdrop of global warming .
This competition is becoming more cut-throat not only on the supply side of our market , but also on the demand side of the market of raw materials and energy .
We could ignore it , we could passively submit to it , or we could prepare for it .
If , however , we want to give today 's children any prospect of a quality life and a good job , then there is only one answer : to ensure that we are competitive .
Being competitive does not mean yielding blindly to the pressures of globalisation .
It does mean , though , that we must equip ourselves with the right instruments that will guarantee us a future for what is dear to us , namely our European social model and the values on which our way of living and society are founded .
In order to be competitive , we need a bold vision , strategy and people , as well as resources .
We have the vision .
We have the Lisbon Strategy with the partnership for growth and jobs and this is something to which we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats have always been 100 % committed .
We are also enormously grateful that the Barroso Commission is putting in so much effort , as is the German Presidency , with its desire to focus more on the weak areas that need improving and on a serious energy plan .
In the last Commission report , we read that the economic prospects had improved over the last year .
Let us seize this momentum to achieve our goals with all the more force , because there is a great deal left to be done , not least by the Member States of which the Commission reports sometimes show in too rosy a light .
With the spring summit in mind , we will be voting on a resolution tomorrow .
We have been able to verify it against the view of the national MPs , with whom we had a good meeting last week .
This resolution also voices our priorities that will be further highlighted by our shadow rapporteur , Mr Lehne .
The completion of the internal market , not least for both the consumer and the SME , administrative simplification , a study into the effect of the practice of goldplating , more research and innovation , a renewed approach to energy policy and to fighting climate change , with due attention to energy supply , affordability , less dependence , more renewable energy sources and lower greenhouse gas emissions .
These are all measures that need to be taken if we want to achieve our objective of more growth and jobs .
For the majority of our group , there is room for nuclear energy as well , even though we fully respect the principle of subsidiarity in this respect .
Lisbon is , of course , more than the sum total I listed so far .
What matters most of all is caring about the well-being and dignity of the people and of their position and share in society .
This is also why all our attention is focused on training , education , lifelong learning , the fight against exclusion and sound migration policy and indeed , gender equality , for the fact that talented women opt out is also a form of brain drain .
As for labour market reform , we are looking forward to the discussion of the Commission document on flex-security .
Since Lisbon is about people , the process must also be supported by people .
As long as the European strategy for growth and jobs is seen by the public more as part of the problem than as the way to a solution , there is cause for concern .
The involvement of both the people and civil society must increase .
In previous major projects , such as Europe ' 92 ' at the time and also when the euro was introduced , we were successful thanks to a huge , broad-based communication initiative .
We , and certainly the Member States , missed opportunities during the enlargement process .
Without a proper communication strategy , Lisbon will not be understood properly , supported or carried out adequately , something that is probably attributable to a lack of political courage .
Hence , I would like to make a passionate plea to the three institutions to pledge their funds for this cause and also , if possible , to make some room for this in the important Berlin declaration that is being compiled .
I should like to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteur for the resolution we will be endorsing tomorrow and which we prepared in the working party with the 33 under Mr Daul 's presidency .
The resolution turned out to be rather long , but as it is one that enjoys broad support and that is also positive , it allows us to send out a broad message about where we want to take this strategy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when global problems are piling up , a number of EU Member States are tempted by nationalism .
The fact is that the indisputable lesson of the globalisation under way is that even Germany , France , Great Britain or , indeed , Poland are relatively helpless faced with the foreseeable rise of certain large nations .
Everyone concedes that the Treaty of Nice is no longer enough to ensure the effective governance of the EU-27 .
However , the Constitutional Treaty has collapsed , and not only because of the French and Dutch ' no ' votes but also because certain Heads of State or Government refuse to honour their signatures .
The vision of Europe cannot be summarised solely in terms of the internal market .
Our fellow citizens want to see a more social dimension and joint action that is more effective .
European integration began with the European Coal and Steel Community .
Last year , China became the world 's top steel manufacturer .
In January , China and Russia signed 15 energy cooperation agreements , one of them relating to the construction of two gas pipelines , each with a capacity of 40 billion cubic metres .
This month , India , China and Russia are to take part in a tripartite forum with a view to promoting trade with each other .
The United States and Russia have just signed a joint nuclear research agreement .
The Chinese , Japanese , Indians , Russians and Americans are cooperating in the development of new technologies designed to combat climate change .
Where , then , is Europe in all this ?
We are far from the solidarity of the now defunct CECA .
We are struggling to define an energy policy characterised by solidarity and therefore of a joint character , and this at a time when our energy dependence is increasing .
Admittedly , we are giving priority to ambitious objectives , but with deadlines in 2020 , 2030 or 2050 , that is to say beyond the foreseeable future .
Chancellor Merkel reminded us this morning that the EU was responsible for 15 % of total CO2 emissions .
According to Commissioner Dimas , our share fell to 14 % in 2006 - a figure indicative not of greater efficiency on the part of Europeans but of an increase in the emissions of other industrialised nations .
If it is obvious that Europe must set an example , it is no less obvious that we are not going to be able to overcome global problems on our own . Europe has some aces up its sleeve when it comes to making its presence felt in the global debate .
We remain the biggest economic power , generating 30 % of gross world product .
More than a third of the two thousand largest companies in the world are European .
We still lead the world in practically all sectors , with the exceptions of digital technology and biotechnology , and the Lisbon Summit has defined a strategy for remedying these deficiencies .
This strategy is still a live one , even if progress is desperately slow , particularly where research and innovation are concerned .
The forthcoming summit will provide the opportunity for a new departure .
All the analyses have been carried out , and all the problems are known .
The time for practical decisions has come . The political relaunch of Europe must take place by June at the latest .
That , at least , is the ambition of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , EU growth in 2006 hit 2.7 % - the highest in six years .
Unemployment is at its lowest since 1998 , at 7.9 % .
One is tempted to say , ' well done ! ' , but that 2.7 % growth has to be measured against 9.5 % in China and India , and our 7.9 % unemployment rate against under 5 % in the United States and 4.1 % in Japan .
In this light , the Lisbon goal of making Europe the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 sounds not only ambitious but unrealistic .
We have already dropped the target date .
Can we maintain the target ?
Well , we hold this debate annually ; some Member States perennially ignore our exhortations .
The Kok Report told us two years ago that the objectives of Lisbon have become muddled and the results are unconvincing .
It is because some Member States have tried to muddle through instead of reforming their ways .
Lisbon will only work if reform is made Europe-wide .
Solidarity cannot mean those governments who have gone through the tough process of reform now having to bail out those who have not .
In some countries , even the opposition does not see the need for reform ; it makes promises to citizens which cannot be kept and , I am tempted to say :
( FR ) It might be said that there is a dire need in this case for a reality check .
A knowledge-based economy needs a willingness to learn .
We in Europe can learn from each other .
Economic growth and low unemployment , a dynamic business environment and high social standards are not mutually exclusive - look at Denmark or Finland .
The way to modernise social protection and benefit systems is to bring in more flexibility .
Youth unemployment is far too high , but protecting our citizens does not mean that we have to protect uncompetitive jobs .
The social safety net should not prop up failing businesses , but help those affected to reintegrate into new business opportunities .
My group believes , too , that investing in green technologies is key to containing climate change and catering for energy security in Europe .
Energy is literally the driving force of our economy , and , as our Energy Ministers meet this week in Brussels , they must rise to the challenge and have the courage to open up the energy sector to greater competition and flexibility , not just separating infrastructure from supply .
Building a true European energy market is important but not sufficient : we also need to cut energy consumption , and I hope the Commission will be even more ambitious in future than it has been .
We have got to create incentives for individuals to change their habits and make thoughtful purchases and investments through using the tax system .
We also have to deliver proper implementation of European legislation , letting our citizens know what needs to be done , and Member States have to live up to their promises of economic reform so that we can give the green light to Lisbon .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , ladies and gentlemen , one of the things that irritates the general public most of all is the European Union 's excessive regulations .
Rules that are not just too numerous but also hard to understand and complex : this trend must be halted .
Establishing the curvature of bananas or the diameter of peas or the length of contraceptives and believing that this means you are regulating the market is a sign that you are a thousand miles away from the daily lives of the citizens .
Rules like this are the product of pressure exerted by powerful interest groups to protect personal business affairs , and are not passed in the interests of the citizens .
Where there are too many rules , bureaucracy reigns in the place of politics or the economy , and the EU may even die of bureaucracy .
Making better laws must become an imperative for the institutions , and on this point Parliament must act as the catalyst .
We are pleased that the Presidency of the Council is paying attention to this issue , too .
As demonstrated by the speeches made in the Chamber this morning , there is a certain European left-wing tendency that continues to demand new legislation , but shows little interest in how much it is actually applied or applicable .
We believe that a free and cohesive society is based on stable , clear , shared rules and not on elephantine bureaucracy .
For growth and development , we invite the Council to adopt with greater determination a policy that is attentive to the problems of the African continent , and vigilant with regard to human rights and workers ' rights , in the countries with which we trade as well as inside the Union itself .
Without a common energy policy , there will be no recovery or growth .
We endorse the Commission 's new Green Paper with regard to renewable energy sources and the improvement of natural gas infrastructure , focusing on LNG terminals , a position that is also backed by the Presidency of the Council .
All obstacles should therefore be removed , including those posed by the Italian Minister for the Environment , Pecoraro Scanio , who on this issue continues to ignore European positions and is therefore delaying progress .
Development and the environment are the challenges to which we must respond , including by ratifying a new treaty that defines the new and differing areas of responsibility of our institutions within the 27-member Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the Council and the Commission , I would like to start by congratulating the Commission on having stood firm in the argument over the national allocation plans for CO2 trading , and on having at least confounded expectations by correcting Germany 's national allocation plan .
I am disconcerted to see that the deal done over the reduction targets for CO2 from cars , evidently as part of a bigger deal , did not come out the way the Commission had wanted it to , and would like to take this opportunity to point out that one thing that is ignored in such CO2 deals - of the kind that are currently being struck between the Member States , the Commission and the Council - is the fact that the targets we have set ourselves are not set by man ; rather , the goal of stopping the earth getting more than 2 degrees warmer is set by Nature .

If we , in these trade-offs between various national and industrial interests , keep on disregarding a target set at Kyoto , then we will , I think , in the foreseeable future no longer actually be able to assert that we are pursuing an ambitious climate protection policy .
As we Greens see it , the energy package and the goal of 20 % CO2 reduction across Europe may well be ambitious , but they no longer bear any relation to the overarching objective of doing something to counteract global warming .
If we really do remain stuck on this 20 % , we can once and for all say goodbye to the idea of being able to have a positive influence on global warming , that is to say , of being able to reduce it .
We have just heard that , if we were to stick at 20 % , the earth would get warmer by 4 or 5 degrees , in other words , that the adverse predictions of climate change would then turn out to be much worse .
All I can do as I stand here is to appeal once more to the Brussels Energy Summit to stop cutting deals around reduction percentages and at last put into effect what the Commission has put on the table .
In my view , the most important part of this energy package has to do with energy efficiency and savings , and I would again ask the Commission to get back to what was put before this House last autumn - which is not that long ago - in the shape of the energy action plan .
Here , too , there must be less discontinuity .
At the time , it was taken for granted that the right target for Europe was to reduce energy consumption .
Today , the idea is firmly enshrined in the energy package that Europe 's consumption of energy will continuously increase .
It follows that there are many corrections to be made .
I want to add something about nuclear policy , for I know that there are many countries in which great hopes are placed in it .
I think that Europe-wide checks are overdue as a means of ascertaining whether the scandalous security culture of which we get repeated reports from the Swedish nuclear power station at Forsmark is a uniquely Swedish problem or whether it might be the case that , over the course of decades in which atomic energy has been being used , this decay in the security culture has become a universal problem as a consequence of such things as reductions in staffing .
This is now the third time that I have risen to protest that Forsmark has as yet not been discussed at the European level , and the reason why I am being so forceful about it here and now is that I gather that Euratom is going to lend the money for the building of a new nuclear power station in Belene , concerning which negotiations are proceeding behind the scenes .
That would be a first , with Atomstroyexport funding a power station in the European Union with European money , which will enable people to act as if there were a renaissance in nuclear power .
I do believe , though , that the fact of the matter is that this industry is in a very bad state , not only from the point of view of security , but also in economic terms .



on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Wallström has remarked that the Spring Summit will have to do a good job of preparing for the Berlin meeting , which is to be held a few days later , and , whilst I can agree with that , I can do so only subject to two conditions , the first being that it would be necessary for there to be very in-depth discussion of the Berlin statement at the Spring Summit , yet , instead , even the dogs in the street know that a thorough debate on the possible content of the statement carries the inherent risk of differences of opinion becoming manifest .
Is there , then , to be no public debate , no debate among the Heads of State ?
If that is the case , then I wonder who is meant to be working on the Berlin Declaration , so important a statement that the EU is to carry it with it into its future .
Secondly , there is a need for more questions to be put on the agenda for the Summit , one , for example , being that of how a consistent fight against poverty , unemployment and social exclusion can be waged in tandem with an effective fight against global warming .
What does that mean , in particular in terms of an employment-intensive and forward-looking transformation of energy and transport , and what would need to happen in order for a really sustainable solution to work-related , social , environmental and global problems to be set in motion ?
The fact is , though , that these questions are not being asked .
We are talking about better regulation and about energy and climate change , but not in any way about the now long overdue beginning of a socio-environmental reconstruction that really would counteract the social division and climate-related catastrophe about the latter of which everyone is currently talking .
We saw only a few days ago just how difficult the German Presidency of the Council is finding this , and Mrs Harms has mentioned it already .
That ' better regulation ' means , above all , more opening up to the market , is something that Mr Barroso made unmistakeably plain last week , as did the Commission with its communication on the implementation of the renewed strategy for growth and employment .
It is the opening up of the market that is supposed to benefit both enterprises and consumers , but more of it means more competition , consequently always benefiting the strong and with the weak being always doomed to lose out .
The opening up of markets does not go together with the sort of structural change that we want and about which we always talk , although I have to say that the question is always to do with who wants what at what point in time .
On 1 February , Mr Solana , addressing the conference of the European Defence Agency - an entity whose creation pre-empts the entry into force of a European Constitution - called for planning and a deliberate demand-led policy for the armaments industry .
I do not see that as being in any way compatible with the purposes of a summit at which the question should be put as to what can be done to create jobs on a sustainable basis , to combat climate change on a sustainable basis , and - this too on a sustainable basis - to give the citizens of the European Union working and living conditions of equally high quality .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , so often in politics it is not what is said in public but what is going on in secret behind the scenes that really matters , and so it is here with this forthcoming European Summit .
The German Minister for European Affairs , Mr Gloser , may talk about sustainability and energy policy - although I have to say that how he keeps a straight face when he talks about the already failed Lisbon Agenda is quite beyond me .
However , what he does not talk about , of course , is the fact that this summit will discuss the European Constitution .
Chancellor Merkel has made it clear that she is determined to press on and , in fact , this very week in Berlin discussions about the Constitution are going on in secret .
Once again , a great deception is being attempted .
You are trying to cobble together a mini-treaty , getting rid of the ' C ' word and thereby denying the peoples of Europe the opportunity to vote on their own future .
It is as if you all have some higher calling and know what is good for the ordinary plebs of Europe .
You might think I am making it all up , but just last week President Barroso said : ' As a prime minister I was in favour of a referendum [ on the Constitution ] ' .
Since then he has come to Brussels and they have clearly spiked his drinks , because now he is saying : ' If there had been a referendum on the founding of the European Community or the implementation of the euro , do you think these would have existed ? '
I think we know the answer and the answer is ' no ' .
In daring even to say that , what Mr Barroso does is to expose the European project .
He shows absolute contempt for the people of France and Holland who voted ' no ' but , more seriously , he shows absolute contempt for the very process of democracy itself .
If you push on relentlessly with this Constitution , if you go on denying the peoples of Europe a say in their future , you are storing up very serious problems for our children .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , perhaps I might be permitted , with the European Council in the offing , to make a number of basic observations in relation to liberalisation and energy policy .
It seems to me that , in order to fulfil the Maastricht criteria and meet the demands of the Lisbon Strategy , the state is flogging off the family silver , while the public have to fasten their belts ever more tightly , with those in the public service being pensioned off early all too often and left unemployed and trembling with fear lest they lose their social security .
Promises have been made to the effect that everything will be better value , more efficient and more flexible , but this sort of liberalisation is no way to keep them .
In public infrastructures , the name of the game is now long depreciation periods and low revenues .
Private investors , though , are mainly interested in ready money , and we are all familiar with the consequences , with , for example , the poor punctuality of the railways and the abandoned stretches of track obliging us to go back to the car .
Thanks to the privatisation of the post , we can now invest in new letter boxes and make lengthy pilgrimages to post offices , where we find a world of indecent working practices that belong in the Stone Age .
Speculations in shares are making electricity more expensive , and we may well end up at some point being unable to afford our own water when higher prices are offered for it abroad , but what is even more dangerous is the prospect of foreign workers and asylum seekers being seen as an answer to the low birth rate and as a means of securing our social provision , to do which is to light the fuse on a powder keg , and the first explosions can already be heard getting closer and closer .
We must , then , have a rethink ; we must pursue a competent policy on family life and births , invest more in education and use a reasonable amount of protectionism to promote our business sectors and our own agricultural production , in order to protect our people from the business relocations that the EU encourages .
Nor , I think , can it be intended that nuclear-generated electricity be used to produce environmentally sound energy , or that biofuel should lead to food shortages in the way in which it has done in Mexico .
What is needed in such situations is the active promotion of research into new technologies or the use of other types of energy production that really are more environmentally friendly .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the true cost of the trade war which is raging under the guise of ' global warming ' will soon become apparent .
The Council is clearly about to embrace the fashionable pseudo-scientific claims that we will only save the planet if we significantly reduce CO2 emissions .
If we allow ourselves to be talked into believing that we can influence our planet 's natural climatic cycles by sacrificing the competitiveness of European industry , we will not be doing the right thing for the planet .
We will be simply pandering to the economic interests of those investors and countries that pay no regard to oxides and protocols .
The pollution that we avoid by means of our sacrifices is more than made up for by their CO2 production .
I am therefore most disappointed that the starting point of the Council 's negotiations on energy is the fight against climate change .
I feel that both our citizens and our businesses are more interested in the price of energy , and especially in its safe , uninterrupted supply .
I should therefore like focus on the liberalisation of the energy market , which will prevent massive price increases .
The Presidency should come up with a proper proposal on how to guarantee uninterrupted supplies from Russia to the whole of the EU and not just to Germany .
Lastly , we must invest in developing new sources of energy , and in particular nuclear energy .
If we do not do this , the high costs of energy will do irreparable damage to the competitiveness of European business .
How can the unemployed cope with the astronomical cost of electricity ?
I could send them to the headquarters of the Council in Brussels , but I doubt that would help .
Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me just start by giving you a brief summary of what we have achieved .
I would remind you that it was about two and a half years ago that the Commission kicked off a new initiative , having come to the conclusion , following the Kok report , that the Lisbon Strategy needed to be got back on its feet again .
We want this strategy , which , in the first half of the decade was in essence no more than a political objective without the least chance of becoming reality , to come at least closer to its objective in the decade 's second half .
I would claim that it has done that .
' Lisbon ' does not yet , admittedly , have quite the same ring to it as ' Kyoto ' , but every Member State is now coming up with its national plans .
We in this House have come up with a structure for getting to grips with the Lisbon Strategy and trying to move it forward .
The Commission , too , has set new priorities for it .
We have held inter-parliamentary conferences here in this House , with an ever-increasing number of participants from the parliaments .
All this shows that we are going in the right direction and that the attempt at resuscitating the strategy has been successful .
Secondly , we have succeeded in making it clear that , although there may well be three pillars to the Lisbon Strategy , our ability to pursue a proper environmental and social policy is dependent on growth and job creation .
We have also to make it plain that the Lisbon Strategy is also Europe 's response to globalisation .
In the resolution - the subject-matter of which will obviously be different from what it was in former years - we will make it clear that there are a number of deficiencies in the internal market that have to be alleviated .
There are many of them , but I would just like to point out two .
One is that the further development of European patent law has still not been forthcoming , and on this front we expect the Commission to take some initiatives , such as it has already produced on the liberalisation of goods traffic in the internal market , which is an equally crucial matter .
It is energy policy , though , on which the summit and the Commission 's - and this House 's - activities will primarily focus .
Let me remind you of what happened last year , when the Heads of State or Government were not to be persuaded that energy policy really had claims on Europe 's concern and that a European approach to the subject was needed , when the view still prevailed that these things could be sorted out at the national level .
That has changed .
This time round , if energy policy is discussed at the summit , everyone will be working on the assumption that this is a task for Europe .
In this resolution , we have said that renewable energies must , of course , be promoted in so far as possible , but we have also highlighted the continuing importance of nuclear power , which will be made inevitable in future by the problem of CO2 emissions , a problem addressed as a whole in this resolution as well , and also , of course , discussed in much greater depth in the parallel resolution on climate change .


We have set ourselves very ambitious targets in respect of energy efficiency , and I do in fact think that - as the figures have already shown - a share of 30 % in the world 's economic product combined with a share of only 15 % in emissions is already an indication that Europe is leading the way where energy efficiency is concerned , but we can achieve far more and be an example to the world .

Something else to which reference has been made was the remaining need for us to make the internal market in energy a reality .
We know that an oligarchic and monopolistic structure continues to exist and that there is only one part of the European Union in which one can speak of a real internal market , while there are real deficits in large areas of the EU .
I would also like to address the aspect of ' better regulation ' .
Here , too , much has been achieved .
Thinking back to the interinstitutional agreement of December 2003 , that was certainly a breakthrough , but all that glisters is not gold .
The Commission has still not yet complied with Parliament 's request - as articulated in over half a dozen resolutions - for an independent assessment of the impact of laws , yet this is something on which we insist .
If the Commission does not swing into action soon , we will have to think up other ways and means whereby we can do it ourselves .
What really is important now , as I see it , is proper benchmarking that makes it possible for us to review the reports from the Member States and say what we think is necessary in order that , through this benchmarking , the Lisbon Strategy goals be achieved even more effectively than they have been in the past .

( DE ) Mr President , frequent reference has been made already to the Constitution , under which Europe gets more powers as regards energy policy .
Since , though , the Constitution is not yet in place , we will have to endeavour to find another way of getting these greater energy policy powers , in particular - as Mr Gloser mentioned - in respect of external policy .
How are we and Russia supposed to have a proper relationship as equals if the European Union cannot , on these matters , speak firmly and with a single voice ?
Russia would much rather negotiate with the individual countries and play them off against one another , but what we are calling for - at this summit specifically - is for us to make it clear that , in this relationship with Russia , there is only one European voice , and if Russia complains that it does not have full access to the market , just what are we , in Europe , supposed to do about it ?
That is why an equal relationship with Russia matters so much .
Secondly , we have to diversify .
We have to get access to other sources , but where ?
I am talking in particular about the Caucasus and Central Asia .
When one sees how the United States of America - committed to the free market though it may be - has managed to get an oil pipeline built from Baku to Ceyhan in Turkey via Tblisi , with private investors being encouraged to support what was considered an important political project , as against how feebly and with what difficulty this sort of thing gets done in the European Union - one can take the Nabucco pipeline for Europe 's supply of gas as an example - then it is clear that we have to demand that this European Union of ours stands up for itself and speaks with one voice .
Since Mr Goebbels has already mentioned many of these things , I really would like to see all these things spelled out at the summit .
If we believe that we have to diversify ; if we believe that we need new and additional pipelines , then we have to say so , loud and clear , and then along will come Russia and will try to get involved or to do business with us .
If we do not , on international markets , have an unmistakeable European profile , then we will not be able to do those things that we have to do for our own people , that is to say , to ensure the security of Europe 's energy supply .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , this House will be adopting a resolution in which we make a number of demands of the Council .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I would like to take this opportunity of thanking my co-rapporteur , Mr Hughes from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , for his cooperation , which has invariably been constructive , good and fair .
He will shortly be presenting to you those parts of the resolution that have to do with employment and the objectives of better regulation , so I will concentrate on what our House expects of the Council as regards energy policy .
The most important thing that this House expects of the Council is plain for all to see ; we want a strong single energy policy for Europe .
It is the most urgent task for the Heads of State or Government to achieve real results at the Spring Summit , for it is by that that its success or failure will be measured .
A working single market in energy is not an end in itself .
For a start , a single energy market is one of the great European projects .
We want a European Union that produces results .
If we can tell the public that it is European policy that has brought their constantly increasing gas and electricity bills back to a tolerable level , then that is good for Europe .
The latest studies on the European energy market have again brought out the fact that we are miles away from a working internal market in energy , as Mr Lehne has already pointed out .
Almost a decade after the first steps towards the liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets , a result like that is disappointing to say the least .
First of all , then , it is in the interests of the public that we need the single energy market .
The second reason why a working single energy market is important is the competitiveness of our enterprises , particularly on the production side .
No business should pay more than is fair and appropriate for the quantity of energy that it uses ; we owe that to our enterprises and to the people who work for them .
That is a means towards the end of increasing our competitiveness at home and abroad , which is one of the goals of the Lisbon Strategy , so the second reason why we need the single energy market is that Europe 's competitiveness requires one .
The third reason is that , in a market with functioning price signals , energy is used effectively , alternatives are developed , and savings are made .
It is true to say that sometimes things have to be required as a matter of policy to get new paths opened up , and that is what we are doing with this report , in order - or so we hope - to achieve the climate protection goals using a European energy policy ; about that , there is consensus in this House .
Thirdly , then , we need the single energy policy for the sake of a Europe that faces up to its global responsibilities .
It is for that reason that , tomorrow , this House will be adopting a resolution , and I shall now read out to you a selection of the most important points one by one .
Firstly , the electricity and gas distribution networks need to be managed and administered economically independently of the energy production process if the long-lasting failure of the electricity and gas market is to be brought to an end .
Secondly , as renewable energy helps to improve the security of energy supply , we urge that the proportion of renewable energy sources be increased to 50 % by 2040 .
The European Parliament is committed to ambitious targets in energy research , and in all areas , whether conventional , renewable or nuclear .
Europe is a front-runner in many areas of this field , and this role needs to be consolidated and built upon if we are to have a knowledge-based economic order .
This House is in agreement with the Commission 's proposals on energy efficiency and the target of saving 20 % by 2020 .
We want to see a timetable for the 30 % reduction of CO2 emissions by 2020 , and we are also committed to the reform of the emissions trading system , while also calling for greater solidarity between the Member States in times of energy crisis .
Members have agreed across all party boundaries on the need for a single energy foreign policy , for energy issues must become a permanent feature of the European Union 's foreign relationships .
I was delighted to hear the President-in-Office say that this is where Europe needs to speak with one voice , for that is precisely how we see it too .
As Mr Barroso put it this morning , our credibility in the eyes of the public is conditional upon Europe holding together , and on that we agree with him .
The Commission , the Council , and the Members of this House must all , equally face up to these European challenges ; that is the only way in which we will be able to discharge our responsibility to the European public , to give them results , or , as the President of this House put it this morning , to be successful for the sake of our continent and serve the European Union 's people .
I would like to add that I believe we should be conducting this debate in Brussels rather than in Strasbourg .
( LV ) The agenda for the European Council 's spring summit is at the moment definitely the most important issue in the European Union as a whole and in each Member State .
The tasks proposed relating to the Lisbon Strategy , and also to energy and climate change policy , are ambitious , but to put them into practice will require a sense of reality .
We know most of what needs to be done in order to achieve the proposed goals , but the fact that the reforms to be carried out are mutually interconnected in the economic , social and environmental fields makes it significantly more complicated to implement the tasks .
The mutual interdependence of the Member States in maintaining the tempo and quality of reform makes the situation even more complicated .
We experienced this recently in the course of the difficult discussions on the services directive , which was intended to be one of the foundation stones in the Lisbon Strategy .
On the agenda now are new tests of the Member States ' readiness to maintain the tempo of reform , the liberalisation of Europe 's energy market being one such .
A liberalised European energy market is a prerequisite for the overall competitiveness of the market , energy independence , long-term stability and the integration of the new Member States into the single electricity and gas market .
One of the central tasks of this European Council summit is to establish a consensus-based approach in the Member States ' understanding of the single European energy policy .
Energy policy must become a component of the European Union 's security policy as soon as possible .
The Member States ought to be able to agree on a common strategy in the sphere of supply and transit routes .
Nor should we defer the creation of a permanent dialogue between energy-consuming states and energy-supplying states , to prevent an increase in global imbalance and the development of instability .
In relation to Europe 's main gas supplier - Russia - we must ensure that it ratifies the Transit Protocol and the Energy Charter Treaty .
Furthermore , on this issue the views of the Commission and the Member States must not be allowed to differ .
I hope that this important issue in the European Council 's spring summit will help to boost a common understanding of mutual interdependence regarding both tasks and achievements in each Member State individually and in the European Union as a whole .
Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , it is quite clear that , as my colleague Mrs Harms pointed out , the March European Council will mainly be devoted to energy and that we have some demands to make in this connection .
I should like , for my part , to address another point affecting the development of the labour market and taxation in Europe .
Allow me to offer two examples .
In Belgium , instead of losing 4 000 jobs , the Volkswagen-Forest factory will lose 3 000 and the employees will work a 38- rather than 35-hour week for the same salary , as well as being required to be more flexible .
The group 's management believes that , under these conditions , the factory will be one of the most efficient in Europe and will fulfil the criteria of a successful Lisbon Strategy .
My second example concerns French private sector employees , half of whom have salaries lower than EUR 1 400 per month , as Mrs Royal reminded us this Sunday .
These are facts that shed a harsh light on the European social model .
In the view of many economists , this change in working and salary conditions is structural , linked as it is to technological innovations and an increased globalisation of activities .
Over the next few years , the majority of European workers are thus going to be under ever increasing pressure .
How are we to respond to this situation ?
I think that the European Union can help .
It can help by putting an end to the absolute scandal whereby somebody who is well-off can just take a trip from Monaco to Belgium via Lichtenstein in order to escape the tax system and the progressive dimension of tax .
I also think that the European Union should undertake , as it did at the G8 and within the OECD , to opt for a firm policy of abolishing the tax havens that are to be found all over the world and that enable financial capitalism to operate .
I also think that if Mrs Merkel and Mrs Royal want to give some practical content to the social protocol that they are announcing with a view to amending the draft Constitutional Treaty , the European Union should provide itself with the resources finally to establish a minimum corporation tax in the European Union , which means that , if there is a desire to maintain the unanimity rule , one group of countries will have to resolve to take the lead .
( PT ) In this debate on the contribution to the forthcoming Spring Council , which is set to assess the implementation of the so-called ' Lisbon Agenda ' adopted in 2000 , we should be mindful of what has actually happened over the course of these seven years in terms of the targets and challenges set at the time , with regard , on the one hand , to full employment , reducing poverty , infrastructure and equipment to support childhood and equal opportunities for women , and , on the other , to the much-vaunted objective of having the most advanced knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 .
The truth of the matter is that since 2000 , the EU has been affected by slow economic and employment growth , by the workers ' productivity gains increasingly being passed on to employers and by the corresponding deepening of social inequality .
Hence the continued high levels of unemployment , with poverty and social exclusion affecting 72 million people , the manifold increase in unstable work with fewer and fewer rights , and increased problems with the intake of new Member States , without adequate financial responses from the Community budgets .
This demonstrates that our criticisms of the strategy have been amply justified .
The implementation of the Lisbon Agenda has done nothing but deepen liberalisation and privatisations in sectors as diverse as transport , energy , the post office , telecommunications and services , thereby jeopardising essential public services , to which one might now add the flexibility of work and the much-trumpeted flexicurity making it even easier to lay off workers .
This is why we are in favour of a sea change in the policies being pursued , namely the Lisbon Strategy , the Stability and Growth Pact , the main economic and employment guidelines and the Community budget .
Consequently , in the alternative resolution to this debate tabled by our group , we have opted to give prominence to a genuine pact for economic progress and social development , and a European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development based on greater solidarity on the part of the most developed countries with better and further-reaching distribution of Community funds .
The purpose of this is economic and social cohesion , improved living conditions for most people , including immigrants , dignity for workers and the implementation of human rights , in particular in the areas of education , health , housing , social security and research and development .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Moscovici has just written a very interesting book , declaring the ConstitutionalTtreaty dead .
It shows very clearly that no one can reintroduce a mini-Treaty on the sly now that the people have spoken .
We cannot act in contravention of Treaty law .
The number is not enough here - all that counts is the sovereignty of a State .
The farce in Madrid was an impasse , and an insult to diplomatic rules .
I should tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that MEPs , myself included as it happens , did not have access to the debating chamber , while any old civil servant had free access .
The solution for the EU is not to recreate Madrid , but to breathe new life into the spirit of the Treaty of Rome , in other words to rediscover the sense of free cooperation between sovereign nations , to re-establish the Community preference and to give up on the vague imperialism of a supranational State , a State that would suffocate our peoples and hinder their rights .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in setting its economic objectives , the German Presidency of the European Council is relying on a report claiming that unemployment has fallen in Europe .
However , this reduction is in fact the consequence of a fall in the number of people of working age due to the aging of the population , rather than the result of a prosperous economy .
With an annual growth rate of just 2.6 % , compared with 3.6 % in the United States and 10 % in China , the Europe of Brussels is still lagging behind the world 's great economic powers .
On top of that , some Member States falsify the official employment statistics .
In France , for example , if we add to the 2 million or more official unemployed people those people who have been forced into retirement or early retirement , the unemployed people in training , and those on subsidised contracts , unemployment actually affects almost 4.5 million people in France , or 18 % of the working-age population .
With growth at half mast , a population growing at below replacement rate , and businesses relocating their activities , the European Union is , unfortunately , continuing to decline economically .
If , then , the diagnosis is incorrect , the treatments prescribed , inspired by the Malthusian and antisocial policy of the last 20 years , are harmful : our trade borders have been destroyed , opening up our industry to unfair competition from the Asiatic economies , bureaucratic restrictions have multiplied , more than a million immigrants arrive quite legally from outside the Community every year , our public services have been dismantled , we are overtaxed , and our agriculture , subjected to the Caudine forks of the World Trade Organisation , has been laid fallow .
In order to restore our economies to prosperity and to give our descendents the economic and social security to which they are entitled , we need to construct a different Europe and a different trade model , based on secure borders to protect our businesses from social dumping , on implementing the Community preference , and on respect for the values that made our civilisation so great : fatherland , freedom , work , family , and security in all its forms , including economic and social security .
( SK ) Two days before the European Commission officially adopted the Strategic Energy Review and other reports on the energy sector in January 2007 , Eurobarometer published the findings of an energy sector survey .
The survey clearly shows that energy issues , be it climate change or future shortages of energy , are not considered a priority by European Union citizens .
Energy issues were ranked twelfth in a list of the most serious issues that Europe should now confront .
Energy issues lag far behind unemployment , crime , healthcare or the economic situation .
It is disconcerting that the citizens of Europe are convinced that the root causes of energy problems are to be found on continents and in countries other than the European Union .
Almost a quarter of European citizens admitted that they do nothing to decrease their energy consumption .
The public has only a vague awareness of the fact that energy prices will continue to rise in the long run .
We stand at the threshold of a new industrial revolution that will have to address energy-related issues and climate change , presenting us with pragmatic objectives that are at the same time utterly political in nature .
If our efforts are to succeed , we need to secure the broadest possible support from EU citizens in implementing these objectives , and Member State governments should stop beating around the bush and instead address the outstanding issues .
Mr President , the meeting with the European Council in Berlin is an outstanding opportunity to send the message of what we have achieved together and what we need to achieve together in the coming years , the first step until 2009 .
I think it is important that in the Berlin Declaration we make it clear that the problems and the challenges we are facing are there because of our success , not because of failure .
We have new countries applying for membership because of this success - because they have seen what the European Union could contribute regarding peace , the rule of law and stability .
We have the whole discussion about globalisation , where the European economy is the leading global actor and gives us opportunities to meet up and to contribute to globalisation .
We have the issue of security and stability in the Balkans , where , although the European Union could not do very much at the beginning of the 1990s , today we can , and that is why we have the responsibility .
If we had failed , if we had not been able to develop the European Union , no one would have asked us to solve the problem , but now we are able to do it and so we have the responsibility .
That also goes for the discussion about climate change because we are , from an economic point of view and also from an environmental point of view , one of the leading global actors .
We can contribute to the discussion about reducing the greenhouse effect more than anyone else and that is why we need to do it , but we need to do it wisely , securing the opportunities for growth and investment and high-tech , because otherwise we will not be able to meet the challenges of climate change when it comes .
It is a challenge that is double-sided .
We need to reduce greenhouse gases , but at the same time to secure a stable and prosperous economy which makes us able to meet future challenges .
Mr President , I have only a short time , so , as both joint rapporteur on this subject and a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I should like to do something we do not do often enough : focus on some of the social , social cohesion and employment aspects of Lisbon .
Under the heading ' Creating employment and opportunity ' , our resolution underlines the need for a balanced approach to flexicurity .
We agree with flexibility for enterprises , but also with the necessary degree of security for working people .
For too many millions of our fellow citizens , flexicurity is seen as a threat .
We have to make it an opportunity .
We urge those Member States so far lacking effort to cooperate with social partners and do much more to create employment and raise the labour market participation rate of the young , female and older workers .
Specifically , we ask them to ensure that every school-leaver is offered a job , training or other employability measure within six months ; to provide wider access to training for the unemployed , particularly for the least-qualified ; to raise investment in comprehensive and affordable childcare , to further reduce the tax burden on employment ; to combat social exclusion and discrimination ; to invest further in education , professional training and lifelong learning so as to boost the Union 's skills base ; to improve the match between the educational system and the needs of the new labour markets , including entrepreneurship in educational curricula ; and , finally , to allow older workers to remain in the labour force on a voluntary basis and modify tax and social security systems to encourage a longer active working life .
These ideas are as old as the Lisbon Strategy itself .
All we need is for Member States to act on them .
Finally , I would also underline the need for both the Council and the Commission to break the current deadlock in employment and social policy .
The current Lisbon policy mix is seriously unbalanced .
If we are to reconnect with our citizens , we need to restore that balance in favour of social and employment policy .
( LT ) Economists established quite a while ago that European development has a positive effect on national economies , particularly on the economies of larger countries .
This positive effect derives mostly from trade , mutual trade .
It seems to me , unfortunately , that we now have a process of centralisation going on , and decisions , whether in the field of energy policy or the Lisbon Strategy , are encouraging this centralisation process .
This could result in there being nothing for mutual trade as there will be several global trade centres .
I think that one of the most important and essential things , while endeavouring to keep the European economic motor running and trying to implement policies to make our countries more efficient and competitive on the world scene , would , first of all , be the necessity to foment the uniform development of all EU Member Countries , making use of the development of scientific research centres and energy centres in various countries .
Once the national economies are synchronised , our economic motor will not sputter out .
( PL ) Mr President , political differences between the economic strategies of Member States have hampered the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
This is having a knock-on effect on the Union .
If we want the strategy to achieve its aims , we need to design a new political equilibrium .
Countries which do not want costly and complex regulations , such as Poland , the United Kingdom and the Baltic States , must be allowed to retain some degree of ability to control the legislative process .
This is not guaranteed in the Constitutional Treaty , which is why I am making a personal appeal to the German Presidency not to adopt the credo that is so fashionable in this House , of ' the Constitutional Treaty or death ' .
This credo will do a lot of harm to the European Union , particular as regards regulatory and economic policy .
The same applies with regard to better-quality European regulation .
If we want to achieve the aims of better regulation , we should not dodge questions about the distribution of power or the political balance within the European Union .
Treaty reform must be subjected to truly pragmatic assessment in terms of costs which legislation based on a new remit for the Council will incur .
The Constitutional Treaty does not promote these aims .
Mr President , according to the Lisbon Strategy , we have to build a welfare state all around the European Union that has to be a model in our globalised world .
We should appeal to a social Europeanism to make Europe attractive for citizens , because life here should be better than in other parts of the world .
A good standard of living is not achieved only by economic growth but also by high educational standards , lifelong learning , cultural consumption and so on .
On the other hand , we have to reduce global warming without damaging development in developing countries .
We can do this in our part of the world by improving research .
In developing countries , it can be done by spreading education and development aid , always related to improved educational standards .
I think that a good combination of development aid and higher standards of education is the key to building a better globalised world .
( EL ) Mr President , energy means three things : nuclear , oil and gas .
Nuclear energy is not possible in all the countries of Europe and is , moreover , ' vivere pericolosamente ' .
Oil is controlled by the United States of America : in one way in Iraq , in another way in Saudi Arabia , in another way in Libya and in another way in Venezuela .
Which of these countries that has oil is close to Europe ?
Not one .
The game is controlled by the Americans .
What does that leave ?
Gas .
Basically , in our neck of the woods , Russia has the gas .
What are our relations with Russia ?
Our relations with Russia are disappointing , precisely because that is what the Americans want .
Did you see what happened with Putin the other day ?
There is a pipeline ready for signing which does not pass through Asia , which does not pass through Belarus or Ukraine , so that we do not have these vicissitudes and blackmail .
It is the Burgas - Alexandroupolis pipeline through Bulgaria and Thrace .
Here too the Americans will not let Bulgaria sign .
So if we , as Europe , want our energy , if we want gas directly from Russia , why do we not turn on the pressure for this pipeline ?
If we want our own oil , there is a great deal in the Aegean .
Enough to relieve Europe .
Then here too there is the bug called Turkey , controlled by America , which does not allow the oil from the Aegean to be exported .

- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , The Lisbon Strategy is our regular topic of discussion in the run-up to the Spring Summit every year , and we would do well to take more seriously the goals that we - in the Council , in the Commission , in Parliament - set ourselves .

The only thing I would urge is that we should do what has been agreed , to convince by our actions rather than just making announcements , and that I would sum up briefly as ' better lawmaking ' .

Better lawmaking calls for more transparency , and more transparency will be achieved if all laws are enacted through the codecision procedure .
Already today , we have heard talk of ' pre-examination ' , of how every European law must be subject to prior scrutiny in relation to subsidiarity , in order to allow its added value to European legislation , its effects on growth and job creation , to become visible .
We have heard about cost-benefit analyses , about shorter legislative processes ; five years are enough to make a law , not ten at least .
We must improve the instruments whereby the how and when of our laws ' implementation is monitored .
Secondly , we have appointed people with responsibility at the national level .
What are they doing ?
Do the national parliaments give an account every six months of how things stand as regards the Lisbon process , of what they plan to do and when ?
Where is the report from the Commission and the national monitors to this House every year ?
Thirdly , it is making the single market a reality that is the work we have to take home with us , strengthening innovation through the efficient use of resources , taking action to save energy , creating the research area , strengthening the SMEs , and that means making it easier to establish new ones , promoting settlement and development in rural areas and encouraging handovers , and at last actively addressing the consequences of demographic change , so that they do not become a hindrance for our continent .
We have enough goals to aim at ; it is actions that build credibility and confidence .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , many speakers have emphasised the many opportunities that lie before us , and they are of course right to do so , for not for some time have we had such an opportunity as we have right now to make a start on new things .
The great post-Lisbon problem was , of course , that growth rates caved in , not least because the Member States had not done enough .



Growth has now returned to the European Union , but what are we going to do with it ?
Growth does not happen on its own ; long-term satisfactory growth will not be there unless we act .

Yes , of course , the single market is a powerful instrument ; 90 % of what we manufacture we - our companies and the members of the public - buy back within the European Union , and that is a good thing , for it makes us a strong international player , but - as Mr Hughes has pointed out - we have now reached the point at which we have to get people back to work , and not by exerting pressure , nor by excluding anyone , but by means of better education and training , and by providing new opportunities .
That is what the debate has to be about ; it has to be about how we have to move that forward together , take it seriously and put it into practice back home in the Member States , but if we are to do that we need better coordination .
Coordination , when applied to economic policy , must not be a dirty word in these halls .
If we cannot even bring in a unitary tax base , we have no business sounding off so much about other things , and that is the sort of debate we have to have back home as well .
Mr Lehne tells us that we have to do something for business in order then to be able to do something for the environment ; well , I do not agree .
That is old thinking of a kind that is not equal to coping with the efficiency revolution that lies in store for our businesses .
It is that old thinking that got many of us into the dead end of nuclear energy , a dead end from which we need to escape , and that is why we need to argue and debate more with one another .
( FI ) Mr President , Chancellor Angela Merkel spoke fine words here at the meeting in January about energy and climate change .
Now it is time for action .
I hope that the Chancellor and Germany will risk power and prestige to ensure that the EU takes the initiative and becomes a pioneer in the issue of climate change and its control .
The prevention of climate change is reliant on two important factors : carbon dioxide emissions need to be reduced at a far greater rate than is currently the case , and the EU must be a lot more energy-efficient .
It has been estimated that a response to climate change will eat into global GNP to the tune of roughly 1 % ; in other words , it will be expensive .
The same calculations show , however , that indolence and just doing nothing will cost even more ; in fact , a lot more .
If the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy is to go ahead , then , we also need to take climate change into account and work to do something about it .
( PL ) Mr President , in 2005 the Lisbon Strategy , which was once described as a load of wishful thinking , was adapted to reflect the real priorities of the societies of Member States of the Union .
From the verbiage contained in the mountain of documents on this subject , we can glean some challenges which we now have to face urgently .
These are , firstly , to ensure security of energy supplies for the whole of Europe , rather than just for selected countries .
Encouraging the use of renewable sources of energy comes under the same heading .
Secondly , to remove the barriers that still exist concerning the free movement of labour within the European Union and to constantly monitor implementation of this principle by individual Member States .
This will help prevent workers from countries other than the employer 's from being treated unfairly , or even as slaves .
Finally , the European Union must also reject the completely outdated idea of trying to compete against the United States , and replace it with close and sound partnership .
( PL ) Mr President , in general , the citizens of Europe do not understand what the Lisbon Strategy is about .
I fear that as politicians we often make mistakes and fail to get to the bottom of the issue .
We amend laws and issue directives , but these have no impact on the essence of the matter .
Essentially , the European Union 's competitiveness will be ensured by entrepreneurs implementing new technologies , and introducing new production and organisational methods .
These entrepreneurs also need to be able to convince both large and small and medium-sized enterprises of their ideas .
It seems that what we lack in Europe is the spirit of enterprise and a business culture , especially if we compare ourselves to the United States .
We attach too little importance to the idea of freedom , which entails not just freedom of action , but also responsibility .
SMEs are the basis of a civil society and responsible civic self-government .
This is something we should learn from our first year of primary school .
We must teach our young citizens respect for fair entrepreneurship .
These values must also be disseminated by Europe 's public media , and we should conduct EU-funded campaigns promoting past and present Europeans who have contributed most to our competitiveness .
We might then be able to stop worrying about the millions of unemployed , many of whom will set up their own businesses . We might then be able to stop worrying that our enterprises and industry are not innovative and are failing to benefit from the results of scientific research , something which Europe is actually very good at .
I wish the Commissioner and the European Commission success in this action , and also in the area of information .
Let us hope it will be a success for the entire Union .




( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lehne and Mr Lambsdorff , and in particular my colleagues , Mr Hughes and Mr Goebbels , for all the work of coordination and cooperation required for this exercise , which , in this second year , is now finding a place in the political consciences and wills of the Member States and our Institutions .
This is happening in a very particular way , on the basis of the preparatory meetings between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
It was at the latest meeting last week that , in a still timid , but firm , manner , the recovery of European transport , logistics and infrastructures were raised as crucial policies if the European economy is to meet the challenges of globalisation with guarantees .
This globalisation reaches Europe 's ports by boat , our airports by plane , or via our roads , and , though not yet sufficiently , by train and by inland waterway .
We are tackling this globalisation by means of instruments such as Galileo , SESAR - the air traffic control system - RTMS , E-Safetynet , etc .
We must also deal with the challenges that it brings with it in the environmental , social and security fields .
The German Presidency 's initiative facilitated the Transport Council 's commitment in this regard , with the initiative of including transport , with its four essential priorities , in this spring 's proposal for the Lisbon Strategy .
Furthermore , Mr Harbour agreed to include it as the third paragraph of the conclusions of the Working Group on the internal market and innovation at last week 's meeting .
I would therefore ask especially that the authors and coordinators of the Resolution include Amendment 10 , which brings in this extremely important sector - transport , logistics and trans-European networks - as a basis for the Lisbon Strategy .
Mr President , I am glad we accept in this resolution that the Lisbon Agenda is not only based on economics but has a social dimension as well .
With that in mind , it is important that we bring those excluded from the labour market into employment by making sure the 2000 Employment Framework Directive is implemented equally across all Member States .
It is just as important that we continue to call for specific directives on age and disability , because if people cannot get to work , then they cannot even take the employment if they are offered it .
I also welcome the section on better regulation , but I would have liked to have seen it include a reference to sunset clauses on all legislation .
Finally , proposed health and safety legislation should be based on up-to-date scientific and medical evidence .
I call also for everyone to vote for my amendment on the Interinstitutional Agreement on better lawmaking .
Mr President , I have three points to make on the European Council .
It is a pity that there are not more people here , but nevertheless I will make the three points .
The first one is on the Lisbon Agenda .
We are going to sign the Berlin Declaration at the end of March .
One of the key points there has to do with the Lisbon Agenda , and that is the free movement of goods , services , people and money .
It needs to be included simply because it is one of the founding principles of the whole European Union .
We are unfortunately living right now in a time of protectionism .
That protectionism needs to end and we need to see a message in the Lisbon Agenda and the Berlin Declaration on that point .
My second point is that , in my view , the European Union has been missing its red menace ever since the end of the Cold War .
Indeed , we had the euro in the 1990s and enlargement in this decade , but ever since we have been looking for something and I think the debate today shows that that something has been found : climate change .
In many ways we should actually thank President Putin for bringing energy policy onto the European agenda , because had he not done what he did in Ukraine , I do not think we would be as excited about discussing energy sufficiency and the energy mix as we are today .
I am really happy with the direction in which the Commission is taking the energy debate , the environmental debate and the debate on climate change .
The final point I wanted to make is on my favourite subject : the constitution .
I know that it is not on the agenda of the European Council in the beginning of March , but I would just really like to urge the German Presidency to continue the good work it has done so far in keeping it going .
We need that constitution and we need it badly for three reasons : one , it makes the Union more efficient ; two , it makes the Union more democratic ; and three , it makes the Union easier to understand .
I hope that that Treaty will get a roadmap at the end of the German Presidency so that it can enter into force in 2009 .
( ES ) With a view to the Spring Summit , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I believe that the speech this morning by Chancellor Merkel also relates fully to the March agenda .
Following the Madrid meeting of the eighteen ' Friends of the Constitution ' , with the two who have said that they are going to ratify it and those who have yet to speak - their silence is deafening - I believe that it is important to support what the President-in-Office of the Council has said .
I would like to make one comment however , and that is that if we have to do anything , we must use the pen more than the scissors , because to defend the substance alone is dangerous , particularly if we start pruning .
I would like to say , from the point of view of democracy and of political action in the energy sector , with a view to the policies that we have to implement , that there is a significant danger attached to reducing , because , from a democratic point of view - and Parliament has a great interest here - we will move on from having thirty-five legal bases to acting with eighty-five , and that is of immense and decisive importance .
Secondly , with regard to the Lisbon Strategy , I would like to introduce an element that has not been mentioned here , which is the successful conclusion of the Doha Round .
We can talk about climate change , we can talk about energy and the social model , but if we do not achieve a positive conclusion in the Doha Round - which clearly cannot include these elements directly , elements that must be taken into account and placed on the agenda in our international relations - I believe that alone we will not be able to resolve problems that have a global dimension in the world .
I believe that the European Union must implement an active policy that includes these elements , bearing in mind the importance of concluding the Doha Round , which is on the German Presidency 's agenda , but about which I believe too little is said .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my comments on the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , I would like to stress one of four priorities - the energy .
It is especially in this field , with minimal competitiveness in market and network services , that the EU still lags behind .
The Baltic countries are still isolated from an energy standpoint - both in terms of electricity and especially natural gas .
The North European Gas Pipeline , which is being constructed as a result of an agreement by just two countries - Germany and Russia , will not solve the natural gas marketing and distribution network problems .
The Russian President 's speech in Munich showed that an imperial mindset is resurgent in Russia , and it appears that the intention remains unchanged - to continue to use energy policy for political purposes .
A common EU energy market would be a security guarantee in relation to third countries , and it would help to solve energy crises which can arise within the EU or can be provoked from outside the EU .
In negotiations with Russia it is essential to have safeguards in place to protect against attempted monopolistic dictates from third parties .
In order for us all to feel safer , I invite the Council and the Commission to promptly initiate an independent expert assessment of the likely effects of the North European Gas Pipeline .
The Baltic Sea does not belong to just two countries but the whole of the Union .
Mr President , I do not think you will be surprised to hear that , as the coordinator for my group on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I want to address in particular the issues concerning the future strategy for the single market .
I know , Mr President-in-Office , that you will be receiving a strategy paper from the Commission to discuss .
We have not had a chance to see that yet , but all I can say is that I hope it is a bold paper because we have a lot of work to do .
I particularly address you as President-in-Office of the Council because I want to draw your attention to the heading of a whole section in this resolution : ' Removal of persisting internal market deficits ' .
That is aimed squarely at members of the Council .
The Commission is working very hard to do that , but the fact remains that the internal market is a shared responsibility .
We can do so much in this House and we have done a lot on the services directive , the prime example recently , but a lot more is needed as well .
We are about to consider , under the leadership of my colleague Mr Stubb , the whole question of free movement of goods in non-harmonised areas .
That will be an important proposal as well , but we must have your engagement and commitment to work on it .
I had the privilege a few weeks ago - Mrs Ayala Sender is also a member of the committee and she mentioned it just now - of being rapporteur for our interparliamentary meeting , where we had parliamentarians from across the Member States talking about the internal market .
What was interesting was the primacy that they placed on the four freedoms that Mr Stubb just mentioned and how they need help to be able to defend those in their parliaments against their own governments .
There is a suggestion sometimes that it is all too easy to blame the internal market for job losses or for encouraging more competition that is bad for consumers and for economies , but in fact the single market is absolutely at the centre of our response to global pressures .
As somebody from one of the national parliaments said at our meeting , the internal market is crucial because it gives strength in depth to the whole of the Lisbon Strategy .
I ask you as President-in-Office of the Council to put that on your agenda , to get your fellow ministers to really start taking the internal market and its transposition seriously , and to engage your citizens and your parliamentarians with that challenge .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not know whether it was deliberate or accidental , but the day chosen to open the European Council , 8 March , is International Women 's Day .
It was a good choice on Mrs Merkel 's part , and I expect that she will be able to make the most of the day .
I would like to put the European Council back in its historical context : 2007-2010 will , I think , be decisive years , rather like 1954-1957 , between the failure of the Defence Community and the relaunch of the European budget by the Treaty of Rome , the 50th anniversary of which we are now celebrating .
We have many meetings ahead of us : institutional , budgetary , electoral , with the European elections and perhaps referendums , a review of the Lisbon Strategy , and even meetings on agricultural policy .
Therefore , we all need to make a commitment to convince the people and to bring them with us when the time comes .
The people will hear us talk about competition , and they are not opposed to it .
They will hear us talk about flexibility in business , and they are not opposed to it as long as workers have security .
That said , there is another word I would suggest to you : harmonisation .
It seems to have disappeared from our language , although it features in the Treaty of Rome .
Environmental harmonisation is getting there - it is making progress .
Tax harmonisation has rather ground to a halt with regard to company tax .
Social harmonisation is too weak .
Be that as it may , I think that we need to send the beautiful music of harmonisation floating to the ears of our fellow citizens .
Equally , and like many others , I would like the Council to encourage the Commission to submit a text , a framework directive , on public services .
It is certainly necessary to rebalance the market , even though it is true that nobody here is opposed to it .
It would simply be a translation of the meaning that Jacques Delors gave to European integration , or at least of one of his phrases : competition stimulates , cooperation strengthens , but solidarity unites .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to pick up on a number of things that have been mentioned , of which the cutting back of bureaucracy is but one .
Today , at midday in this plenary , we annulled two directives , but I do , even so , think we all need to make a bit more of an effort , and I also believe that there is a need for a mechanism with the aid of which we can together work out which directives really are superfluous .
This laborious procedure , whereby the Commission prepares something , the Council 's assent is then required and then at length we in this House have a say in the matter , is one that I do not regard as efficient .
I think that we would , together , be able to annul superfluous directives much more quickly if a proper system were in place for it , and I would also be glad of participation in this subject on the part of the Commissioner with responsibility for this matter .
There is a second matter that I would like briefly to address .
This year , we will have to come to a decision on a piece of legislation liberalising the market in postal services , something that is of great importance in relation to the internal market .
The proposals made by the Commission are indicative of its great commitment to this .
We in this House will endeavour to get through first reading as quickly as possible , and I hope that the Council will take those things that are going to be enacted at the March European Council - splendid headings , flowery language and all - and put them into practical effect in the legislation on the opening up of the markets in postal services , that being an area in which that really is urgently necessary , since , if we want to achieve growth , create jobs , and foster social security , we will not find a solution in the monopoly model that has hitherto held sway in Europe .
I await the Council 's proposals with eagerness and am particularly keen to see the government of the Federal Republic of Germany pursue the path to which it has committed itself rather than fall to its knees .
I have heard many interesting things said today about energy policy , and will permit myself one final comment on that subject .
What I will say to Mrs Harms is that I find it quite shameful that the energy policy of the Social Democrats and the Greens will have contributed to an increase in the amount of CO2 emitted in Germany , so I would ask her not to lecture this House on what is to be done about it .
In the seven years in which you had responsibility for these things , you - Mrs Harms - did the precise opposite of what you are preaching to us .
Mr President , I think it would be very difficult to underestimate the importance of this Spring Summit , because it comes before the Berlin Declaration , which is going to explain how and why the European Union is relevant to the world , in essence relaunching the European Union .
It comes before further reflection on future reform of the European Union itself .
So I would like to echo what Commissioner Wallström said , i.e. that this Spring Council has got to show how the European Union can deliver for its citizens , because before you talk about fine institutional matters you have got to talk about how you deliver .
I think if we fail to deliver action at this summit , this is going to undermine all the plans of the German Presidency .
I think we need to deliver action , as has been said , on completing the internal market .
There are simply too many gaps which affect ordinary citizens who want to travel and to work in other Member States - even things like registering a motor vehicle in a number of Member States .
We have to deliver on the subject of better regulation in order to improve the rights of consumers and improve the business atmosphere .
We have to carry through a commitment to cut the cost of red tape by 25 % .
In particular we have got to follow through on the ten fast-track practical proposals presented by the Commission .
On action and energy , we have to fulfil existing agreements on energy liberalisation .
We have to have a competitive energy market and that involves unbundling and strengthening the power of regulators .
I would hope the German Government , as opposed to the German Presidency , will be taking a lead in this area .
We need to take action on climate change .
We have to take a global lead but we can only do that if we have action to reduce our own emissions , to cut our use of carbon and to make the emissions trading scheme much more effective and much more watertight .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Lisbon Strategy is Europe 's answer to the challenges of globalisation .
The efforts made by the Commission and the Member States to relaunch and clarify the strategy now need to bear fruit in terms of growth and jobs .
The European Council must reaffirm that the solution to our economic difficulties rests largely in improving the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , including productive public spending on investment , research and development , energy and the environment .
The combination of economic , social and environmental reforms at national and European level is the only way for us to achieve our joint objectives of improving competitiveness and creating more and better jobs .
The European Council will also adopt the energy action plan , with the aim of guaranteeing security of supply , competitiveness and respect for the environment .
I would like to draw your attention to the potential impact of the really ambitious targets that the Commission has set for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 , because , whilst the aim is entirely laudable , we must ensure that we maintain a balance between ecological principles and the competitiveness of business .
I support the German Presidency and the Commission in their backing for the ' better regulation ' initiative .
Europe has often had a tendency to produce too many regulations , sometimes on any old subject , but it is not the role of the Union to interfere in everything .
Instead , it must do better in the policies that do require decision-making at at least European level and that represent true European added value : energy , climate , security and immigration , to name but a few .
It is now time for the EU to concentrate on the basics , with respect for the subsidiarity principle and in line with the people 's expectations .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , in the year in which the EU is celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , in the year of equal opportunities for all , in the year , too , in which my country , Portugal , is to take the EU Presidency , I feel it important to point out that on Sunday the Portuguese people voted ' yes ' in a referendum to decriminalise abortion up to ten weeks of pregnancy .
I feel it is right to highlight the importance of this vote here in this Chamber and in this context for two further reasons : firstly , because the clear victory for the ' yes ' vote corresponds to the recommendations adopted by Parliament calling for abortion to be legal and safe in all Member States , and secondly because , by happy coincidence , as mentioned by Mr Poignant , the Spring Council is due to take place on 8 March .
As Portuguese Prime Minister Mr Socrates said , with this result Portugal has taken a further firm step forward in building a more open , more tolerant and fairer society .
As regards the Lisbon Strategy , it is also necessary to strengthen the social element throughout the Member States , in order to enhance the work-life balance for European men and women . This involves , for example , creating and developing high quality , affordable care infrastructures for children and other dependents .
What is needed is more and better jobs for women as well , and equal pay for the same work . We feel that without the involvement of women the ambitious objectives of the Lisbon Strategy cannot be attained .
( ES ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , the Lisbon Strategy represents the launch of a great European project , now that we have achieved the euro , aimed at achieving greater well-being and especially levels of employment and participation by Europeans in the workplace , women in particular .
It is an ambitious project for 2010 .
It sets the path towards opening up - opening up Europe - a path towards liberalising strategic sectors , communications , transport , energy , financial services . Also towards modernising labour relations , with a view to ensuring , by means of social agreements , that the labour market is modernised in such a way as to increase access to jobs , especially for young people and for the long-term unemployed .
We are now seeing a recovery of economic growth and this Summit , to be held in March , which will revise that Lisbon Strategy , must confirm to the Europeans that economic growth in 2006 is not a passing event , but that it can be reinforced within the framework of the global economy and of that recovery .
In order to do that , we are going to need a lot of political initiative , a lot of political capacity in order to carry out the reforms that cannot be left any longer - and this afternoon energy and the environment have been mentioned in this House . In short , all of the reforms needed to restore the Europeans ' confidence in their own project .
There will be no confidence without employment .
What is slowing down the great European Project is our inability to grow , as Mrs Wallström said .
It is low growth with insufficient job creation .
Those of us who feel profoundly European believe that there is still time to restore that process and not to let it die by itself .
( PL ) Mr President , once again we are debating a programme for Europe that needs to be far-reaching , clear and able to meet global challenges .
This time we have to pay particular attention to the problem of the common energy policy , which is currently a very important political and social issue .
We must remember that the recent increases in energy prices will in future become an ever-increasing problem both for world energy markets and for economic development .
We do not yet have a clear European energy strategy .
The Member States continue to focus on their own strategic interests , which are then reflected in their domestic political decisions .
That is why there is still so little scope for cooperation at European level .
A European energy policy , on the other hand , means acting in harmony and solidarity .
Mr Barroso , the President of the European Commission , rightly said this morning that if we want to be treated as a partner to be reckoned with in energy policy , we need to speak with one voice instead of 27 . Solidarity is particularly important in obtaining secure energy supplies .
The European Union must speak with one voice when negotiating with its main energy suppliers in order to achieve a sound , long-term partnership and agreements on energy cooperation .
Furthermore , energy policy is also indirectly linked to the priorities of the new Lisbon Strategy , which are to increase growth and jobs .
On this strategy , the Council rightly proposes that we focus on four areas , namely an economic policy based on stability and growth , development of the internal market , innovation , research and education , and increasing jobs and developing of the European social model .
The Lisbon Strategy does , however , still require greater commitment by the governments of the Member States as regards implementation .
In order to maintain balanced growth , we must also bolster the strategy 's environmental and social aspects , particularly as regards job creation .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , today is the right time to say that , thanks to the 2004 reform , the Lisbon Strategy is more than just a series of unattainable targets - the priorities are clearer and the responsibilities better defined .
I wish to use this speech to talk about social policy within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy .
Firstly , it is abundantly clear that the Lisbon Strategy is not , as some would have it , some kind of liberal attempt at undermining the foundations and values of the European social model .
Far from it , in fact . The Lisbon Strategy represents a vision that , very much in a spirit of reform , seeks to preserve the values that lie at the heart of the European social model .
The Lisbon Strategy therefore lays down political guidelines on the need to modernise social protection systems , which is a necessary response to what is happening in Europe and around the world .
This broad guideline clearly expresses the idea that social policy should be seen not as a burden but rather as a factor that can have a positive influence on economic growth , by increasing productivity and competitiveness and by delivering higher levels of social cohesion and access to fundamental rights .
It thus becomes a significant instrument in guaranteeing social peace and political stability , without which there can be no lasting economic progress .
Because of the 2004 reform , I now feel more optimistic than before as regards the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
The EU has entered a period of economic acceleration and may outstrip the United States of America in terms of growth .
In the first half of 2006 alone , investment rose by 6 % , exports should rise by more than 5 % , and the unemployment rate has fallen to 1998 levels .
These figures confirm that the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy are having a cumulative effect on the ground , whereby sustained economic growth leads to more and better jobs , to continued improvement in the living standards of EU citizens without any loss of competitiveness and to the values of the European social model being upheld .
I therefore wish to congratulate Mr Barroso and the Commission on the reform that , in timely fashion , they chose to introduce into the Lisbon Strategy .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , a great deal has been said about the successful implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , or at any rate about the endeavours to achieve it .
Before you leave , I should like to ask you to speak out , at the next meeting , in favour of clear outlines and clear boundaries , for which the individual will be responsible , ' individual ' meaning the Member State and the European Union .
It became apparent from last week 's inter-parliamentary meeting in Brussels that our counterparts in the various Member States had brought with them all their criticisms and demands in relation to education , employment , social security , climate protection and so on , and insisted on getting solutions to them , yet it is in the hands of the Member States that most of these powers and responsibilities lie .
More transparency and more information are needed if people are to know where , at the end of the day , responsibility lies , which responsibility lies with the EU and which with the Member State .
Education is at the heart of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Commission 's most recent progress report showed that the Member States are still making considerable efforts to achieve the five targets by 2010 , and that will require , as a matter of urgency , more investment in education and the specification of explicit rights and obligations in that area and in that of lifelong learning .
If people are to be more mobile , their qualifications will also have to be recognised .
Those that we have acquired within the European Union are still of too little practical use to us .
I would ask you to take account of that in your work .
Last week , I had a very interesting meeting with the European Young Socialists , who asked me to pass on to you the message that education is also an end in itself , that it does not always have the sole purpose of helping people to become workers adapted to the labour market , but also has a great influence on the development of personal self-awareness , of social skills and of cultural understanding .
It is that that I see as a great education task for all of us .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my particular thanks for the many suggestions that have been put forward , which are also summarised in the parliamentary resolution that has yet to be adopted .
We have focused on a number of important issues , namely those inherent to the Lisbon Strategy : growth , jobs - and also sustainability , which was added in Gothenburg .
The last speech , in particular - by Mrs Prets - highlighted the issue of who bears responsibility with regard to Lisbon - and my personal experience over recent years validates this point .
It has been clear that , in many fields , things are being coordinated that subsequently need to be implemented at national level .
Nevertheless - and this is related to the other point raised by several Members today - there are issues where all Member States agree that measures are not affordable at national level alone , and that help from the European level is needed .
This , in turn , is related to the issue of lawmaking : does it have to be carried out at European level or could it be done at national level ?
One important related issue is energy - which , in turn , overlaps with the field of growth .
We shall be dealing with this at the Spring European Council , too , as the development of renewable energy is on the agenda .
This will represent the first important contribution to environmental protection , too - a contribution that will at the same time present new job opportunities .
After all , this field has proved to be a source of new jobs - and these , in turn , will offer opportunities for exporting products outside the EU .
It is not sufficient that Europe leads the way in energy conservation and combating climate change ; it must convince others to take this course too .
We can only convince others if we set a good example ourselves , however .
I should like to emphasise another important point , even though it will not be such a central topic at the European Council .
There have already been repeated calls for energy solidarity , and there have also been calls for talks with Russia - and rightly so .
To achieve this security , however , negotiations with Russia are needed as well as a mandate to breathe life into the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Russia at long last , so that the very aspects that also play a role in the issue of energy security can be included in the negotiations .
I should like to mention another aspect in this connection , namely the reason for the importance of this dialogue with Russia .
If we all bear in mind today how the pipelines in Russia are laid , where they are laid and the fact that - partly as a result of global warming - the condition of these pipelines may soon deteriorate , we see that it is important to enter into close contact with Russia in this particular regard - rather than just with the other producing countries and / or the relevant transit countries .
I should like to mention a field already referred to by several Members , including Mr Goebbels - namely the social dimension , the European social model .
The occasional criticism has been made that this dimension is not really central .
I should just like to remind the House that , just a few days ago , this Presidency held an impetus conference in Nuremberg under the leadership of Franz Müntefering , German Federal Minister for Labour and Social Affairs and President of the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council , on issues such as the following . How can we respond to the challenge of globalisation ?
What can the EU do ?
What should be retained and what changed in response to these challenges ?
The Council President has also made it his objective to continue this during Germany 's Presidency of the G8 .
Nevertheless , we must consider how to allay the fears that this changing world holds for many citizens .
It is very important to bear in mind that people need security in change .
Returning to the subject of Lisbon , many associate this word with the beautiful capital of Portugal , whilst for others it holds no associations .
The task of remedying this falls not only to the Commission .
It is our duty to repeatedly emphasise the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy - growth , jobs and sustainability - and coordinate these with new issues and challenges , such as research , education and training .
In so doing , however , we must show at national level that this impetus and this coordination have come from Europe .
I should like to make one last comment on the subject of the Constitutional Treaty , even though it is not on the agenda of the Spring European Council .
It is unsatisfactory to make comments such as ' Why not just dispense with the Constitutional Treaty : the people do not want it ? '
Statements such as this are incorrect , as some Member States , such as Spain and Luxembourg , have accepted this Constitutional Treaty - be it in their parliaments or by means of referendums .
It is true that two other Member States have voted against it , but , at the same time - as the German Chancellor said in her speech on the German Presidency here a few weeks ago - many people who reject this Constitutional Treaty also want the European Union to have more powers and responsibilities , for example in the field of energy .
This is exactly what the Constitutional Treaty envisages .
Individuals have to decide what it is they want , therefore : they cannot always just select the parts they like .
Those calling for parliamentary rights , for example the early-warning mechanism via better lawmaking , have to be able to decide on the level - national or European - at which they believe regulations are needed and should be adopted .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank all the Members for staying until the very end .
It is always a challenge to create a real debate and not just to have monologues .
I should like to make three comments .
Firstly , I should like to follow up on something to which many of you referred : the deadlock over the Constitutional Treaty and what many of you have pointed to as a lack of commitment from our political leaders in Europe today .
The Commission , of course , fully backs what we could call a courageous and ambitious commitment from the German Presidency to ensure that this whole issue is moved from a stage of reflection to one of action .
We know it will not be easy to find solutions , but we will help as much as we can .
We must overcome this deadlock as soon as possible .
The outcome of the spring Council will be very important in this respect , as will its capacity to deliver on the crucial issues on the agenda , including climate change .
I should like to comment on what some of you have said about the ambitions of the Commission and the European Union .
It is important to say that there is a longer-term objective and target for what we have to do in order to fight climate change .
The 30 % cut in developed countries ' emissions by 2020 is a necessary step towards the longer-term objective of reducing them by as much as 50 % below 1990 levels by 2050 .
It is necessary to see that this is a step in that direction .
This reduction is essential if we are to meet the 2 ° C objective , which we know , in turn , should prevent massive and irreversible disruption of the global climate system .
It is the developed countries that should continue to shoulder most of this global effort to reduce emissions over the next decade or so , as they are already doing under the Kyoto Protocol , so as both to be credible and motivate those poorer countries in the world that will have to follow suit .
We asked the group of developed countries to reduce by 30 % .
Let us ask ourselves whether this is ambitious .
Compared to 1990 , US emissions are currently up by 15 % , those of the EU-25 are down by 5 % and those of Russia are down by 30 % .
It will not be easy , and you cannot see it individually , but it represents a huge challenge .
Let me also mention the costs , because many of you have referred to the costs for industry .
The Commission has made impact assessments that show that taking action to limit climate change is fully compatible with sustaining global growth .
Investment in a low-carbon economy will require around half a percent of global GDP over the period from 2013 to 2030 and would reduce global GDP growth by 0.19 % per year , which is a fraction of the expected annual GDP growth rate of 2.8 % .
This is without associated health benefits , greater energy security and reduced damage from avoided climate change being taken into account .
This is a small insurance premium to pay for significantly reducing the risk of irreversible damage to our economy and to our planet , and especially if you compare it with the Stern Review 's estimate that uncontrolled climate change will cost between 5 and 20 % of GDP in the longer term .
So we must consider the cost of inaction !
Climate change is already costing us - just ask insurance companies all over the world .
Finally , the spring Council is about the Lisbon Strategy .
You are absolutely right that , if we want to communicate , we have to mention that it is about jobs and growth .
Lisbon is also about the courage of reform .
I fully agree with Mr Watson that there is ample evidence that reforms work .
However , we also have evidence that societies dominated by fears and insecurity are not easy to reform : they are afraid of change .
That is also what we see in Europe and that is why we have to build confidence and remember that the Lisbon Strategy - the jobs and growth strategy - is also about fighting social exclusion and poverty ; fighting poverty in Europe as well , improving quality of work , investing in education , building civic competence and investing in people .
That is the only way to overcome the fears .
Listening to all these interesting speeches , I am reminded of the intimate link between the growth and jobs strategy and sustainable development , because we have heard all the arguments for why we as Europeans would like to see economic growth , coupled with social security and maintenance of a high level of environmental protection , while continuing to be ambitious .
I think that sustainable development is an objective which is gaining ground more and more as the vision for Europe and for the world .
To conclude the debate , I have received five motions for resolutions on the Lisbon Strategy pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. while awaiting Questions to the Commission and resumed at 5.35 p.m. )

Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
( SK ) We all certainly agree that innovation plays or should play a dominant role in how we respond to the risks and opportunities presented by the global economy .
It is common knowledge that the biggest problem concerning the development of innovation is insufficient implementation within the various Member States .
The main aim of the Lisbon Strategy is to create the conditions for strengthening the internal competitive environment in each Member State .
The EU economy can only be as competitive and innovation-savvy as the smallest and remotest businesses in its regions .
Innovation programmes must therefore be directly implemented at a regional level , where they can create a sufficiently competitive environment for local SMEs .
The centrally managed implementation of innovation development is doomed from the very beginning .
The way to proceed is through building up a regional technical infrastructure for innovation , including technology incubators and high-tech centres where there will be opportunities to make use of all of the available knowledge potential , as well as every viable innovative idea .
This must go hand in hand with a flexible approach to all forms of financing , in particular venture capital , taking into account the level of development of a given innovative company or project .
The financing must also be available at a regional level .
This is the only way for us to sustain , motivate , develop and tap the knowledge potential of our regions in the interests of long-term sustainable growth .
Therefore , I would like to call on the EC to consider the above-mentioned aspects of innovation development when assessing national strategic reference frameworks .
Announcement by the President : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Common organisation of the market in wine ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Batzeli , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the reform of the common organisation of the market in wine .
Madam President , as you said , today 's debate in the European Parliament on the reform of the COM in wine introduces a cycle of speculation on the future of one of the most important productive , economic and commercial sectors in the European Union .
What we need to focus on today in this review is the objective of keeping the European sector at the top of the world league , the simplification of Community legislation , compatibility with other European development policies , product recognition , the proportionality of products and the cohesion of all wine-growing areas .
This was also the message from discussions in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and from the opinions of the Committees on International Trade and Regional Development and from our consultations with operators in the sector at national and European level .
The reform of the sector must take account of the specific characteristics of wine production at regional and national level , the structure and organisation of the sector , its export capacity and the fact that it may be the only product to which Community legislation applies with a high degree of subsidiarity .
The arrangements under present policies and funding for the current COM , which have often distorted the market and the competitiveness of the product , should be converted so that the Community budget of EUR 1.3 billion under the first pillar is allocated to policies which will aim in the long term at :
maintaining and strengthening European vineyards ;
reinforcing and improving the competitiveness of the sector at European and international level ;
a territorial approach that takes account of environmental protection and protection of natural resources by financing agricultural cultivation practices ;
balancing supply and demand by controlling production with the by-product and potable alcohol distillation mechanism and by modernising the vineyard register ;
the compatibility or adaptation of COM policies with CAP policies ;
maintaining the recognition at international and cross-regional level of quality European wines and wines with geographical indication and designation of origin , the classification of which must be decided in principle by the Council , with scientific opinions from the International Organisation of Vine and Wine ;
strengthening cooperation between all wine agencies from the level of production to the level of movement through operational programmes ;
strengthening rural and regional wine-growing with additional structural interventions .
In order to achieve these strategic targets , the Committee on Agriculture proposes certain measures , which include :
firstly , having a transitional reform , so as to give a chance for producers to adjust , so that they can abandon market support measures and move towards structural measures , cultivation practices and commercial action ;
secondly , standard Community policies need to be integrated into national development and support programmes for the sector , depending on the priorities and orientations set by each Member State following consultations with operators at national and regional level .
The funding for these programmes , by which I mean the national envelopes , will need to be decided at Community level on the basis of standard objective criteria so that there are no distortions or inequalities between the Member States and the regions .
Commissioner , the market is at its most vulnerable and sensitive stage .
It is at a dangerous turning point .
However , with your proposals , you have spun your car off the road .
You are ousting European wine and vintners from the market .
The Wine Spectator has published a study showing that , in 2010 , the USA will be the biggest consumer of quality and expensive wines .
However , with your aggressive financial interventions in grubbing up , distillation and enrichment , all the measures on the basis of which you are saving EUR 760 million euros , you would measure much smaller quantities in figures , but we would be driving European wine out of the market , even though this is not warranted by its development .
In essence , there would be a radical redistribution of Community resources for the benefit of rich , high-yield wine areas to the detriment of regional and mountain areas , to the detriment of the diversity of European wine , and a redistribution of the market for the benefit of imported wines .
However , I should like to state my position on the amendments tabled in plenary .
The views of my fellow Members are understandable and I am sure that they wish to express local and national interests and demands .
This report , as passed by the Committee on Agriculture , is a balanced and integrated report and can go as it stands to the negotiating table for the preparation of the legislative text .
Watering down the positions expressed in this report would mean watering down the position and the credibility of the European Parliament .
We cannot call in a loud voice for a radical reform and , in essence , propose a radical status quo .
We cannot condemn the Commission for liberalising views and respond with nationalisation .
Finally , our proposals should aim to organise the future , not de-organise everything achieved in the past .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I am very grateful to the European Parliament and in particular to the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Regional Development for their work in preparing an own-initiative report on the Commission 's communication ' Towards a sustainable European wine sector ' .
I knew before I started the reform process that it would be difficult and complex .
These last few months have certainly confirmed this impression .
My debates in the Committee on Agriculture and with a number of Members in the Intergroup on Wine here and in their constituencies have shown me that we are dealing with difficult and sensitive issues .
I therefore welcome the report .
It is an ambitious report that covers the whole range of aspects addressed in the communication .
I believe that I am not saying too much by noting that Mrs Batzeli has grasped the many conflicting concerns that we need to reconcile in the course of the reform .
It has been a valiant effort and we will now study the report carefully .
I shall make a few initial observations tonight based on our first reading of the report . Firstly , I should like to express a little regret .
The report initially states that the Commission , by advocating the need for the reform within the European Union , is not paying sufficient homage to the image of European wines .
Let me , therefore , be completely clear .
The European Union 's wine sector is second to none : it delivers the best quality wine in the world , it is extremely diverse and it is an important part of our cultural heritage .
However , some parts of the sector are struggling .
Millions of hectolitres go into crisis distillation every year .
That is hardly a sign of a sector that is in good shape , which is what I want it to be .
I want the sector to be able to compete so that Europe will continue to be the world 's leading producer of wine .
That is why the current regime simply has to be changed .
It is no longer sustainable .
I think we can agree that it has resulted in a structural imbalance .
Stocks are high and , as a result , prices for many wines are low and income for wine-growers has been reduced .
These developments , combined with falling consumption , changing lifestyles and increasing imports from third countries , have forced changes upon us .
I think this is widely accepted .
The direction we all want to take is described in recital K of your report . It suggests that the principal aims of the reform should be to strengthen the dynamism and competitiveness of the sector without losing its market share in international markets , but , equally , to take account of the interests of producers and consumers , while respecting the objectives of maintaining tradition , quality and authenticity .
It goes without saying that you are critical of certain elements of the communication , including matters such as the consumption forecast and the alerts , and the contradiction between the policies of grubbing-up and competitiveness .
The Commission agrees that one of the main challenges is to revive demand , but profitability is even more vital and the pattern of structural surplus leading to lower prices and negative incomes needs to be stopped first .
Profitability is not a question of concentrating production in a few hands and then standardising the wine .
There are small producers who make wine of a wonderful quality and who are also very profitable and I see no reason why this should not still be the case in future .
However , grubbing-up allows those wine producers who are never going to be able to be competitive and who are not able to respond to consumer demand to leave with dignity and compensation .
Surely no one here wants to force those producers who have no profitable , predictable future in the sector just to remain because they cannot afford to leave .
I fully understand that grubbing-up is a sensitive question .
I therefore particularly appreciate the constructiveness that the European Parliament has already shown on this issue .
I welcome your recognition that the decision to grub up must lie with the grower and , having said this , I have also studied your different suggestions very attentively .
You also state very clearly that the decision to grub up cannot , and should not , be taken in a vacuum .
I completely agree .
You have put forward suggestions on how to ensure that grubbing-up complies with a certain number of social and environmental aspects and I can assure you that these will serve as a useful inspiration when we consider how better to frame grubbing-up within our legislative proposal .
I have also noted that you propose to operate a reform in two stages .
We will have plenty of time to discuss the timing and how to calibrate the various instruments at the different stages , but I agree on the concept that we need initially to address the structural imbalances that weigh heavily on our sector today .
One issue that you come back to in the report , and which was also a key factor in our earlier debates , is your strong preference for maintaining the wine budget within the first pillar .
First of all , I believe that this is at odds with the Community position that rural development measures can make a substantial contribution to the required improvements in the wine-growing regions .
Let us not forget that we can ring-fence funds for wine regions in the rural development budget .
But I also believe that your position on this issue rests on a false perception that I want to shift considerable funds away from the first pillar , and this is not the case .
I have said on several occasions , and will repeat tonight that in the future the majority of funding to the sector will continue to come through the first pillar , but this should not prevent us from drawing on the obvious benefits of also having recourse to the second pillar .
I know that in this Parliament there is a strong push for more Community efforts on promotion .
It is indeed important that we improve information about the advantages of moderate and responsible wine consumption and that we promote opportunities in third countries more aggressively .
I think that you will agree with me that we need a more progressive and a more modern approach .
This is something to which I will certainly give due attention in the legal proposal .
Finally , I would like to say that I have worked with this Parliament for two and a half years .
You have clearly demonstrated your ability to be progressive and creative , even on sensitive matters such as the sugar reform , in the pursuit of balanced reform solutions that properly prepare the European Union 's agriculture to face up to its present and future challenges .
But when I look at many of your positions , notably on enrichment , distillation , and private storage , I must admit that I find you to be a little more timid than usual in your zeal for reform .
I do not expect us to agree on these issues now , but these are areas where I believe we will need to be innovative and creative .
Much difficult work therefore lies ahead of us , but I look forward to your continued and very valuable input .
I welcome this opportunity for a debate here tonight .
My apologies to the Chair for being more lengthy than usual , but this is a very important issue which is the focus of huge attention in all the regions of Europe and that is why I took the liberty of speaking for a little longer than usual .
In its opinion , the Committee on International Trade emphasised that in the course of reforming the wine sector , the most important thing is for us to make European wine more competitive on international markets as well as on internal markets .
This is by no means a simple task , since regulating the wine market is exceptionally complex , and European wineries are struggling with numerous difficulties .
One of the very important points in the recommendation by the Committee on International Trade is that support for grubbing up cannot be the central element of the reform .
A much more complex regulation is needed than this .
In my view , insofar as support is to be given to grubbing up , this must be concentrated on those regions where surplus is currently being produced .
For it can be seen that in those regions where production is in deficit - in other words , where they consume more than they produce - or where it is in equilibrium , the growth of imports comes not primarily from wines of other European Union Member States , but from wines of third countries .
Therefore , if grubbing up is carried out in those areas which until now have been able to produce enough for their own consumption , but which from now on will no longer be able to do so , it is not at all certain that this will lead to a decrease in the surplus produced within the European Union .
It is much more likely that it will lead to an increase in imports from third countries .
In addition to these considerations , it is the opinion of the Committee on International Trade that we need to act forcefully in international forums , within the framework of the WTO , that is , in bilateral trade agreements , in the interests of securing protection of geographical indications .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( ES ) In our opinion , we in the Committee on Regional Development have wished to stress certain issues that we believe to be important from the point of view of territorial cohesion , when it comes to implementing a reform that will have a significant impact on certain European regions .
Vineyards and wine production play a crucial structural role in certain regions as a motor for rural development and , therefore , when it comes to adapting the rules regulating the wine sector , aspects such as the increasing depopulation that is threatening many European regions must be taken into account .
We therefore wish to draw attention to the system of grubbing-up proposed by the Commission , which would seriously prejudice the economic and social situation of certain regions in which the wine sector is the main source of employment and prosperity .
We believe that the Commission must propose measures to modernise wine-production techniques and marketing methods .
Finally , this reform must be applied gradually and include transitional periods and a constant assessment of the effects of the reform on the economic and social situation of the regions of the European Union .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by emphasising once more that what we are discussing here is an own-initiative report that represents the response of the European Parliament to the Commission Communication regarding the reform of the common organisation of the market in wine .
In my capacity as rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I can say that the Commission is right to regard strengthening the innovative capacity and competitiveness of the wine sector in Europe and worldwide as the primary objective of this reform .
Promotional and information campaigns to encourage responsible consumption of wine form part of this .
We consider it indispensable for the intensive pursuit of these objectives that the entire funding of the wine sector remain under the first pillar .
In this connection , we warmly welcome the fact that the new rules will be applied according to the principle of subsidiarity by transposing them into national programmes approved by the Commission .
Grubbing-up and permanent abandonment of vineyards may form part of this reform , but they must not be the central part .
Likewise , before assigning new planting rights , the situation in the individual wine-growing regions with regard to illegal plantings should be examined .
If we are to achieve an ambitious , forward-looking trade policy for wines , we must take a tailored approach in thinking about the present funding .
The present distillation , representing EUR 600 million out of a total of EUR 1.4 billion , is certainly not an option for the future .
Nevertheless , we believe that support for the distillation of wine by-products and potable-alcohol distillation should be retained .
The compromise on the wine-growing traditions of the individual Member States consists in respect for the various traditions - and enrichment with sucrose also ranks among traditional oenological practices .
In addition to its economic value , wine-growing forms part of the cultural heritage of the various regions of the EU .
The new challenges necessitate rules that enable sustainability and also sustainable competitiveness .
We should make these things our objective .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , on the immense amount of work she has done .
Secondly , I would like to say to the Commissioner that , according to her own analysis , consumption of wine is falling in the European Union , our trade balance with third countries is deteriorating and we have a production surplus that the Commission puts at 15 % of the total for 2011 .
Nevertheless , while I agree with the Commissioner that this reform is necessary , I hope that she has understood this Parliament 's message , which is that grubbing-up cannot be the central element on which the reform pivots , but rather one more instrument of structural adjustment , subject to control by the Member States .
We need a reform that preserves the best of what we are .
It should not be a question of producing less in order to leave room for third countries , but of making the changes necessary to improve our own production and processing structures and above all , as the sector is demanding , our marketing structures .
With regard to funding , this Parliament unequivocally supports the maintenance of the current budget , within the first pillar of the CAP .
Its a priori distribution amongst producing States , according to the historical data , by means of the so-called ' national packages ' , will promote a more appropriate application of the reform .
With regard to the liberalisation of planting rights , I believe that it must be carried out prudently and at all times under the supervision and control of the Member States .
I would also like openly to express my support for the amendment by Mrs Fraga , who recommends that , for enrichment , musts produced within the European Union should be used .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Commissioner , Mrs Batzeli , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's wine-growing sector represents an extremely important economic activity , particularly in terms of exports .
The European Union is the world 's premier vineyard .
Global wine consumption is on the increase , and yet the European wine sector is in crisis : it is a very paradoxical situation .
We here in Parliament have been working passionately on the outline of a reform of the common organisation of the market in wine .
Wine producers are using their know-how to keep traditions going in modern viticulture .
These men and women are passionate about their work , and it is our responsibility to be passionate in defending them , in helping them to face economic realities and in showing them our support .
The Commission 's response to passion , however , is a cold ' large-scale grubbing up , liberalisation of planting rights and abolition of distillation mechanisms ' .
In my opinion , this report on which we will be voting on Thursday shows that Parliament is responding with a proposal for reforms , admittedly , but progressive reforms .
I think we need to leave the Member States , and particularly the regions , considerable room for manoeuvre in this matter : no one can deny that , in some regions , nothing grows except grapevines ; nor can anyone deny the contribution that wine producers have made to the structure of the countryside .
Through their competences in town and country planning , the Member States and the regions therefore have the necessary capabilities to assess plantation or grubbing-up policies , in close cooperation with producers and representatives of the sector .
It is true that some of the instruments in the current common market organisation are now inappropriate , or are not being used properly , but I nevertheless expect the Commission to take the time to work with the Member States to analyse the consequences of the abolition or replacement of those instruments , particularly distillation mechanisms .
I expect the Commission to propose instruments to regulate the market and to manage potential crises .
The recipe is simple : quality wine , and promotion .
Global wine consumption is on the increase , and the economic and cultural boom in certain countries is being accompanied by an interest in drinking wine .
It is important for the Community 's wine sector to be made more competitive , by means of actions instituted at all stages of production and marketing .
In terms of œnological practices , the new wine-producing countries have more flexible regulations .
I think we need to be careful to avoid the character of our wines becoming globalised .
We certainly need to relax the restrictions imposed on European producers and enable them to adapt to demand and improved competitiveness .
I support a ban on the vinification of imported grape must , and on mixing it with Community must .
I would like , by way of conclusion , to remind you , Commissioner , that wines have a flavour of the land on which they are grown , the colour of the seasons and the spirit of the wine producers .
They have the flavour of the country , of the European Union .
It reminds me of an anonymous quotation : ' to make a great wine , you need a passionate fool to grow the vines , a wise man to regulate them , a lucid artist to make the wine , a lover to drink it and a poet to sing of its glory ' .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Mrs Fischer Boel , ladies and gentlemen , above and beyond its role as an agricultural and economic product , wine represents our history , culture and traditions .
Thus , we cannot accept a reform primarily aimed at resizing a sector that currently uses only 3 % of budget funds , as compared with added-value production of 7 % .
The Commission is proposing to reduce production and to grub up approximately 400 000 hectares of vines over five years , on the grounds of the need to reduce management costs on production surpluses and to improve European competitiveness through the principle that ' only the strongest will remain on the market ' .
It is strange to observe that , while Europe favours a policy of grubbing up vines , other countries , such as those in South America and southern Africa , support planting them .
In view of the fact that worldwide demand is not falling but increasing , it seems that the Commission intends to restore a balance in the European Union 's internal market without taking into consideration worldwide demand and the balance of the world market , and without considering that in the hasty reduction of European wine production there is a risk of eliminating some vines which , while not producing products that are extremely strong on the market , are regional holdings of quality , with strongly-rooted historical traditions that still today act as the social fabric for entire regional areas .
The truth is that the new world wines are gaining market share thanks to a growing improvement in product quality , together with the competitiveness of their prices .
The new intervention methods ought to make it possible for the whole sector to meet the new challenges imposed by an increasingly globalised market .
The winning formula is still to invest in the quality and individual characteristics of European wines , in cost reduction , in the promotion of wine in order to enlarge its market , and we fear that the spread of new oenological practices may lead to a deterioration in the image of wine and therefore compromise the relationship of trust between the consumer and the product , with very serious consequences for consumption .
Mrs Fischer Boel , the wine sector needs a reform that promotes greater competitiveness in European wine , by continuing with the restructuring of vines to make them more competitive and by promoting the maintenance of viticulture to act as protection for the land and the environment .
Geographical labels and designations of origin should be understood to be vital tools in guaranteeing and protecting European producers .
To conclude , Mrs Fischer Boel , what we ask of a new EU wine policy is the recovery and development of the sector on the world market .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the rapporteur really is a staunch champion of European wine .
I disagree with her in many regards , but one really has to give her credit for her commitment .
Even though I am inclined to welcome the Commission 's proposals , I must point out that many regions perceive the liberalisation carefully implemented by these proposals as a rather unfeeling policy from Brussels .
This is something that should be taken seriously - the rapporteur also points it out .
When she invited us to a Greek wine evening , I fully agreed with her - and I hope I was not alone in this - that it would not occur to anyone to make the wine proffered to us there into pure spirit .
That is exactly the problem .
We must market wine as a quality product , and we must also give vintners the opportunity to do so .
On the subject of grubbing-up - which , it must be emphasised time and again , should not be compulsory , but should instead consist in offering vintners the chance of ceasing operations if they see no future in the wine market - the Commission should take measures to shape a better future for the market .
That is , vintners should first be made an offer , and then told that , if nothing can be done , they may leave viniculture with the help of public funds .
Then there is the matter of the regions .
Commissioner , this is a question of money .
The regions have been receiving money , and to discontinue a given measure now will deprive them of this money .
The fight is for purely material things , therefore .
The regions should be assured here , too , that these funds will remain at their disposal - according to specific social and environmental criteria and with regard to the market - so that these regions can continue to be wine-producing regions .
Taking this course would remove a great deal of the tension and also enable agreement with the rapporteur .
Madam President , the last reform of the CAP set as an objective faster cutbacks in the agricultural sector and support for it , so as to save resources for other anti-grassroots policies .
At the same time , the elimination of small and medium-sized farms is being promoted so as to concentrate land , production and trade in a few hands .
Wine is not exempt from this objective .
What if Europe is first in production , consumption and exports in the world thanks to the good quality wines that it produces ?
For Europe , the main thing is competition and the liberalisation of wine and must imports to the detriment of European production , thereby also undermining quality .
That is why mass grubbing up is being imposed , with strong incentives and sales of the rights of small and medium-sized vineyards to companies in the sector , thereby fostering the creation of cartels , using as their pretext the structural surpluses and the need to balance supply and demand on the Community market in order to safeguard better prices .
This pretext is a joke , because the liberalisation of imports from third countries of must and wine and the legalisation of the practice of mixing them with Community must and wine , together with the recognition of wine-making practices which use foreign materials in vinification , thereby converting wine from an agricultural to an industrial product , mean that imports of cheap wines are facilitated and quality is undermined .
What is certain is that European vineyards will shrink , small and medium-sized wine-growers will be wiped out and imports will triumph .
Moreover , the grubbing-up measure has been applied in the past , a decade ago .
In Greece , over 200 000 decares were grubbed up .
Surpluses were reduced temporarily , but the problem reappeared with mass imports and in fact resulted in the distillation of even high-class wines .
However , thousands of small and medium-sized vineyards were wiped out .
That is why the Commission proposal cannot constitute a basis for discussion , because it does not address the problem of wine-growing .
Nor can I agree with today 's report , because in essence it proposes a longer transitional period for the application of the new regulation , with certain amendments to the proposed measures in order to blunt the consequences .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , producers in other parts of the world have succeeded in making wines that are to the taste of European consumers as well as being cheaper than European wine .
According to the rapporteur , we must counteract this state of affairs by pumping more money into agricultural policy , at the same time as implementing various types of campaign .
There is no doubt that Europe produces some terrific wines .
The interesting question in terms of principle is that of whether poorer countries are to be allowed to be squeezed out in order to favour European wine production .
Certainly , the New World consists not only of economic giants such as the United States and Australia but also of recently industrialised countries such as South Africa , Chile and Argentina , where the wines are often produced in poor , neglected areas .
The social safety nets to be found in the EU Member States do not exist in the same way in the aforesaid countries .
If wine production in these areas were to be impeded , there would be major repercussions for the populations .
It is important to take an overall view , and thus also to adopt a public health perspective , when debating this issue .
In the long run , the protectionist features of this report would be to the disadvantage of both the EU 's and the New World 's wine producers .
When all is said and done , wine is an alcoholic drink , and the EU should not , therefore , sponsor campaigns that encourage more wine drinking .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , since 22 July 1993 , the date of the first draft reforms of the wine sector , we have been told that we need to grub up our vines , with figures to support it .
In 1993 , for example , we were told that consumption in 2000 would fall to 115 million hectolitres , but in fact it was 127 million - the Commission was out by 12 million .
We are also told that there is overproduction , but where ?
On the global market in potable alcohol. there was a shortage of 9 million hectolitres in 2002 and 11 million in 2003 .
And we know full well that the time has come for wine producers in China , in particular , where Chairman Mao said ' let the people drink wine ' .
So what is lurking behind these reforms on free plantation , the addition of sugar , distillation , infusions of wood chippings , imports of grape must and , of course , grubbing up ?
In reality , the Commission is pursuing two aims with this grubbing up of 400 000 hectares , the most violent episode in the global history of wine , because we have to go back to the Emperor Domitian in 92 to find an equivalent : first of all , abandoning our exports of wine to the southern hemisphere by 2015 , in exchange for its services market ; and secondly for the pensioners of northern Europe to settle gradually in southern Europe .
Europe therefore needs a land reserve , and that reserve can be found in the 400 000 hectares that will be grubbed up and replaced by houses - four million houses on four billion square metres , with a turnover of a thousand billion euro .

It is this , this land grabbing , that is the true tragedy , because wine is not just a common market organisation : it is more than agriculture , and even more than culture , despite the painters , the 275 poets of wine , and the structures of the 5 000 wine-producing villages of Europe - wine is the interface with the divine .
At the wedding in Cana , Jesus ' first miracle was to turn water not into whisky and coke , or into Nokia mobile phones , but into wine .
Abandoning that , therefore , is not like abandoning New Zealand 's sheep or Brazil 's chickens - it is abandoning Europe 's identity .
That , Commissioner , is why you must hold fast to wine , which the Argentinean Jorge Luis Borges called the deep patriarchal river that flows through the history of the world .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank my fellow Member , Mrs Batzeli , for the work she has done , as well as Commissioner Fischer Boel , for the listening abilities that she displayed during the communication .
We hope that the legislative proposal to be put before us will be consistent with the many wishes expressed both by Parliament and by European producers .
The challenge is a very important one : to place European viticulture in a position to renew the vigour of the market , to regain competitiveness and , above all , to allow our wines to compete with non-EU countries , by reconquering old markets and also acquiring new ones .
Some proposals do not convince us at all , Mrs Fischer Boel , and , above all , the keystone of the reform cannot be definitive grubbing-up .
This step would translate into a wholesale and uncontrolled abandon of difficult holdings which , as well as having a productive function , also play a part in protecting the environment and the countryside .
Grubbing up , then , just as new producer states are planting , would mean handing over large new slices of the market to them .
It is a question of making a choice of spheres , and our choice can only be that of high-quality wine , not a so-so beverage .
In promoting our wines we must promote our traditions , our land , our culture , our added value , and the expression of a great historical and cultural heritage .
For this reason , I am not at all convinced by the proposal to allow the use of imported musts to enrich our wines or blending them with the wines of non-EU countries . Even less am I convinced by the idea of indicating on the label the vintage of the species in the wines without any geographical indication , making it possible to use varieties linked to the territory and , above all , running a major risk of misleading consumers .

On the subject of liberalisation we should , instead , protect the efforts and the investments made by the winemakers , promote our geographical designations internationally and prevent them from being devalued economically .
There are two words that we should remember : flexibility and market-orientation .
' Flexibility ' , though , does not mean sudden , total and indiscriminate abolition of all the current management measures .
In addition , Mrs Fischer Boel , I believe that resources should be distributed on the basis of historical criteria , namely in line with the same criterion used for all the other reforms adopted to date .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Batzeli report on the CMO in wine is a preparatory stage in a dialogue that will lead us to the legislative report , and therefore to final decisions within the course of this year .
I do , however , think that it would be a good idea for Parliament to take decisions on some of the proposal 's main conclusions , and this should certainly include grubbing-up .
Like others of my fellow Members , I disagree with this proposal if seen as the only and exclusive option for rebalancing the market .
We must compete with each other on the world market , and the strength of European wine lies in emphasising quality and traditional practices , and also in its connection to the land and age-old practices that are used in this sphere .
To this end , I am also opposed to the importation of musts : as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we have tabled an amendment on this point .
I think that dialogue , including today 's exchanges , will lead to positive results - including during transitional periods - against measures that , like distillation , if abolished immediately would pull away the safety net for many winemakers .
I think that if we listen to each other we will be able to retain European wine production on the world stage .

( FR ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a few months ago now since we were taken by surprise by the agreement on wine concluded with the United States , on which we had to call for an urgent debate and which already contained some of the bad ingredients of the reform you are proposing today : weakening of the European criteria for wine quality , confusion over geographical indications and designations of origin , acceptance of highly questionable oenological practices , greater opening of the market , which will benefit standardised products that are thought to be to the taste of the equally standardised world consumer .
Undoubtedly merchants and exporters will benefit , but the development of products with intimate cultural links to their local area certainly will not ; neither will the diversity and the very rich flavours of European wines , nor the consumer , who will soon be forced to swill concoctions that hardly deserve to be called wine , and certainly not the winegrowers who work hard , sometimes in difficult regions and on small areas , to maintain a high quality of wine and the pleasure of drinking it .
Alright , let us put an end to the most absurd mechanisms that encourage overproduction and have too many perverse effects , but please , Commissioner , fight with us and put in place the resources to promote quality wines , to make the most of the variety of flavours and territories , to preserve the soil and biodiversity and to tell the whole world about the wonderful alchemy of European wine that has existed for over 2 000 years .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the figures speak for themselves : in recent years Europe has seen its production decrease , while other countries outside Europe are witnessing a constant increase in their production shares .
Today , in launching a reform of the CMO in wine , Europe must take account of the fact that approximately 3 400 000 hectares and 3 000 000 workers are involved .
Looking to grubbing-up as a tool for market balance means going along the route of previous changes to the CMOs in tobacco and sugar .
We cannot continue along this path , which results in falls in employment levels and the abandonment of entire agricultural territories , often located in fragile areas from the viewpoint of hydrogeological capacity .
Any reform must thus take account , above all , of businesses , workers and environmental conditions , and it is only by protecting and maintaining a European agricultural system of production that we will be able to ensure quality and security for consumers .
Of course , the efforts made by the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , have brought about an improvement with respect to the Commissioner 's positions .
Despite this , I believe that there are still points of concern .
Above all , we must abandon the grubbing-up scenario and use the crop reconversion levy for those holdings with market difficulties , to achieve high-quality production .
As the latest European export data show , we need to place the accent on quality and , as a result , production that should identify itself with the land and with our traditions .
This is the road that we need to go down , not that of changing wine into an ordinary industrial product .
It follows from this that we should not add sugar as a way of enriching wine , and that we need to lay down precise rules on vinification .
On this point , the use of musts of European origin for enrichment should not be penalised , since this is a traditional practice in European winemaking and is not detrimental to the quality of the wine itself .
For this reason , it is important to retain support for funding musts .
In the final analysis , it is essential for any reform to take into account the climate changes currently occurring , which will have dramatic consequences in some areas in southern Europe , throwing their agricultural systems into confusion .
Now is the time for Europe to defend its land , its civilisation and its traditions .
( ES ) Wine is not manufactured , it is developed and nurtured .
There is a subtle difference , but an important one , because it says a lot about the person who is talking and about their point of view and their sensitivity towards the sector .
The European wine-making sector has problems .
The fundamental problem that it is facing at the moment is the difficulty created by the increase in internal demand , because consumption is still increasing at international level .
That problem must be resolved , however , and in resolving it , account must be taken of its many implications , because the European sector is facing increasing imports .
The problem is not therefore what we produce , but the price at which we sell it .
Why do we sell at different prices ?
Essentially because European producers do not have to meet the same requirements as third-country producers , but rather they have to face many more , and they are not therefore competing under equal conditions .
We must make the sector competitive , not by tearing up 400 000 hectares of vines , but by controlling ; not by liberalising indiscriminately , but rather by controlling , promoting and safeguarding the culture , tradition and quality of European wines , because wine is not manufactured , it is nurtured and developed .
We must therefore support that culture and promote knowledge amongst consumers about which wine they are consuming and when a wine is a vino de crianza or a vino de reserva , a gran reserva , a table wine , a vino de la tierra , a vino de añada or however we wish to describe it .
We must improve and supplement all of the qualities of wine , controlling wine-making practices , promoting responsible consumption and above all researching , developing and innovating .
Not by manufacturing , but rather by developing the wine within a culture , a tradition and a quality which represents European wines , respecting our traditions and , above all , increasing demands in order to harmonise quality upwards , and never downwards .
We therefore hope that the Commission 's proposal will at least show leadership and imagination and genuinely guarantee that the sector is competitive .
( PT ) I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Batzeli on her outstanding work in difficult circumstances and to thank Mrs Fischer Boel once again for being here in the Chamber .
All of the political debates , the hearings , the meetings with representatives from the sector , the visits we have made to the winemaking areas of various Member States and the hundreds of amendments are ample evidence of the interest that the Members have in analysing this important issue for European agriculture .
There is consensus on the need for reform and it is right to point out that no alternatives to the Commission 's original model have been put forward .
There are , however , major differences between Parliament and the Commission as regards the timetable , the intensity and the manner of the implementation of the main measures .
It is certainly necessary to grub up poor-quality vines , but this must happen with illegal vines first . Furthermore , it is vital that the final decision on grubbing up should rest with the Member States .
It is certainly necessary to put an end to subsidised distillation , but it is essential to safeguard support for potable alcohol distillation ; fortified wines , which are so important to European exports , need such support .
It makes no sense to promote the authenticity and tradition of European wines whilst at the same time advocating the free entry of concentrated must from third countries .
This report is indicative of Parliament 's good faith and commitment .
I trust that the Commission will welcome our proposals so that we can implement satisfactory reforms in the sector .
( PT ) As Mrs Fischer Boel 's speech confirmed , the main purpose of her intended reform of the common organisation of the market in wine is to use the grubbing up of vines as a means of balancing the winemaking market .
This means that the least developed regions and in particular family farms and farmers on low incomes would be worst affected , which would have a disastrous social environmental effect and would lead to the increased desertification and , in turn , abandonment of rural areas .
For vast areas of countries of the South , in countries such as Portugal , the consequences could be disastrous , on a par with the tragedy of the summer forest fires .
We therefore place the emphasis on protecting vine and wine cultivation , which has played a central role in European , and in particular Mediterranean , civilisation .
We want to see our farmers producing better and better wine and maintaining potable alcohol distillation .
We are opposed to the downplaying of producing wine from grapes , replacing it with industrial wine resulting from the import of must from third countries .
Commissioner , our high-quality wines must be defended .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Fischer Boel , ladies and gentlemen , as our Council President , Angela Merkel , said in her speech in this House on 17 January , ' what distinguishes Europe , that which constitutes its soul , is the way we handle our diversity ' and ' Europe 's soul is tolerance ' .
In recent weeks and months , we have held many discussions on the proposals for reforming the market in wine .
North and south , the individual wine-growing regions - a wide variety of opinions and interests have been represented .
Each of us believes that , if we could have written the Batzeli report ourselves , we would have done it differently , made it more specific , more succinct .
Nevertheless , we have managed to moderate all interests so that everyone can support them .
It is a compromise , then , which not only tolerates but also respects the diversity of the European wine sector , and develops it further - albeit in small steps .
The Commissioner has taken the trouble to visit many wine-producing regions in recent months , and for that I am obliged to her .
She has seen how different the regions are .
In the field of wine , in particular , we need more scope to determine things at national and regional level . We also need national budgets under the first pillar , on the basis of which the appropriate measures can be selected from an EU catalogue of measures for wine in the regions and subsequently implemented .
We agree that we do not want to give up , we do not want to grub up 400 000 hectares .
We want to fight for market shares , for our jobs , our cultural landscape , the European lifestyle .
Wine is part of Europe and we must maintain its traditions and thus also long-established oenological practices .
Our competitors around the world are waiting in the wings to supply what we no longer produce .
There is one thing the discussion has made clear , and that is that Rome was not built in a day : we need staying power .
Our policies need to be reliable .
In the long term , however , our measures must be adapted in response to the market .
( FR ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our work has not been in vain .
I would like first of all to thank Mrs Batzeli for her report , which makes far-reaching and very positive amendments to the excessively liberal proposals the Commission presented last summer .
Indeed , we need to send a strong message to the entire wine sector , which is in serious crisis .
We know that the drop in consumption in Europe combined with increasing imports from third countries has resulted in falling prices and falling incomes for wine growers and that only a policy of proactive regulation , not all-out liberalisation , will get us out of the crisis .
We want to promote quality winegrowing that respects the nature and traditions of our winegrowing areas and the diversity of holdings , especially family holdings .
The massive indiscriminate grubbing-up of 400 000 hectares , seen as a structural solution , must be clearly ruled out .
Planting rights must be preserved , but at the same time controls must be stepped up to prevent illegal planting .
The assignment of new rights recorded in the adjusted vineyard register must benefit young producers of quality wines most of all .
Trade organisations play a major part in the sector 's competitiveness and they should be strengthened through national operational programmes .
Finally , the promotion of sensible wine consumption together with a dynamic export policy , including simplified labelling , will require a real allocation of substantial budget resources .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are on the point of approving the report on the Commission communication on the common organisation of the market in wine together with a series of amendments .
What is the basic message we want to give the Commission :
firstly , no to uncontrolled grubbing up which can wipe out valuable production areas producing valuable quality wines ;
secondly , certain intervention measures - and I refer here to distillation - designed to balance the market and indirectly support producers ' incomes should be maintained ;
thirdly , national envelopes should be created containing various actions from which the Member States can choose .
However , in order for these envelopes to be effective , they must have adequate funding ;
fourthly , we will of course need to avoid transferring resources from the first to the second pillar as this would , in essence , weaken the COM .
We need to turn our attention to drastic solutions , of which I would mention two :
firstly , above all we must seek to maintain high quality Community wine production .
This we can rely on ;
secondly and more seriously , we need to aim for more intensive promotion of Community wines .
Market shares do not increase by wishful thinking .
Only an aggressive policy can achieve an increase in consumption inside and outside the European Union .
Clearly there are different opinions on various issues in the communication , such as , for example , wine enrichment .
For us - for me - wine produced by adding sugar and water does not qualify as wine .
Wine is a grape product , not a sugar beet product .
I know that the addition of sugar will be decided .
If the addition of sugar is decided , then it must be stated on the label .
We must be honest and protect both consumers and producers .
( PL ) Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate you on your election and on chairing this debate , and to thank you on behalf of all of us for your great patience in allowing us to exceed the time limit , which was necessary for all our sakes .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , for all the work she had done in recent months preparing her report on reform of the wine sector and the excellent way in which work on this document was coordinated in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I agree with the need for fundamental reform of the common organisation of the market in wine , and for adjustment of the structure of wine production to ensure the European wine sector is competitive and balanced .
Action must be taken to encourage a balance on the market as soon as possible , because lack of such a balance will swallow up increasing amounts of EU budget resources .
I would like to draw your attention to the need to support the development of rural areas in regions where wine-making , although insignificant in the context of the Community as a whole , is important for local tourism and diversification of farming in rural areas .
These areas will all be equally affected by the reforms .
We therefore need to adopt solutions to reform the market in wine which will not put undue economic restrictions on wine-growing at a local scale .
Local innovation in wine-growing in rural areas of the new Member States , furthermore , is not directly related to the European wine market , and therefore does not need regulation on strict market principles .
These regions have never created costly wine lakes , and any actions aiming to limit future over-production should not therefore apply to areas with a low level of wine production .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , the lack of an agreed compromise before this report was adopted has led to a series of errors and contradictions which I hope will be resolved in the vote in this plenary .
Of these errors , I would like to point to the one contained in paragraph 18 , relating to the distillation of by-products , which requests that the alcohol obtained by means of this kind of distillation be directed , at least in part , to the potable alcohol market .
This demonstrates a lack of knowledge of the different kinds of distillation and of alcohols produced by them , since potable alcohol , intended exclusively for the production of brandies , ports and liqueurs , is a high-quality product , something that can in no way be achieved by means of alcohol from the distillation of by-products .
For all of these reasons , I believe that we must vote against this paragraph in order to prevent any more confusion in relation to types of distillation and the alcohols produced by them .
Secondly , I would like to stress something that is crucial to any COM reform : the budgetary aspects .
To date , all COM reforms have employed a distribution of funds based on an historical criterion .
Surprisingly , in the case of the wine reform , the intention is to change to other formulae , which are not yet very clear , but which are creating great uncertainty in the sector .
In order to provide Mrs Batzeli 's report with more clarity , therefore , I also propose that we vote for the amendments on employing the historical criterion for the distribution of the funds .
( HU ) Dear Mrs Fischer Boel , believe me , we also want reform : thoroughgoing and radical reform , and in this regard the Commission and the European Parliament should be allies .
Where we disagree with the Commissioner is that we do not wish to give as much weight to grubbing-up , as all parties are in agreement that changes in structure and modernisation are at least as important as grubbing-up .
I would like to draw the attention of the Commissioner that there is great danger for the new Member States that poor winegrowers will grub up too much , thereby only adding to the problems of the new Member States .
That is why all payments must be made into the national envelope , and I wish to congratulate the Commissioner for this , because a national envelope can mean the future not only for wine but for the entire common agricultural policy : let us define the limits and then put it into the national envelope , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
This is an excellent solution , but our grounds for determining the national envelopes is problematic , Commissioner , if it is true that we are to base them 20 % on territorial and 80 % on historical references .
This would be serious discrimination against new Member States .
Consequently , for the new Member States only a distribution of the national envelope on the basis of territory would be acceptable , if this information is correct - I hope it is not .
On the fifth aspect , that of distillation , you are right : it has to be stopped completely .
Finally , in connection with rural development , we should make it possible to use additional rural development funds for the development of wine regions , beyond those budgeted for the winemaking sector .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all , it gives me great satisfaction to note that the women are setting the tone for this debate .
Unfortunately , this report has been ill-fated from the outset .
It is true that it has improved a little . Nevertheless , in my view , it is still much too confusing to send the desired clear signal to the Commission and make this institution , too , realise that things are not as bad as they seem in its Communication .
I shall be supporting those parts of the report that continue to regard a specific market organisation for wine as indispensable .
In my view , however , it is nothing short of a provocation that the Commission is now devoting its attention superficially to proposals for a single market organisation for all agricultural products , whilst here we have been racking our brains for months over the reform of the common organisation of the markets in wine , fruit and vegetables .
How seriously does the Commission really take us ?
What does it have at the back of its mind ?
Regarding the organisation of the CMO for wine , we need the funding to be under the first pillar .
We need better use of funds to enable us to maintain and improve our production potential , regain old markets and conquer new ones , and promote moderate , healthy wine consumption .
We need more subsidiarity and greater responsibility for the profession , so that funds can be spent more selectively at regional level .
Nevertheless , when it comes to allocating national funding , the regions that have made the least effort to produce and market good-quality wine should not be rewarded once more , on the basis of ' historical criteria ' , for ploughing hundreds of millions of euro into the distillation of unmarketable wine .
That is unacceptable .
It is also unthinkable that northern regions , which have marketed their quality wines without European funding , should be forbidden from producing their wines according to traditional methods .
This is no solution to the structural problems in the regions that have slept through structural reforms on a bed of their distillation millions .
Europe does not in fact have a structural surplus of wine , but instead has a surplus corresponding exactly to the quantities planted illegally .
If vintners want to give up their business early , they should be able to do so and the social effects should be cushioned , but they should do so without causing irreparable environmental damage by grubbing-up within the boundaries of quality-wine production .
It must be possible to compete for markets worldwide on fair competitive terms .
European wines should not be produced using water from Europe , or must imported from third countries .
Blending European and imported wines is also out of the question .
What was the Commission thinking ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Madam President , I would like to try a different approach .
It would be short-sighted to think that , in this age of globalisation , European policy only impacted on our own citizens .
If Europe changes policy with regard to its wine sector , then this will affect very many other people outside of Europe , people whose incomes will suffer as a result of unfair competition from the European wine sector .
This is why it is necessary to integrate policy in different areas .
The Commission proposals to reform the wine sector are a step in the right direction .
As the Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Development and as a Social-Democrat , I am deeply disappointed that the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has overlooked European development policy and fair trade .
According to the report , it is necessary to keep the wine sector out of the negotiations in the world trade round .
After all , according to the report , the difficulties in the wine sector are caused by ever greater imports from third countries .
Meanwhile , the Commission has to take all kinds of measures to protect our wine sector .
Why would we in developing countries take away with one hand what we give them with European development policy ?
Why would we want to shut our markets to fair competition ?
Why not let the customer decide what wine they want to drink , whether this is a French Bordeaux , a South African Chardonnay or a Chilean Merlot ?
Fair trade with other countries does not rule out a competitive European wine sector , but protectionist wine policy does , however , exclude tens of thousands of people who depend on a fair wine trade with Europe for their daily crust .
This is why I am happy to drink a glass of South African ' Groot geluk ' when I say ' To consistent European policy ; the Commission receives my support .
Cheers ! '
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , The market in wine has in recent years struggled with surpluses , which the current policy on the common market in wine has been unable to resolve satisfactorily .
The support for wine distillation , for example , is in my view a pointless waste of limited resources .
The reformed market in wine today does not encourage producers of inferior quality table wines to move towards producing higher quality wine .
This is why it is so important to reform the market .
What is needed is a substantial boost to the competitiveness of the European wine sector .
In this context , Mrs Batzeli 's report offers many suggestions , and I , for one , feel it is a very well balanced report .
The key area on which we must focus our attention is budgetary reform .
Support must be proportionate to the area of land being used for wine cultivation , and to the value of wine production .
Funding should not be provided for the grubbing up of vineyards found to be in breach of the acquis .
The export payments for table wine are completely unsystematic and certainly do not help enhance the good name of European wine .
Ladies and gentlemen , last but not least , we must understand that if we care about supporting the competitiveness of European products , we cannot persecute European producers .
The geographical conditions in countries of the north are diametrically opposed to those in the south .
Sweetening sugar beet is as much of a tradition in northern countries , as is acidifying wine in southern countries .
Banning it would spell the end for many good families of winemakers in our countries , disrupting traditions and consequently also disrupting the solutions to problems of rural production .
Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , European winegrowing needs an ambitious reform .
As you will have gathered , we want that reform to respect the European winegrowing tradition and to respect the men and women who work in that sector .
I would however like to draw your attention to the opinion of the Committee on International Trade , which is included in Mrs Batzeli 's report .
The reform of the common organisation of the market in wine must in fact take account of the commercial stakes .
Europe remains the world 's largest exporter of wine and while it is necessary to make it more competitive in the face of growing competition from New World wines , the vitality of this sector 's exports rests above all on a quality and authenticity that are acknowledged the world over .
We therefore need an offensive commercial policy to promote the quality of European wines .
It would therefore be absurd , and counterproductive , for example , to authorise the vinification of imported must and the blending of European wines with wines from elsewhere .
The European Parliament 's report is therefore strongly against that .
Likewise , it is necessary to secure better protection of protected geographical indications ( PGI ) and protected designations of origin ( PDO ) within the framework of the WTO negotiations and bilateral agreements .
We want to defend wine production linked to local areas against wines that are largely unregulated .
I hope , Commissioner , that the European Commission will respect the opinions which appear in Mrs Batzeli 's report , and I pay tribute to her and congratulate her this evening .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we know that the reform that we are seeking to implement must be an appropriate response to the challenge of the competitiveness of the European wine market worldwide .
We agree that Europe can only meet this challenge if it preserves and improves the quality of its wine , by enhancing its individuality .
Not all the answers that we have found , however , fully correspond to this final aim .
So we can say that the text adopted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is the best possible text , but it nonetheless requires further modifications .
It is therefore right to carry out prudent reform , in stages , that is properly managed , based on the principle of subsidiarity with a view to respecting individual national and regional features .
For all these reasons , agricultural funding should be kept under the first pillar : we need to implement educational campaigns to promote responsible consumption ; to retain distillation measures , at least for now , as a security net for producers ; to permit the Member States to restrict the grubbing-up of vines on the basis of rigid environmental and social criteria , giving preference to the protection of small , high-quality production .
As for retaining the rules in force on practices permitted for vinification , sugar enrichment and musts , I would say that the strenuous defence of these practices by some national delegations raises the problem of national interests as compared with those of the Union as a whole and points to the need to strengthen the concept of a united Europe , avoiding the market distortions involved in excessive nationalism .
If what is at stake is improving the competitiveness of European wines , the proposal to support the practice of adding saccharose and of using musts runs counter to this , because the use of such additives lowers quality and reduces differences , whereas these are , in fact , the best expressions of wine cultivation .
Perhaps we might have made a better effort on this aspect , by posing the question of Community interests and by asking , as I am doing , for all the EU countries - without exception - to agree that it is inappropriate and politically incorrect to place national interests before European interests and that it is vital to find a fair balance between these requirements .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like first of all to congratulate Mrs Batzeli , the rapporteur , who , as we have heard , expresses a point of view widely shared in this Chamber .
Let us say it one more time , the Commission 's proposals are not acceptable as they stand .
Far be it from us to deny there is a problem ; European consumption is falling , our exports are stagnant , but at the same time our wine imports are rising .
The Commission 's response to this is to propose a massive grubbing-up plan that really means the scrap heap for our winegrowers .
We are told there is overproduction ; alright , but refusing to act on imports is to use European production as the market ' safety valve ' .
That is unacceptable .
We can only agree to grubbing-up vines if it is based on a voluntary approach , which means substantial financial compensation , and if we introduce the idea of temporary grubbing-up .
My second point is that the reduction in the budget for the common organisation of the market in wine is not acceptable either .
The Commission mentions the possibility of transferring some of the budget to rural development .
But without wishing to call into question the very principle of a specific common market organisation for wine , I find it hard to see how the already low level of credits can be reduced , especially when we have just welcomed two new States , which are themselves producers .
As several of us have said , we are therefore against a transfer , any transfer , of credits from the first to the second pillar of the CAP .
My third point , with which I shall conclude , is that , for our part , we really believe that European winegrowing has a future .
We do not believe that the time of the winegrowers is passed .
The future does not lie in the concentration of holdings as the massive grubbing-up plan suggests .
We must build that future by making our wines more competitive , especially abroad .
That is why we think that the first priority for a reform of the common organisation of the market in wine should be to make our wines more attractive through a major plan to promote and market them in the world .
I was glad to hear you say as much just now , Commissioner ; we now want to see action .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to warmly congratulate my honourable friend Mrs Batzeli on her excellent work and express my satisfaction , because this report was undertaken by our honourable Member from Greece , which has a history of wine-growing going back centuries .
Wine , as an agricultural product , has always held centre stage in our life , in our customs , in our traditions , in our history , in our joy and in our sadness .
In other words , it is an integral part of our civilisation .
It is therefore a very positive thing that this report reflects to a large degree the views of the Greek wine-growing sector .
At the same time , Mrs Batzeli 's report constitutes a clear stand by the European Parliament in light of the new common organisation of the wine market planned by the Commission and sets caution and logic against what are in my view the Commission 's hasty and simplified initial thoughts .
I would ask that we vote for the report as it stands .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to join in thanking the rapporteur and all the shadow rapporteurs for their work .
This is the third reform of the wine sector in 12 years , and I am glad that a Commission Communication has now made it possible to reconcile the very different positions and objectives .
The reason our points of view started out so divergent is that wine is a very emotional subject . I always say that wine is among the most elegant of agricultural products .
This divergence is also evidenced by the tabling of almost 600 amendments .
In my opinion , a great deal of this report can be seen in a very positive light .
It contains many compromises .
I should like to emphasise in particular that traditional oenological practices really have been taken into account .
It must be made quite clear , however , that there is no option whatsoever for duplicate compensation or support for the regions , as we could not justify that to the European taxpayer .
One problem remains that is of significance to Austria .
Proper account has yet to be taken of the issue of the labelling of table wines .
At all events , we want to see table wines labelled differently from quality wines .
There must be a clear distinction for consumers .
Finally , I would ask the Commissioner to read this own-initiative report carefully .
I am convinced that she and all her staff will do so .
It contains some good proposals , which the Commission will hopefully incorporate into its proposal on the new common organisation of the market in wine that it is due to present to us in the summer .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would just like to touch on some of the major issues that have been raised by many of you in this very important debate .
Grubbing-up was mentioned by almost all of you .
I am not quite sure that you listened carefully to what I said in my introduction , namely that we need to ensure that grubbing-up does not disrupt important and legitimate social and environmental concerns .
Listen carefully , and I will take this into consideration when we make the legal proposals .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf said very clearly that grubbing-up should not be forced upon our winegrowers .
Exactly .
It should not be , because the decision on grubbing-up is one for winegrowers and winegrowers alone to take .
It is not a decision for the Member States or for the Commission , but exclusively for the winegrowers .
But we should not force those growers that are today struggling to be successful in winegrowing to remain in a business where they cannot make money year after year .
So let us give them a possibility to leave the sector in a decent way .
On distillation , I have yet to meet anyone willing to tell me , off the record , that crisis distillation could ever make good sense .
On the contrary , I think it gives our citizens an excuse to portray the common agricultural policy in the most negative way , referring to the old-fashioned methods and tools that we used in previous times .
We cannot defend spending half a billion euros every year on getting rid of wine that nobody wants to drink .
This does not work and I hope you will support me on this .
Therefore , we need promotion .
It is something that the European Parliament has stressed over and again and I am prepared to make a push on this .
But promotion at European level must not be a cushion for the wine sector .
The wine sector itself also needs to be much more aggressive .
In Ireland we have seen the consumption of wine increasing .
And today 70 % of the wine consumed in Ireland is imported from outside the European Union .
Therefore , I simply did not understand why at the recent World Ploughing Championships in Ireland , which attracted 250 000 visitors , only two wine producers were present , neither of them from Europe . I can only ask why .
On imported must for vinification , I have said clearly from the beginning that we have to put everything on the table and I have taken note of the reactions from the European Parliament , from different Member States and from stakeholders .
Christa Klaß mentioned that there are huge differences within the different regions .
I have been able to see this for myself and therefore I think we have to stress the importance of the idea of national envelopes in the Commission communication .
I think it is an excellent possibility for Member States and for regions to allocate the different tools and the money as part of a national envelope completely tailor-made for the different regions .
I think this is crucial .
Quite a lot of you stressed that we need to base our future in the wine sector on quality , quality and quality , and I can totally endorse that .
I am looking forward to holding discussions with you in the future on the wine reform that I will present to the Council , hopefully just before the summer break , and then I will be happy to come here to the European Parliament to present it at the same time , as the basis for our future discussions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) The EU wine sector produces some of the world 's finest wines and has enormous potential which must be further developed in a sustainable manner .
The constant growth of the market in China , which is now beginning to actively produce wine , together with increasing production in other countries such as Australia , New Zealand , the USA , Canada and South Africa , has resulted in wines from the ' New World ' gaining a considerable market share at the expense of European wines .
I agree with the Commission that supply and demand imbalances in the wine sector , and increasing challenges on European and international wine markets point to the need for reform in this sector as well .
However , I completely disagree with some of the solutions proposed in the Commission 's communication of 22 June 2006 .
The plans for a massive and indiscriminate grubbing-up of vineyards pose a particular threat to the environment , and constitute in my view an unjustified attack on Europe 's wine heritage .
Winegrowing , which primarily relies on natural resources , has a positive effect in terms of protecting soil against erosion .
As the driving force of rural development , viniculture also holds out the promise of longed-for prosperity for many European regions .
With their tradition of viticulture , Slovakia 's regions have focused on promoting enotourism by tapping the potential of the Lesser Carpathian , Kamenínska , Hontianská and Tokaj Wine Routes , and they are now expecting CMO reform in the wine sector to secure the dynamic growth and competitiveness of the European wine sector by allocating adequate financial resources and , above all , through fostering innovation .
I agree with the Commission on the importance of simplifying and harmonising the legislative measures and of making the European wine sector more competitive , at the same time as guaranteeing environmental sustainability .
However , while , on the one hand , the support given to European farmers and the heavyweight agricultural budget need to be reduced gradually in favour of other policies , on the other hand , the EU needs to protect the fundamental sectors of its economy .
The wine sector certainly counts among those , with an output that in 2005 yielded almost EUR 2 million , and which in Italy alone involves more than 2 500 000 businesses .
It must not be totally abandoned to the rules of the free market : free competition could have a harmful effect on the quality and diversity of our production , which is mainly based on the activities of small businesses , which are unable to compete internationally .
I also regret the attempt - which has sadly been carried through - by the countries of northern Europe to alter the conditions of competition within the EU by offering aid to those who use sucrose as a means of increasing the alcohol content of wine , without maintaining aid for the production of must , which is a common practice in Italy and in other Mediterranean countries and which guarantees that our production is of a better quality .
Radio Spectrum ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Hall , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , entitled ' Towards a European policy on the radio spectrum ' .
rapporteur . - Madam President , firstly I would like to thank all the people who shared their knowledge and expertise with me when I was preparing this report .
I would particularly like to thank the Commission for its generous help , as well as my colleagues , the shadows from the other groups , for their very constructive and cooperative suggestions .
The basic theme of the report is that the current method of managing radio spectrum is no longer adequate in the face of constantly emerging new technologies .
These new technologies need to make use of radio spectrum , but the quantity of radio spectrum will always be limited simply by the laws of physics , so we have to find ways of making sure that this precious resource is used as efficiently as possible .
Policy on radio spectrum may sound like an obscure matter of no interest to the citizen on the street , but the end result of that policy is of fundamental interest because it is a question of jobs and economic growth .
If we fail to reform our approach to radio spectrum , we are failing European industry , which is poised to become a global leader in communications technology .
All the innovation that the industry is coming forward with will fail to develop properly if no spectrum is available and if the industry is blocked from operating across the European market of 500 million people .
The Lisbon Agenda is the driving force behind the new approach to spectrum .
But there is also the need for Europe to be forward looking in the way it makes services of public and general interest available .
I will come back to that in a minute .
First , I should like to say a few words about the changes proposed .
At present , spectrum is managed on an administrative command and control model whereby certain frequencies are allocated to certain specific uses .
The report argues that this administrative model needs to be supplemented now by a more flexible approach which would include more unlicensed use of spectrum and the tool of spectrum trading .
An essential element of this more flexible approach is that spectrum should be made available without conditions being attached as to the service to be provided or the technology to be used .
In other words , the market-based element of spectrum management would be service- and technology-neutral .
This freeing-up of spectrum would clearly raise issues for existing users , such as the question of potential interference .
It is therefore very important that the changes take place within a clear legal framework and with pre-established dispute resolution mechanisms .
In several places , paragraphs 11 , 13 and so on , the report emphasises the importance of maintaining services of public and general interest and supporting cultural and linguistic diversity .
It is important not to get this political commitment mixed up with the technical issue of how such services ought to be delivered .
I believe it would be a big mistake to ring-fence the frequencies currently used by broadcasting services by insisting on their exclusion from any new approach to spectrum management .
That is because we would actually be damaging our ability to support a broad range of socially useful services if we insisted that the delivery mechanism for providing those services remained exactly the same , frozen in time at the very period when all other uses of spectrum are evolving very rapidly .
To take one example , we face the challenge in the EU of stopping a rift opening up between the internet haves and the internet have-nots .
One easy way to roll out internet access to the poorest regions of our poorest countries would be by way of wireless broadband , taking advantage of some of the broadcasting frequencies freed up by the switch from analogue to digital broadcasting , the digital dividend .
I use this as just one example of why we need to affirm our commitment to services of public and general interest , but also as an example of why we must not treat the frequencies currently used by broadcasting as somehow untouchable .
We need to make the most of opportunities to provide services in new ways by new technologies and to more people than at present .
And it is vital to support the growth of a knowledge-based economy in Europe .
So , it is important to open up the possibility of more flexible use across the whole of the radio spectrum without ruling out certain frequencies .
Finally , I welcome the amendment tabled by the PSE Group , which serves as a balanced summary of the key issues at stake .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I have to compliment the European Parliament , in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Hall , for realising the importance of the choices Europe is about to make with regard to radio spectrum policy .
This is an area where political decisions have a direct impact on the quality of jobs and growth in the European economy .
Services dependent on radio spectrum represent around 2 to 3 % of Europe 's GDP .
There have been studies for the World Bank and for the OECD which clearly link the development of electronic communication services to economic growth .
An econometric study made for the Commission tentatively associated better spectrum break relation with 0.1 % of extra GDP growth per year .
This would quickly cumulate to deliver real benefits .
The urgency of the matter can be summed up in the word ' convergence ' .
Practically all communications are quickly becoming digital and there is an increasing number of infrastructures competing to carry services .
The old categories are disappearing and we need to respond with a regulation that permits the spectrum users to choose the mix of services and technologies that they prefer and that in many cases permits them to buy and sell spectrum rights to each other .
The reasons for regulation are still strong .
We have to manage interference .
We need to ensure that the rights to use spectrum are clearly defined and we need to ensure a level playing field .
The report that we are debating tonight is in most aspects in line with this policy vision and I want to thank the rapporteur for her efforts .
One area of divergence concerns including spectrum for terrestrial broadcasting distribution in the planned reforms .
We are not questioning the importance of the television companies ' public service function , nor their contribution to cultural and linguistic diversity .
We should , however , think very carefully before we privilege one specific form of broadcasting distribution without regard to the costs to our society in terms of opportunity .
A case in point : the report quite rightly highlights wireless broadband as a tool for rural development and for breaching the digital divide .
This requires tough choices about the balance between broadcasting and other services .
There are necessary decisions to be made to safeguard the resources and functioning of public service broadcasting , but we should not use spectrum policy as a substitute for real debate .
The amendment gives a more balanced approach by mentioning the need to secure stability and security for media services and the importance of a level playing field for new entrants and new technologies .
I have one final point to make : on the basis of the full analysis , the choice of the national regulators is to award spectrum to broadcasters .
These users must also have the same obligation as any other users to be good stewards of a public resource and use it as effectively as possible .
We think that our reform proposal would help to implement this principle .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Technological innovation opens up tangible new opportunities for Europe .
Switching to digital technology leads to a surplus in what has till now been a scarcity in frequencies available .
It is therefore appropriate and necessary to make it possible for a part of that surplus to be used for new technologies , thereby opening up a dynamic territory for the European information and communications industry .
The regulation required for this purpose needs to be created in such a way that the traditional system , unlicensed use and frequency trading be part of an effective spectrum management .
Clear rules are needed , which indicate what and how much we allow in the area of frequency trading .
The opinion of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is that we need very soon to make spectrum trading itself , as well as its guiding conditions , perfectly clear .
In this regard we must handle broadcast frequencies with particular care .
It must be ensured that frequencies cannot be accumulated , and that there be no monopolies .
We have to promote the spread of new technologies to less developed regions and rural areas , but in such a way that they not be made to bear the costs of this .
It is the firm opinion of the Group of the European People 's Party that in the process of regulating this area , we need to bear in mind social , cultural and political considerations , in order to advance the expression of cultural and linguistic diversity .
In the process of drafting the report , I mentioned time and again the various specialties of the new Member States , which will have to be taken into account when regulations are drawn up .
I was therefore pleased with Mrs Trautmann 's initiative in this matter , and I support it .
Finally , Member States need to open up frequencies for the purpose of Europe-wide technological harmonisation , and this must be done on the basis of a consensual agreement .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Hall , ladies and gentlemen , we are being asked to express an opinion on the reallocation of radio frequencies .
This is a very important dossier and the Commission 's reasons for wanting a proposal that seeks to optimise or maximise the benefits of this resource of course stem from changing technologies , the existence of the digital dividend and the desire , clearly expressed in the Lisbon objectives , to give everyone access to new services , be it the Internet , mobile telephony or many others besides .
We have just spoken of broadband in particular , which could help to reduce the digital divide from which the European Union suffers , especially in rural and thinly populated areas .
We must therefore seek to ensure a rational use of frequencies that will guarantee universal coverage in the 27 countries of the Union with a view to sustainable development of all areas .
Frequencies are in fact a resource , a public good , common to us all and strategic for the Union , and we must ensure that the spectrum is used efficiently in the long term .
Just as we speak of energy efficiency , I believe we can also speak of radio spectrum efficiency .
I would like to welcome the Commission 's attempts to give a new European dimension to the use of this digital dividend and avoid a repetition of the very real problem we had , and which the companies concerned saw as such , when the UMTS networks were put up for sale .
It proposes the creation of a market .
We have to be able to find a way of providing greater flexibility , avoiding speculation and monopolies and making frequencies accessible to new services and new entrants .
I believe it is right to want to do so .
We must find new opportunities for innovation there , but we must be careful how they are marketed , whether it be by licences , auctions or assignments , in particular of public or free-access services , even if on a temporary basis .
These different approaches remain to be defined .
In our committee we had a debate on the place of broadcasters and I would like to say here most emphatically that for my part I have always defended the special nature of the information programmes , the cultural programmes provided by broadcasters , especially public broadcasters , who do not have the private capital necessary to pay for access to the market on the same terms as , let us say , ordinary companies .
Therefore , if we are to take account of this situation while being fair and impartial , that is why the Socialist Group has tabled an amendment seeking to take account of radio spectrum efficiency , the balance between respect for public broadcasts and respect for State broadcasts on safety , also the role of regulators and the role of business .
Madam President , I shall be brief .
From the point of view of my group , which welcomes the Commission 's approach in principle , there are five important points .
We want to ensure that the new approach proposed by the Commission does not result in the formation of oligopolies .
Germany has had bad experiences with the auctioning of UMTS licences .
Our group wants services ensuring diversity to take priority at all times .
I agree with Mrs Trautmann that broadcasters should always enjoy particular respect for the job they do , for our societies and the public .
We want to see technical neutrality and interoperability .
We want to really see blanket coverage .
This is important to the Commissioner , too , since she bears co-responsibility for rural affairs .
We in rural areas do not want to be disadvantaged any more , and we , too , want access to high-speed Internet connections .
In addition , the procedures for auctions should be fully transparent and comprehensible in future .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I presume an answer would be expected from the Commission , but I promise I shall keep it short .
I share the appreciation of Parliament regarding the vital role played by public service television and other media for democracy , diversity and for the encouragement for a public debate .
It is necessary that future regulations continue to ensure that this programming can be distributed to the citizens in accordance with the public service obligations assumed by those broadcasters .
However , assuming that these goals can be satisfied and keeping in mind the reality of convergence , we should carefully assess the need for the spectrum required to offer a public broadcasting service and to ensure its efficient use .
In consequence , we need to provide broadcasters with the means and the flexibility to continue to develop their offer to the benefit of our society .
We have listened carefully and your comments will be taken into account during the revision of the telecommunication regulation , which will be proposed by the second half of 2007 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Climate change ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
PNR , SWIFT ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at midnight )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
1 .
Transportation and illegal detention of prisoners ( vote )
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , I should just like to inform the services that , due to an inconsistency with the report voted on in committee , points 114 , 127 and 128 must be brought into line with the rest of the equivalent paragraphs .
Therefore , if Amendment 228 is adopted , Amendments 234 and 235 must also be adopted .
( FR ) I quite understand that the House has decided to vote on the whole package of amendments .
However , can someone explain to me what my group should do , in the case of a collective vote , to endorse some of the amendments and not to endorse others , or even to reject them ?
What must we do in that case , Mr President ?
Because , in the case in point , we want to endorse some of the amendments and vote against others .
What do you propose , Mr President ?
That is why the groups were asked in due course to submit requests for separate votes , which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , in particular , did do .
The amendments that caused the most problems and on which the groups wanted to vote more precisely will thus be withdrawn from the collective vote and will be submitted to you a little later on .
If your group has not requested separate votes on certain packages of amendments , that means , in principle , that they do not pose any problems .
I do not want to re-open the debate on this subject .
( Mr Guardans Cambó insisted )
Everyone understood your position , and I hope that I have given you the most neutral technical explanation possible .
You do not have the floor , Mr Guardans Cambó ; you have already spoken twice .
( Mr Guardans Cambó continued to insist )
If you wish to request an additional separate vote , specify which one , and I will incorporate it .
I would like a separate vote on Amendment 38 .
- Before the vote on paragraph 60

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , the oral amendment aims at replacing a singular with a plural : the word ' document ' , relating to Italian cooperation , would become ' documents ' , and the rest of the paragraph would agree in the plural .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
( IT ) Mr President , I should just like to say that , following the adoption of this oral amendment , our group is withdrawing Amendment 261 .
- After the vote on paragraph 66
( FR ) Mr President , I believe that it is in everybody 's interest for the groups to vote as they have decided to do .
The fact that the amendments of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group have been withdrawn from the voting list is currently causing confusion amongst many Members ; they think that they are voting on the Union for Europe of the Nations Group 's amendments when in fact the vote relates to the original paragraphs .
I would therefore ask you to carry out an electronic verification of the vote on the original paragraph 66 , and I would ask the honourable Members always to check whether the vote relates to the original or to the amendment .
( NL ) Mr President , what is making voting more than usually difficult is the fact that my headset is telling me that we are voting on 66 , the screen is saying the same thing , and you are saying 68 .
We ought , I think , to be hearing the same thing from you as we are told by the screen and over the sound system .
( Voting time was suspended at 12 noon to make way for the formal sitting , and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )

Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the votes , see Minutes )
Before starting the vote , I am going to give you some important information in this regard , particularly in relation to the vote on the Fava report .
As you know , the Fava report , which we debated on Monday evening , is a report for which there are many amendments .
I am used to chairing the vote , but I have never seen such a thick dossier for a single report .
However , we might be able to speed things up .
This has nothing to do with any foreign power intervening ; the Union for Europe of the Nations Group is simply proposing that some collective votes be held in order to enable us to save at least half an hour .
The problem is that this proposal arrived very late in the day and that your voting lists could not be adapted to incorporate it .
Therefore , if you agree to some collective votes being held , you are going to have to pay very close attention to your voting lists .
The layout itself of the list has not changed , we will follow the same order , but we will go a little bit quicker .
I should like to know whether the House agrees with this proposal , which is going to save us some time .
( Applause )
Mr Pirilli , I believe that you are going to present this proposal , on behalf of the UEN Group .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am making this proposal on behalf of my group and under Rule 155 ( 6 ) of the Rules of Procedure : I propose a block vote on 122 amendments that are complementary to each other , in order to simplify procedure .

In any case , these amendments are workable in relation to those that I propose should be put to the vote individually .
Each of these in fact makes its own main point : from violation of State secrecy , to the security of European citizens and States , to the faked kidnapping of Abu Omar , a CIA spy , who was picked up to save him from certain death and not deported to Guantánamo , but sent back to his own country , where he lives under suitable protection and gives interviews .
The amendments to be put to the vote separately are therefore the following : 71 , 73 , 113 , 114 , 115 , 121 , 122 , 124 , 210 , 212 , 213 , 214 and 216 .
I also propose individual votes , amendment by amendment , from 38 to 69 and from 245 to 256 .
All the other 122 amendments can be put to the vote as a block .

( DE ) Mr President , much as I would like to make the vote a shorter business , I do have to point out that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has submitted to the Tabling Office a list of the votes that we want to split , and this list - which has also been endorsed by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group - must be followed in the voting process .
Everything else can be voted on en bloc .
We can agree to things being handled in this way , but , if they are not , we will have to take everything one thing at a time .
I can confirm that the request by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has been passed on and that we will in fact hold some collective votes , except for the separate votes that you have requested and that have been incorporated in the announcements that I just made .
Mr Guardans Cambó , you have the floor to speak on procedural issues only .
( FR ) As regards the procedure , I cannot accept the principle of collective votes on certain amendments without having first received the list in writing and without having a break so that I can study it .
So , I am sorry , but there are blocks in which we want to keep some things and reject others .
Every sentence in this report counts , Mr President .
If we had known about this proposal beforehand , we could have gone ahead with it .
However , we have a list of votes that is calibrated virtually to the last centimetre , and our group is not going to risk an erroneous vote just for the sake of saving five or ten minutes .
I am sorry .
The comment made by our fellow Member is entirely valid .
That is why it is the House that is going to decide .
I am therefore going to give you a first option to vote on : to accept the Union for Europe of the Nations Group 's proposal , which would enable us to hold collective votes while keeping the separate votes that were requested by certain groups .
( The House indicated its agreement to the proposal )
I would also point out that we will be taking a break at around midday in order to welcome a prestigious guest , the President of the Italian Republic .
In view of the thickness of the dossier , we will probably break during the vote on the Fava report .
I would ask you right now to kindly excuse the services , but we have no other option .


( IT ) Mr President , so as not to interrupt the vote on the Fava report , which as we all know will be a complex vote , I should like to ask whether it might be possible , if the House agrees , to invert the order of business and thus vote first on the simpler and briefer reports and go on to vote on the Fava report after President Napolitano 's speech .
It is clear , Mrs Muscardini , that if we do not start with the Fava report , we will not conclude it today , which means having to interrupt the vote on the Fava report in order to conclude it the day after , which I believe would be even more disastrous .
You will understand why I cannot act on your request .
Let us try to proceed allegro vivace , ma non troppo .
Formal sitting - Italy
President of the Italian Republic . - ( IT ) Mr President , I am sincerely grateful for your kind words of friendship towards me and towards Italy .
They reflect the feelings and the efforts that we shared during the period when we worked most closely together .
Above all , we collaborated in our respective roles in producing the Constitutional Treaty , for which you now reiterate your staunch support .
Allow me , then , to offer you my sincere compliments in return , and my very best wishes at the start of your important mandate .
Mr Poettering , Vice-President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , on coming back to this Chamber I have the same feeling of belonging that inspired me throughout the years that I spent in the European Parliament : belonging to Parliament as an institution and belonging to Europe .
I had been a member of my own country 's national parliament for decades , but I at once felt at ease in taking up my duties as an elected Member of this House when I was called upon to join it .
I felt no awkwardness , because the European Parliament , at least since 1979 , has had the same dignity , authority and democratic legitimacy as any other freely elected parliament .
I felt no contradiction , either , because I have always believed that there should be no misunderstanding or antagonism between national parliaments and the European Parliament , but just mutual respect and fruitful cooperation .
Most of all , I have always been convinced that one can represent the views and interests of one 's own country just as well in the European Parliament as in one 's national parliament : here , in the Chambers of Strasbourg and Brussels , one takes a broader view of problems and choices that have to be understood in a European dimension , yet also in the interest of our national communities .
What unites us all is precisely the sense of belonging to Europe , seen as a common heritage of values and ideas , traditions and hopes , and as the prototype of a new political and institutional entity capable of rising to the challenges of the times in which we are living and of the foreseeable future .
That explains the special kind of experience that one gains in the European Parliament .
The political representatives acting here are not bound by restricted , divergent national outlooks and , even though they may well differ on certain issues , including important ones , and on votes that are certainly significant , they largely agree in their view of the basic objectives that must be pursued in order to further the integration of a united Europe .
When - as has happened so many times over the course of the decades - there has been a choice between pushing forward to broaden and strengthen European unity and just marking time or even pulling back , the European Parliament has always played a dynamic role : it has sent out a clear message , backed by a huge majority , to push ahead with developing the Community and broadening its horizons and ambitions .
Indeed , with the first elections to the European Parliament by universal suffrage in 1979 - an important event - it had seemed that consolidating the parliamentarian and constitutional nature of the European Union would inevitably follow , in order to strengthen the democratic bases of the integration process , to guarantee the citizens their rights and the chance to participate .
The European Parliament moved in that direction when , on 14 February 1984 - exactly 23 years ago today - it approved the draft Treaty establishing the European Union .
The draft , which had been drawn up and debated at the instigation of Altiero Spinelli , unfortunately never became a Treaty and , despite the long and far from fruitless journey that followed , often inspired by the proposals of Spinelli 's draft , a number of issues remained unresolved and were to surface again .
When , on signing the disappointing Treaty of Nice , the governments agreed on the need to address the major themes for the future of Europe and to launch a genuine constitutional process , Parliament committed itself wholeheartedly to making its contribution by helping to seek adequate solutions to the questions raised in the Laeken Declaration of December 2001 .
Parliament can indeed feel proud of the dynamic role that it played more than ever at that time , especially in the Brussels Convention - in its working groups , its plenary sessions and its Praesidium .
Ladies and gentlemen , 2001 , 2002 and 2003 did not see a pause ; rather , it was a time of serious , genuine and profound reflection .
The material that was then put forward to the Intergovernmental Conference for final decision was a text packed with analysis that had been considered and discussed at length .
The outcome was undoubtedly a compromise , but not a poor one : a middle ground was found between diverse viewpoints ; each side , including Parliament , had to sacrifice its demands and proposals to some extent in order to arrive at an agreement that could actually advance the cause of European unity and integration .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , can we perhaps now blithely say that that Treaty - it is no accident that it is called ' Constitutional ' - is dead ?
Is that extraordinary , prolonged political and cultural effort destined to end up in oblivion ?
Are the signatures of 27 Heads of State or Government at the foot of that text now worthless ?
Of course , we are all too aware of the traumatic effects of the votes against ratifying the Constitutional Treaty in the referendums held in two of the six founding countries of the European Community .
We are equally well aware of the issues raised by the spread , in other countries as well , of doubts and scepticism about the path that Europe should take and about the European Union 's current situation and future prospects .
In reality , we are paying the price for having made little effort to involve the citizens in the major decisions about European integration and unification , or to inform public opinion in every country about the extraordinary results and progress that we have achieved in 50 years and the new , ever more pressing needs to strengthen the EU in terms of its cohesion and its ability to act .
All of that , however , must not lead people to underestimate the reasons for the Constitutional Treaty signed in Rome in October 2004 , or the solutions that it contains .
These are practical , albeit partial , responses - which we need to ensure are better understood and appreciated - to the citizens ' own demands , including their demand for more transparency and democracy in the Union .
While the Constitutional Treaty represented a happy middle ground overall , it must be remembered that a good compromise means accepting certain ideas and giving up others .
People should not forget that when they say they are going to rework the 2004 text : nobody should think of shifting the balance of the established compromise to the benefit of his or her own views .
Starting new negotiations may be like opening Pandora 's box , with the risk of having to start again from scratch and begin a debate when nobody knows what the outcome will be or how long it will take .
Eighteen of the 27 Member States , representing 275 million European citizens , have ratified the Treaty : they deserve our respect for having upheld the commitment signed in Rome .
It is quite clear , mind you , that the majorities that voted against it in the French and Dutch referendums must also be treated with respect , and that every effort must therefore be made to clarify the concerns that led to those rejections .
The time has come , however , for Europe to find a way out of the impasse .
No one can seriously claim that , after its huge enlargement , the EU does not need to redefine the overall framework of its values and objectives or to reform its institutional structure .
Working on a draft Constitution for Europe was not a formalistic exercise , nor was it a whim or a luxury : rather , it was a response to a profound need in Europe at this moment in its history .
Nor can the Europe of projects or results be put forward today as an alternative vision and strategy .
Admittedly , Europe has certainly not stood still for the last two years .
It gave the most telling proof of what it can achieve on the international stage when it succeeded in speaking with a single voice on the war in Lebanon , thus launching a dynamic new mission for peace in that region and throughout the Middle East .
Alongside this renewed political initiative , some further items to write down on the credit side of the balance sheet for this period are the drawing-up of some important directives and the agreement on an albeit limited increase in the meagre financial perspective for 2007-2013 . This was achieved with substantial input from the European Parliament through the powers it gained under the codecision procedure .
Nonetheless , ladies and gentlemen , the EU cannot go very far down the path of results with its current institutional framework .
It is certainly important to sketch out and propose new Community policies , as the Commission did recently on the environment and energy issues , which have now become major , critical problems because of climate change and the tensions over oil and gas supplies .
We know from long experience , however , that Commission documents , communications and even legislative proposals may produce scant results or only very slow progress .
That is shown , for example , by the long , hard road towards a European immigration policy , which has already taken many years .
We also remember how the introduction of the single currency was not followed up with the economic governance that would have been necessary , not least to ensure that the objectives of that great project , the Lisbon Strategy , were effectively met .
What , then , are the decisive factors in making projects thrive and in making a Europe of results really grow ?
The strength of the institutions and of their political commitment is decisive .
It is decisive that the Union should have institutions that are stronger than the resistance put up by those Member States that are still closed in on themselves , defending anachronistic prerogatives and vain national pretensions .
The Constitutional Treaty cleared away any fear or suspicion of a swing towards a centralised superstate by more clearly enshrining the distribution of powers and guaranteeing respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
It could be claimed instead that it did not go far enough in adapting its operating rules and decision-making procedures to the challenge posed by the enlarged EU or in introducing the new Community policies that are needed .
The most decisive steps forward in the Constitutional Treaty were towards a common foreign and security policy , an effective European area of freedom , security and justice , structured cooperation in the defence field , and enhanced cooperation in other fields .
If , however , talks were started all over again and some party began to question those innovations , starting with the appointment of a European foreign affairs minister and a European department for external action , you can be sure that somebody else would demand instead that the 2004 Treaty be supplemented or expanded with bolder and more consistent new measures to push the integration process along .
For example , the proposal to extend the scope of majority decision-making within the Council might understandably be tabled again , not least because getting rid of the unanimity rule and the veto does not prevent but rather encourages people to seek broad understandings and to reach acceptable agreements quickly .
Similarly , another point that would be put forward again if talks were restarted would be to get rid of the need for unanimity regarding future reviews of the Treaties and their entry into force .
All parties therefore need to have a good sense of realism : realism together with a determination to keep in check the tendency - which has resurfaced again - to weaken and water down the choice that was made more than 50 years ago now .
What was chosen then was the prospect of a Europe that was able to integrate , a single yet plural entity enriched by its diversity , aware of its common heritage of civilisation , and strong through combining cooperation among national governments with a new supranational dimension .
We are about to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Treaties of Rome , and it is important to use the occasion to reaffirm that prospect and that choice , while clearly setting out our new rationales and our new ambitions .
The Community idea was born in Paris back in 1950 , however , when the very distant goal of a European Federation or a United States of Europe was first sketched out .
Today , we confidently expect Paris to make a reliable contribution to overcoming the crisis that began with the failure to ratify the Treaty in 2004 .
Our partner , France , has such a keen sense of its role in Europe and the world that it will not fail to provide us with its now decisive input .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have drawn your attention to a few of the essential points forming the backdrop to the decisions that have to be made in the near future , without going into detail about the manifold legal , technical and political ideas that have recently been advanced in the search for a way out of the institutional impasse .
Italy has every confidence in the German Presidency 's commitment , both to the principles and values that the Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , referred to in her speech in this Chamber , and to reaffirming Europe 's objective of adopting the Constitutional Treaty .
Whatever form the roadmap that is now being mentioned may take , it is important to agree that the citizens need to see the Constitutional Treaty already in force , together with its message and programme , before the elections are held in 2009 .
On that basis , my own message and programme is to appeal to the sense of responsibility and the political commitment of all those in positions of leadership in our countries .
No one can deny the extent of the new threats , challenges and opportunities facing us .
Europe will only be able to influence international relations and global development , recover its drive and dynamism , and count for something in the world if it strengthens its own cohesion and unity , by swiftly equipping itself - as a Union - with the institutions and resources that it needs .
The alternative - as we must realise - is a dramatic decline in the role of all our countries , indeed , in the historical role of our continent .
Allow me to repeat the words with which Jean Monnet ended his memoirs in 1976 : ' We cannot stop when all around us the whole world is on the move . '
Thirty years later , those words are even more true : they buzz in our ears like an insect from which we can no longer escape .
The leaders of all our countries must therefore show that they are equal to this awareness and this responsibility , and they must be able to release a new European political will .
The European Parliament must shout louder than ever in calling for consistency and courage , as in the past .
Italy will play its part , Mr President ; it will make its contribution as it has done ever since the integration process began .
This contribution is symbolised by the figures of a far-sighted statesman , Alcide De Gasperi , and of a passionate prophet and fighter for the European idea , Altiero Spinelli , the centenary of whose birth we are celebrating this year .
In referring to their example and in reaffirming Italy 's European commitment , I know I can speak for my country as represented by all of its political groups together and by its citizens ' heartfelt beliefs .
At the same time , I have tried to address you , ladies and gentlemen , on a more personal note , as dictated by my strong feelings .
Sitting on these benches and working in this Parliament taught me more and more clearly that one can only serve the cause of our peoples , our nations and our joint future by working for a united Europe .
President Napolitano , thank you very much for such an important speech .
We have every confidence in Italy .
Mr President , we thank you most warmly for the great speech you have just delivered .
You stand in the tradition of the great Italian figures who contended for the unity of our continent , something that you do not only when addressing parliaments , but also when you go out and talk to young people , as you did at the University of Tübingen in Germany a few days ago .
For this great dedication you have our heartfelt thanks , and we wish you strength and health for the future , so that we may continue to work together with the same dedication for the unity of our continent .
We thank the President of the Italian Republic .
Thank you , Giorgio Napolitano .
( Applause )
1 .
Transportation and illegal detention of prisoners ( continuation of vote )
- After the vote on Amendment 268

( DE ) Mr President , the oral amendment has been agreed with Mr Fava , so it enjoys the rapporteur 's support .
It is an addition to paragraph 82 and I shall now proceed to read it out .
' Deplores the inquiry by the prosecutors of Hamburg North against three journalists of Stern magazine and one collaborator of the Financial Times Deutschland on the basis of complicity in betrayal of secrets ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 31
( FR ) This is an oral amendment that merely updates the information .
It concerns the following addition to the end of paragraph 110 :
' takes note of the decision by the Spanish authorities to declassify secret documents held by the intelligence services concerning the use by CIA-operated aircraft of Spanish airports ; ' .
This is an update .

( ES ) Mr President , in order to respond positively to Mr Guardans Cambó 's proposal and try to save his oral amendment , I would like to propose to the House - and my group could approve this - that we simply add ' at the request of the Judge of the High Court ' .
If that is possible , we will be able to accept it , Mr President .
If it is not possible , Mr President , my group will be opposed .
( The amended oral amendment was accepted )
( ES ) In fact I am taking the floor to say that , in agreement with the rapporteur -who is also going to present an oral amendment later on following Article 184 - we have agreed to withdraw this amendment from this paragraph so that we can then support the rapporteur 's amendment in 184 .
We are therefore withdrawing our amendment from this paragraph .


( IT ) Mr President , for the same reasons given earlier by Mr Romeva i Rueda , myself and my colleague , Mr Meyer Pleite , who tabled the amendment in question , are also withdrawing our amendment .
- Before the vote on Amendments 234 and 235
On this point , too , I need clarification from our rapporteur .
In your view , Mr Fava , have Amendments 234 and 235 lapsed following the vote that has just taken place ?
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , they are compatible .
A point of order , Mr President .
There is a PPE-DE amendment on paragraph 125 that I have tabled .
It is amendment 258 and you seem to have skipped over it .
I would appreciate it if we could take a vote on that amendment .
- Before the vote on Amendment 258
( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to point out to my group that there is an error in the voting list .
On this point , we are voting with a plus .
Mr President , on a point of order , even the interpreters cannot keep up with you .
Would you please slow down .
There are people making mistakes in the voting .
Please !
( Applause )
- After the vote on paragraph 184
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , I should like to propose an oral amendment to paragraph 184 .
I shall read it in English :
' Expresses serious concern about the content of the information in the air control register of Portugal list regarding stopover of military planes through military bases in Europe on the way from and to Guantánamo ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 242
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , the purpose of the oral amendment is to add the following phrase : ' calls on the Member States to sign the above-mentioned convention without delay ; ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
2 .
Macro-financial aid for Moldova ( vote )
3 .
Conservation of stocks of highly migratory species ( vote )
4 .
Drift nets ( vote )
5 .
Voluntary modulation of direct payments under the CAP ( vote )
- After the vote on the Commission proposal
Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether the Commission will withdraw its proposal .
Vice-President of the Commission . ( IT ) I shall , of course , report back to the College of Commissioners on the outcome of today 's vote .
Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Mr President , I do not think that the Commission has cleared it up terribly well , but I think it is not withdrawing its proposal , and so we need to clarify the legal situation .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has presented the second report on voluntary modulation after the referral of the first report back to committee in November 2006 , under Rule 52 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
As no agreement was possible with the Commission , the committee has had to reiterate its position , so we are dealing here not with a new report , where Rule 52 ( 3 ) may be applied again , but with the confirmation of the first report .
The Legal Service of the European Parliament , with which I have consulted on this issue , has informed me that , in our specific case , the last sentence of Rule 52 ( 4 ) has to be applied mutatis mutandis , which means that we have the vote on this legislative resolution and that a second referral to committee according to Rule 52 ( 3 ) is not appropriate , so we are not referring it back to committee .

I propose , therefore , that the House should vote in favour of Parliament 's legislative resolution because we have already rejected the Commission 's legislative proposal .
Therefore , the ball is now firmly in the Commission and Council 's court .
We await a new proposal with great interest .
( Applause )
I am going to try to summarise this clearly .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is proposing that , instead of referring the report back to committee , we take the exceptional step of proceeding directly to a roll-call vote on the draft legislative resolution , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
6 .
The Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 6 / 2005 on the Trans-European Network for Transport ( vote )
7 .
Climate change ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 21
( NL ) Mr President , according to our voting lists , Amendment 9 will lapse if Amendment 21 , tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , is adopted .
I should like to ask that Amendment 9 be voted on in addition to Amendment 21 , which stipulates 20 % as a basis for sustainable energy and in our amendment , that of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we advocate 25 % by way of gradual increase .
This could therefore be seen as an addition .
If it is voted on additionally , I should like to ask our group to vote in favour of Amendment 21 .
As there does not appear to be any opposition on your part to Mrs Corbey 's proposal , we are therefore going to vote on these two amendments .
9 .
Lisbon Strategy ( European Council of 8 and 9 March 2007 ) ( vote )
Mr President , it is a very straightforward oral amendment .
In the second line there is a phrase beginning ' have made it clear that no source of energy must be left unused ' .
We want to insert three words so it would read , ' have made it clear that no sustainable and safe source of energy must be left unused ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
10 .
Radio Spectrum ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time ( continued )
The next item is voting time .
Explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , I rejoiced to learn that the report made it unequivocally clear that neither the Austrian Government nor any official entity or authority in Austria had any kind of improper part in this .
I have nevertheless voted against the report on the grounds that the assertions in it are made without the backing of any kind of proof , yet they have not been removed from it , and , above all that the factual error concerning Europol has not been deleted either .
What that means is that the report continues to contain a misrepresentation of the facts in which it is insinuated that Europol had employed members of the American secret services , something that is without any substance whatever and the very opposite of the truth .
A report containing errors such as these does damage to Parliament 's credibility and is a contributory factor in so many of its Members having voted against the report as a whole .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Fava report is worth little more than a collage of press cuttings ; while it pretends to uphold human rights , it is in fact an attempt to demolish the power and effectiveness of anti-terrorism activities .
The demand to see the full names of Italian military secret service personnel published on the European Parliament website just shows the level of irresponsibility of someone who hypocritically says he supports the fight against terrorism and then , in fact , takes every suitable opportunity to prevent it from being put into practice .
Parliament cannot and must not grant itself the power to strip EU national governments and Member States of their full sovereignty in matters of protecting their citizens ' security , which is and must remain the inviolable province of the nations and Member States .
Mr President , the British Conservative delegation voted against the Fava report .
We regarded this report as an expensive exercise duplicating the work of Senator Marty in the Council of Europe .
It is full of unproven allegations , makes unreasonable demands of the Council , criticising Mr de Vries , Mr Solana and NATO arrangements , which allow cooperation with the United States of America as our ally in the fight against international terrorism .
The report calls for unacceptable Articles 6 and 7 sanctions against EU Member States , demands consular protection for UK residents , undermining the concept of British citizenship , and does not accept diplomatic assurances against torture in extraditing suspected terrorists to third countries .
Our case rests .
in writing . I voted against this report , not because I am unconcerned about allegations of international wrong-doing , but because this report builds its case largely on unsubstantiated speculation .
Even before this report was written there was a virulent anti-American political agenda driving it towards its conclusions of today .
Hence , its preference for press cuttings , rather than hard evidence .
In consequence it exudes imbalance to the point that it will bring comfort to terrorist and anti-democratic forces .
in writing . ( SV ) We have abstained in the vote on the report on the CIA 's alleged use of European countries for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners .
There is no doubt that , in the fight against terrorism , human rights violations have been committed - a state of affairs that is substantiated with examples in the report . We Swedish Conservatives condemn these acts of cruelty .
By mixing facts with assumptions and unconfirmed rumours , the report is in danger , however , of weakening , rather than strengthening , the justified criticism .
We opposed the setting up of the special committee because we believe that suspected crimes should be investigated by the judiciary .
Responsibility for investigations has , in the first place , been exercised at national level .
For example , the Swedish constitutional committee has examined - and passed judgment on - the Swedish Government 's conduct .
The issues mainly dealt with by the report are those coming within the competence not of the EU but of the Member States .
On these issues , the governments of the Member States are responsible not to the European Parliament but solely and exclusively to their national parliaments as long as no European legal rules have been broken .
If Member States have failed to comply with commitments at European level , it is the Commission 's responsibility to investigate such violations and to go to court in connection with them .
in writing . The Irish members of the Fine Gael delegation voted in favour of the report as a whole , as we support the general thrust of the report and its strong stance against the process of extraordinary rendition and the involvement of EU countries or airports in that process .
However , I would like it noted that we do not agree in full with the wording of paragraph 125 of the report .
I attempted to delete paragraph 125 , but was unsuccessful in doing so ( the vote was narrowly lost ) .
That being said , the majority of the report is worth supporting , as a strong statement against the process of extraordinary rendition , as a breach of international law .
Therefore , we have voted in favour of the report as a whole .
I abstained from the final vote for the following reasons :
1 .
This report is ill-timed and ineffective ;
2 .
A decision that reconciles the need for commitment to protect human rights with support for the fight against terrorism and its causes is only acceptable if it engenders broad consensus ;
3 .
This report has not engendered such consensus and has not produced the political analysis of this issue that is required ;
4 .
The document focuses too much on the investigation into what has happened in the Member States , and fails to draw the salient conclusion that the citizens ' inalienable right to protection and the integrity of the Member States needs to be upheld within a framework of respect for individual human rights ;
5 .
Lastly , a report on this sensitive issue should be coordinated with the intervention of the European Council and should take account of any decisions made by the Council of Europe .
in writing .
I am voting for this report by my colleague Mr Fava on the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners .
Let us be clear that I do not agree with everything in the report .
There are a number of highly contentious elements , including gratuitous references to the former Secretary of State for Defence in the UK , which we have rejected here this morning .
It has been claimed that much of the argumentation is not evidence-based .
One could say the same thing about the case for intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan .
To paraphrase Donald Rumsfeld : there are things we know , things we don 't know and things we don 't know we don 't know .
Well , here I know that our Temporary Committee and its rapporteur Mr Fava have identified a serious abuse of human rights in breach of international law in the Union .
My vote is to endorse that clear overall finding and not the associated detail , which , inevitably in the absence of clear cooperation by the authorities , is speculation , which , while often right , is from time to time wrong .
The argument used by the German Presidency to shrug off the problems and shirk its political responsibilities regarding the ' use of European countries by the CIA for the illegal transportation and detention of prisoners ' comes as a surprise .
Believe it or not , the Council claims that the affair lies outside its remit , even though it adopts one political position after another on whatever it considers to be of interest , and even though it is abundantly clear that these issues have been addressed as part of EU-NATO and EU-US relations .
It has once again been demonstrated that such attitudes are , at the very least , indicative either of an attempt to provide a smokescreen for this unacceptable violation of international law and the most basic human rights , or of connivance with , and even subservience towards , the USA .
The report drawn up by the temporary committee - which provided many of the victims with an identity and a voice - represents a further contribution towards the emergence of the whole truth and will help the national parliaments , the bodies actually charged with carrying out checks and balances on the behaviour of governments , to do their duty . This is something that the Portuguese Communist Party has long been calling for and proposing in the Portuguese Assembly .
in writing . I voted for the Fava report , despite the changes made by nervous colleagues .
The so-called ' war ' on terror has been used by some to rework international law and defy international conventions on human rights and the treatment of those detained ( on suspicion , not proof ) without trial or any due process .
Human rights are universal and indivisible : the EU is committed to upholding these rights .
This report confronts us with an uncomfortable reality and we urge Member State Parliaments and Governments to investigate fully what may have been happening on their territory .
This committee did not have full investigative powers , but we do have the power to make political recommendations .
They should be acted upon if we really want to uphold our values .
in writing . I support this report investigating the alleged secret CIA ' rendition ' flights .
As human rights form a core value of the European Union and by extension the activities of the European Parliament , it is right and proper that the European Parliament as an institution discusses and investigates possible human rights violations within its borders .
in writing .
Today 's report by Mr Fava raises some critical issues which are about the core fundamental rights of everybody in Europe and across the world .
The report paints a shocking picture of human rights abuse and illegal activity , all of which was tolerated by Member States including Ireland .
The Irish Government 's hear-no-evil , see-no-evil approach to illegal renditions is unconvincing and unacceptable .
The report points out that at least 147 CIA-operated flights made stopovers in Irish airports including by aircraft involved in ' extraordinary renditions ' or kidnappings as we would normally call them .
Now all of us who seek the truth about these kidnappings must take this issue to our national parliaments and directly challenge the national governments at home in our countries .
The real pressure must be applied at home where the people who permitted and tolerated these actions will feel it .
To this end , I am calling on the Government to launch a full parliamentary inquiry in the Dáil immediately into the use of Irish territory as part of the CIA rendition circuit .
Sinn Féin supported the report to lend our weight in the European Parliament to this call .
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party ( EPLP ) voted for the Fava report because we believe that it is important for the European Parliament to have investigated the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners .
MEPs are directly elected and answerable to our constituents .
We investigate all manner of issues on behalf of them and we could not ignore calls that Member States may have breached their treaty obligations under Article 6 of the EU Treaty which outlines the basic principles of democracy , human rights , and respect of law .
The EPLP voted for amendments which moved the focus of the report away from personalities and party politics to the substance of the rendition allegations .
The EPLP have voted for a more balanced and fair report in Plenary than the report which emerged from Committee stage .
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party ( EPLP ) voted for the FAVA report because we believe that it is important for the European Parliament to have investigated the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners .
MEPs are directly elected and answerable to our constituents .
We investigate all manner of issues on behalf of them and we could not ignore calls that Member States may have breached their treaty obligations under Article 6 of the EU Treaty , which outlines the basic principles of democracy , human rights , and respect for the law .
The EPLP voted for amendments which moved the focus of the report away from personalities and party politics to the substance of the rendition allegations .
It is for this reason that the EPLP voted against amendment 29 .
The EPLP have voted for a more balanced and fair report in Plenary than the report which emerged from the committee stage .
The report describes and - up to a point - confirms the disclosures and facts which have come to light on abductions , secret flights , illegal detentions in secret prisons , torturing and so on by the CIA on European soil .
The MEPs of the Greek Communist Party abstained from the vote because they consider the stand of the grassroots and socialist party previously in government which backed and backs the so-called anti-terrorist strategy of the USA and agrees with all these actions to be hypocritical .
Today , under the weight of the grassroots outcry about these disclosures , they are trying to appear as champions of the ' terrorist policy ' and as protectors of human rights in order to rescue the ' lost honour ' of the ΕU .
We radically disagree and have no intention of helping to delude the peoples as to the nature of the policy to ' combat terrorism ' .
It is the imperialists ' pretext to construct a gigantic repressive mechanism throughout the world with the basic objective of establishing their supremacy and hitting the grassroots movements and opposition .
At a time when the European Parliament is doing its utmost about violations of human rights , autocratic laws for striking the movement and restricting demonstrations are being promoted throughout the ΕU .
Personal files on all and sundry and the signature of new agreements with the USA are being promoted .
I voted in favour of the Fava report because it is an historic step in the fight against a criminal international parastate .
Apart from the huge responsibilities of the European Council , there are also clear responsibilities for the governments of several Member States .
On completion of this complicated investigation by the European Parliament , it is vital that examining committees be set up now in the national parliaments of the Member States - which unfortunately include Greece - which appear to be involved in the CIA 's illegal activities .
The baton in the fight against the international parastate is now in their hands .
The German Federal Government bears a great deal of shared responsibility for the CIA 's torture flights ; such is the verdict of the report of the committee investigating the CIA 's activities , which was adopted in the European Parliament today .
The German Federal Government - a coalition composed of conservatives and social democrats - can no longer avoid facing up to the consequences , even though it is obvious that it has been in response to pressure from it that the Social Democrats in the European Parliament have watered down some of the report 's language .
The European Parliament has come to the conclusion that , ' according to information given by Murat Kurnaz 's lawyer and information provided by the German authorities , there was a prospect of the release of Murat Kurnaz from Guantánamo in 2002 but this was not accepted by the German authorities ' and that ' Murat Kurnaz 's lawyer was told by the German Government that it was impossible to open negotiations with the US Government on his release because Murat Kurnaz was a Turkish citizen ' even though ' all investigations had established , by as early as at the end of October 2002 , that Murat Kurnaz posed no terrorist threat ' .
My colleagues and I are agreed that this gross misconduct on the part of the representatives of the former Social Democrat / Green Federal Government needs to be investigated .
The foreign minister , Mr Frank-Walter Steinmeier , who formerly coordinated Germany 's secret services , should desist from deceiving the public and at last face up to his responsibility for what happened back then .
I voted against the Fava report , otherwise known as the CIA report , for four reasons .
Staunch defence of human rights , the rule of law and democracy , which I advocate , cannot be delivered by political action underpinned more by naïve left-wing anti-Americanism than by the actual defence of these values .
It is not for Parliament to monitor the Member States .
This is the duty , first and foremost of national parliaments and any violation of this principle is inherently a political error and a legal anomaly .
The report makes the unforgivable mistake of drawing definitive conclusions from unproven , controversial statements , turning opinions into truths and insinuations into facts .
As regards Portugal , even with the adopted amendments , there is still a degree of imbalance between what has been proven ( or even declared by the alleged victims ) and what has been concluded , or , worse , presumed to be true .
Lastly , I should like to praise Mr Coelho for his tireless work in promoting balance , reason and the defence of our key principles and values .
I take the view that had he been the rapporteur rather than the chairman of the committee the report would have been substantially better balanced .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has just given its verdict on the work done by its Temporary Committee concerning the use of European airspace by the CIA for the illegal transportation of prisoners .
The verdict was unsurprising : condemnation of the many Member States that have effectively given their support to the CIA .
Mr Fava 's report has one great quality , which is to point out a common basis of fundamental values : respect for human rights , the condemnation of torture and respect for the legal framework in the fight against terrorism .
It also has one great failing : it totally overlooks the fact that the only thing restricting our governments ' efforts is reason , reason that allows them to reject the impossible : the secret services will never be welcoming and transparent !
Let us not confuse humanism with naïve optimism .
As the philosopher , Alain , put it : ' there can be no freedom without security ; security is worth nothing without freedom ' .
This concern for security in the context of freedom justified my abstention .
I am convinced that my friend , Antoine Duquesne , the former Minister for the Interior of the Kingdom of Belgium , would have delivered the same message , if he could have voted today .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners .
Since January 2006 , a great deal of work has been carried out by Parliament 's Temporary Committee , which is responsible for conducting investigations into the allegations made in the press on this sensitive issue .
I should like to point out that , if its work is to be legitimate , it is important for the Committee to rely on tangible and verifiable evidence , so as to remain somewhat impartial .
The MEPs are vested with a duty of transparency and information towards the citizens ; this information must therefore be guided by a concern to provide the most accurate feedback possible .
While the final report does not fulfil this demand as well as it might , I decided to vote in favour , convinced that , through these committees , Parliament is required to play a decisive role in terms of helping to ensure that the human rights and fundamental values to which the Union fully adheres in its Treaties are respected .
Thus , the fight against terrorism must be waged in compliance with the international law in force , and no human rights violations can be justified .
I voted against the adoption of the aforementioned final report because it contained references to Poland that did not reflect the findings of the work of the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners .
The committee found no evidence , other than press reports , to confirm the existence of secret CIA prisons in my country .
Mere supposition , unsupported by evidence , cannot be used as the basis of a final report on such a serious issue .
in writing . Mr Fava should be commended for steering through our House this difficult and sensitive report on rendition allegations .
Abuses of human rights , torture and illegal deportation must be condemned in today 's Europe .
in writing .
( DE ) I reject the CIA report on the grounds that it does not do even the most basic of the things that I expect of a report from a committee of inquiry , whether in terms of its methodology or of its analytical processes .
The conclusions differ in no way from those reached by the Council of Europe 's investigator Dick Marty , some of whose former witnesses have since changed their minds .
Although this should not be taken to mean that I approve of what the USA has done , I have to say that , in this report , truth , facts and honesty have given way to suppositions and accusations .
in writing . ( SV ) Many unfortunate incidents in the fight against terrorism have been noted .
However , these issues have already been dealt with by the United Nations Human Rights Council and by the Council of Europe .
The Swedish Government has taken the criticism concerned on board .
There is therefore no reason for discussing this issue in the European Parliament too .
I have therefore voted in favour of many of the proposals but abstained in the vote on the report as such .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of adopting the report on granting European Union financial aid to Moldova , aimed at supporting the balance of payments and foreign currency reserves .
I did so because I am convinced that these resources will allow one of the poorest countries in Europe to overcome its current financial difficulties .
Additional exceptional support should prove very useful in facilitating and supporting the implementation of the Government of Moldova 's economic reforms .
Bearing in mind the positive social and economic changes in Moldova , including the recent abolition of the death penalty , I believe it is appropriate to strengthen bilateral links with Moldova and deepen its relationship with the European Union .
A grant of up to EUR 45 million will send out a strong signal from the European Union , especially in the context of the Russian ban on the import of wine from Moldova and the higher prices demanded for energy .
in writing . I am in support of this financial assistance to one of the poorest countries in Europe , which has been economically hard hit by events in its region .
I particularly welcome the amendments which seek to increase the role of the Parliament .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council decision on providing Community macro-financial assistance to Moldova .
Indeed , despite making definite economic progress , Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in Europe .
Since 1 January , Moldova , which shares a border with Romania , has actually bordered the European Union , and the Council wants to help it cope with its commercial and financial difficulties .
I should like , nevertheless , to emphasise that this solidarity , valued at EUR 45 million , is of an exceptional and limited nature and requires certain conditions .
The granting of aid must be made subject to the fulfilment of objectives such as the increased transparency of public finances and respect for human rights .
Finally , I believe , above all , that , in the wake of the 2004 and 2007 enlargements , the European Union 's spirit of solidarity must now extend to the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
Thus , through its neighbourhood policy and its Euro-Mediterranean partnership , the EU must ensure that its financial instruments remain effective and that its trade with the countries of the southern Mediterranean increases .
in writing . A total ban on drift nets and its effective implementation needs to be prioritised by Member States .
Too many dolphins , porpoises and seals die needlessly due to the use of these nets .
A standard definition should be welcomed in order that there can be no loop-hole in the use of these destructive nets .
in writing . ( SV ) Because the June List does not believe that the EU should have a common fisheries policy , we have voted against this report .
We would also take the liberty of referring to earlier explanations of vote concerning fisheries policy .
This purpose of this regulation is to clarify the fishing gear that can be classified as drift nets by harmonising a common definition for all regulation in this area .
Drift nets have a major impact on fisheries resources and on marine ecosystems , and an economic impact - in terms of competition and loss of income - on fishermen using more traditional gear .
Against this backdrop , the EU has adopted United Nations Resolution 44 / 225 introducing a moratorium on the use of drift nets as part of the Community acquis ( Regulation No 354 / 1992 ) , despite some regional exceptions at Community level .
As such we support the content of this report , which will help improve control and reduce the impact of drift nets in Portuguese waters , in particular in the Exclusive Economic Areas of the Azores and Madeira , as these waters are visited by fleets from other Member States , which use this gear in fishing for tuna and other marine species , either due to a loophole in the law or illegally .
in writing . ( SV ) The report contains quite a few constructive proposals for preventing overfishing .
I have therefore voted in favour of this proposal for pragmatic reasons .
The EU 's fisheries policy has , in general , militated against long-term sustainable exploitation of the sea 's resources by subsidising fishermen 's purchases of efficient boats .
Fisheries policy is also prejudicial to the populations of poor countries inasmuch as the EU purchases rights to fish in these countries ' waters from weak governments .
The EU should therefore return fisheries policy to the Member States and see to it only that the Member States do not overfish species that move in more than one country 's territorial waters .
I mistakenly voted in favour of the proposed resolution , when I had meant to vote against , as I did on the legislative proposal .
I therefore request that my vote on the legislative resolution be amended ( to a vote against ) .
in writing . The reason I did not vote for the Agriculture Committee 's proposal to reject the Commission 's proposal on voluntary modulation is that doing so would further delay the start of the new rural development programmes and their funding .
This would have a negative affect on farmers and rural communities in my constituency , who badly need these funds .
The lack of funding for rural development is a problem for Wales . This has been caused by a combination of the UK not getting a fair share of the EU funding , the UK Government 's defence of its budget rebate and the UK Presidency 's financial perspectives deal .
As a result of this failure by government , Ministers will look to modulation to top up this fund .
Subsidiarity must be ensured so that the decision to apply voluntary modulation or not and at what level is taken at the appropriate level .
In my constituency that would mean the National Assembly for Wales rather than at Member State level .
There are wide differences in approach and distinctive rural communities across the UK and it would be totally unacceptable to have a single level .
There must also be full and additional matching funding from central government funds .
As we have said before , the key issue here is that the Commission 's proposal is not a proposal for genuine modulation . Such a proposal would increase aid to those who receive the least , or receive nothing , and reduce aid to those who receive a large amount , so as to ensure greater fairness in the distribution of aid among producers , countries and crops and to support small and medium farmers and family farming .
We feel that the Commission should table a fresh proposal in order to create genuine , compulsory modulation , which would guarantee greater fairness and release financial resources by introducing a maximum limit to aid per holding ( capping ) and a percentage increase in aid for farmers who receive the least from the CAP ( modulation ) , for example , by proposing a 15 % to 20 % increase for small or medium-sized farmers who receive less than EUR 5 000 in aid , and taking various circumstances into account even when they receive more than that .
Without this , there is a risk that existing inequalities will be exacerbated .
We therefore urge the Commission to recast the proposal in order to ensure that a decision on this issue does not ultimately lead to the renationalisation of the costs of the CAP .
The Commission has so far not done this , however .
Hence our decision to abstain .
Parliament has already rejected the Commission 's proposal for voluntary modulation of direct payments under the CAP of up to 20 % .
According to this proposal , funds earmarked for farmers would be provided under the second pillar of the CAP , namely rural development ; that is to say , they would pass to the national budgets of the Member States that decide to employ this modulation .
The removal of aid for farmers would raise issues of competition between farmers from countries that do not employ modulation and those from countries that do , and between farmers in the latter category depending on the level of modulation decided upon .
For this reason I share the view of the rapporteur , Mr Goepel , that we should once again reject the Commission 's proposal .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that the European Union 's common agricultural policy should be phased out .
We also oppose the new subsidies under the designation , ' rural development ' .
We wonder why the EU believes that the Member States cannot manage to develop their rural areas themselves .
We are faced with two alternatives in this vote : the Commission 's proposal and the proposal by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
In this situation , we have chosen to vote in favour of the Commission 's proposal , since it is better than the proposal by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which is quite absurd .
The report 's explanatory statement contains a whole range of views . For example , it criticises possible abandonment or renationalisation of the common agricultural policy - a development that the June List would find desirable - and complains that it is contrary to the European Parliament 's right of participation , a view that the June List does not share .
In addition , the explanatory statement maintains that the health check on the long-term budget should only form the basis of proposals for the financing period after 2013 .
The June List completely rejects that view .
We believe that the mid-term review should lead to cuts in the agriculture / rural development budget as early as in the current budget period of 2007-2013 .
The June List observes that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision regarding the EU 's agricultural policy . Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to all the various groups within the agricultural industry .
in writing . I voted for the proposal to introduce voluntary modulation of the CAP as it has been used more effectively in the UK than in any other Member State .
It has been used as an essential source to fund rural development schemes throughout the country .
in writing . - ( FR ) In addition to decoupling aid and production , the CAP reform has introduced a new tool : modulation .
In practice , this is the option to transfer part of the appropriations , the direct payments to farmers , to rural development appropriations .
It is called a ' transfer from the first pillar to the second pillar ' .
As much as twenty per cent of the funds may be transferred under voluntary modulation .
The Member States may choose this modulation from an abridged menu , rather than from one imposed on them , which serves up ' direct aid ' as a main course and ' rural development ' as a dessert .
In reality , modulation amounts to robbing Paul the farmer to feed Peter the landscape gardener .
This is a budgetary technique that is meant to disguise the shortage of appropriations with the impression that one can choose how these scarce appropriations are managed .
in writing . ( DE ) The EU 's appearance of taking up the cause of agriculture does nothing to change the fact that we are constantly losing farmers and that more and more farms are now being run only as a sideline .
In a situation in which big business and royalty benefit from our subsidies and we cannot manage to get our organic farmers ' case heard by the WTO , one can hardly be surprised that this is the way things are going .
Comprehensible indicators of quality and health benefits would be desirable as means of guaranteeing fair prices for healthy products , but the most vital thing of all is that the EU 's subsidy jungle be simplified , if need be by returning agriculture to national jurisdiction .
It is for that reason that I have voted against the Goepel report .
in writing . The British Conservative Delegation recognises the vital importance of agri-environment schemes .
However , for three major reasons , Conservatives voted in favour of rejecting the Commission 's proposal on voluntary modulation .
Firstly , for British farmers , voluntary modulation would be anything but voluntary - they would be forced to accept a cut of up to 20 % of the value of their single farm payment , while the rest of Europe 's farmers would not .
Had Tony Blair negotiated a better EU Budget deal for the UK on rural development monies , our farmers would not be facing this bleak prospect .
Secondly , the proposal that we are called to vote on is , in any case , unacceptable to the British Government itself because it does not allow for regionalisation , it restricts the Government 's freedom in deciding spending priorities and it maintains a franchise unsuitable to the UK 's farming structure .
Labour MEPs did not move a single amendment to bring the proposal more into line with their Government 's wishes !
Finally , Commissioner Fischer Boel 's most recent statements suggest that Parliament 's overwhelming opposition to the proposal cannot be totally ignored and that some form of compromise may emerge .
We sincerely hope that this is to the benefit of British farmers .
in writing . ( DA ) We are voting against Parliament 's proposal that the Commission should withdraw its own proposal and in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
We think that Parliament is trying to blackmail the Commission with the threat of withholding 20 % of rural development resources .
Instead of affecting the Commission , this would hit the farmers , who would not see their money paid out , and , especially , the EU as a whole , the reputation of which would scarcely be enhanced if shameless blackmail between the institutions were in future to become the norm .
On behalf of the Danish delegation of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
in writing . The proposed CAP reforms should be supported .
It is disappointing that for the second time Parliament has rejected these reforms which provide a sustainable approach to rural development .
The vote today will again delay payments to farmers in Scotland and the UK .
MEPs cannot demand reform of the CAP on the one hand and then not support reform in practice .
Our constituents time and time again ask for reform of the CAP .
It is worrying that the national and vested interests of a few are being allowed to distort the urgent reform of the CAP .
The Trans-European Networks for Transport ( TEN-T ) represent an investment in guaranteeing accessibility within the European area , and form a key part of the Lisbon Strategy , both as investment in innovation and in job creation , and via the creation of structures that help speed up cohesion and socio-economic development .
Consequently , the meagre increase in the financial resources earmarked for the TEN-T and the slowness in implementing the TEN-T priority projects are major causes for concern .
It is therefore vital that the Member States attach maximum priority to realising these projects and do not shy away from adopting all the measures needed to complete them .
In addition to the priority of cross-border links , there needs to be better coordination and transparency in the procedures if we are finally to see the fruits of over a decade of work .
These projects are of vital importance to cohesion on the European continent , to intermodality , to interoperability and , lastly , to easing traffic congestion .
Decisions must now be taken to enhance the leverage effect of Community funding . Today , we must have no hesitation in correcting mistakes , effecting the necessary changes and ensuring that these projects move forward as quickly as possible .

( DE ) Mr President , while I would like to make it clear that the delegation of the Austrian People 's Party has always been forthright in its advocacy of pro-active action to address climate change , we have nevertheless voted against this resolution on the grounds that it attempts to bring in nuclear power through the back door .
We have always been equally forthright in rejecting this form of energy , which , in our view , has no future .
It has been a cause of great surprise to me that so few of the self-proclaimed opponents of nuclear power - in particular those belonging to the Socialist Group and the Group of the Greens - have nevertheless voted to endorse this report .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution on climate change , because I firmly believe there is an urgent need to define a European Union strategy on this issue , which is of such importance to humanity .
It seems very important for the European Parliament to make its voice heard on the matter .
The Member States of the Union and the European Commission are facing a tremendous challenge .
How can economic development be supported whilst at the same time protecting the natural environment ?
Experts are calling for emissions of gases containing CO2 to be limited , and for research and innovation in the area of renewable energy and energy saving technologies to be supported .
It is also important to cooperate with countries outside the European Union and , in particular , to make citizens aware of the dangers resulting from climate change .
We are all responsible for protecting the Earth .
We must understand , however , that reducing emissions and pollution will involve additional costs for European enterprises and citizens in the short term .
If we consider that countries such as China , Brazil and India are producing more and more carbon dioxide and other noxious substances every year , the Union should help them to change over to cleaner and more energy-efficient production methods .
Trade in so-called green technology and the development of renewable sources of energy should be promoted .
We need to take this action for our own sakes and for the sake of future generations .
( FI ) Mr President , in point 34 of the resolution on climate change , which we have just voted on , the Commission was asked to assess the risks to nuclear institutions posed by floods and tsunamis that are caused by climate change .
There is a Finnish campaign behind this idea which is based on a fictional novel , and for which there is no scientific basis .
In the story , a tsunami , brought about by climate change , causes an accident that results in massive damage to a nuclear power plant .
I am in favour of exercising great caution and assessing the risks , but this initiative was annoying and downright embarrassing for the reputation of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
First of all , climate change does not cause tsunamis .
That idea is considered absurd by serious researchers .
My colleagues behind the initiative are right to say that an assessment of the risks of power stations is always necessary , but wrong to let it be understood that this had not already been done .
No power plant is built without ensuring that it is flood-resistant .
That is why I am also forced to ask the Commission to assess the political risks arising from parliamentary initiatives based on pure fiction .
I am happy that this time the problem was avoided .
in writing . ( SV ) We voted in favour of Amendments 3 and 8 because we think it would be a good thing if the EU Member States could agree unanimously on taxes that help reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
However , we do not support decisions on tax taken on a majority basis at EU level , because we Swedish Social Democrats believe that tax decisions should be taken at national level .
We broadly welcome the adoption of this document , yet another on climate change .
It is a document that asserts , or confirms , our undertakings as regards reducing emissions and promoting alternative energies .
It does not , however , deal with other equally important points such as promoting energy efficiency and the use of high-quality public transport ; these alternatives are covered either fleetingly or in watered-down form .
It also emphasises the proposal to commercialise emissions rights , or to put it more aptly , the ' right to pollute ' . As we have been saying , this would run counter to the stated objectives , on account of its commercial nature , as those who can pay will still be able to pollute .
This will affect in particular countries with weaker economies that do not have the money to buy these emissions rights .
Whilst there are some welcome proposals in the areas of emissions reductions and renewable energy , there are other proposals that would be difficult to implement given the stringent requirements placed on the different countries , especially given the opposition to them .
In any event , we shall carefully monitor the implementation of some of the ideas in the report , whilst fighting to ensure that they are not exploited for the purpose of further concentrating energy in the hands of the wealthiest countries or in such a way that it is the consumer who has to carry the can for the pollution costs of the polluting companies .
The results of the Paris session are a slap in the face for everyone who believed that opposition and interests would be overcome in light of the serious danger of the planet 's overheating and of the catastrophic medium- and long-term repercussions for the peoples of this earth .
However , the resolution on climate change , which is a fighting text , does not propose material and specific solutions .
To a large extent it expresses wishful thinking and maintains a reliance on the same methodology responsible for today 's acute problems , favouring market mechanisms , imposing taxes and contributions on the workers and exempting the multinationals .
It clearly states that the reduction in emissions will contribute towards competition and towards achieving the Lisbon and Kyoto objectives .
It is precisely this policy of capital that is responsible for contaminating the environment and for emissions and it cannot be a criterion for protecting it .
Moreover , all those who ratified the Kyoto protocol are showing on balance significant deviations , while the USA continues to increase greenhouse gases , together with China and India .
Consequently , Kyoto has little to do in practice with reducing emissions .
The conclusion is that the EU of capital and its political spokesmen are destroying the planet on the pretext of environmental changes and their only concern is how to make more profitable use of the Kyoto ' market mechanisms ' .
in writing . I agree with the general aims of the Council resolution .
While I agree with the content of the Verts / ALE amendments and the commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % by 2020 , I believe that the amendment was too narrowly focused and I abstained from the vote on that particular amendment .
in writing . Climate change is perhaps the most significant political challenge of our time .
The type of steps called for in this resolution , and collective action at the multilateral level are essential if climate change is to be combated .
in writing . While I supported the resolution , the EU needs to take additional initiatives to address climate change
Shop shelves are full of low value , perishable goods that have been transported tens of thousands of miles to satisfy consumer pricing expectations .
The carbon footprint left behind by this form of global trading is colossal .
I am therefore calling for the introduction of a " Carbon Labelling ” system , which would give consumers the information to make responsible and wise choices .
in writing . Moves to make the European Parliament a carbon neutral institution require to be pursued as a matter of urgency .
Tackling climate change is the challenge of our time .
We all need to play our part .
Perhaps it will be the argument of our carbon footprint , rather than any other , which will finally end our Strasbourg sojourns every month .
After all , we as MEPs should practice what we preach .
in writing . ( SV ) The greenhouse effect is one of the great problems of our time .
It is therefore important that considerable efforts be made to reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
One of the best and most important methods of eliminating such emissions is to have nuclear energy replace energy produced through the burning of coal and oil .
The IAEA has observed that nuclear energy is one of the keys to reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
It is unfortunate that the resolution in question chooses to ignore this fact by insisting that emissions should not be reduced through the use of nuclear energy .
It is for this reason that I am voting against this resolution .

( DE ) Mr President , we all know that fighting terrorism can only ever be a cooperative effort , and there is no doubt about the importance , to the European Union , of the USA as a partner in this , nor , indeed about the need , to this end , of the exchange of data and information , yet this must be done in accordance with rules accepted by both parties .
Now that we have decided on those rules , which - ranging from the specified use to which data may be put to conversion to a push-system , by way of the non-storage of sensitive data - have gained broad majority support , and have , above all , managed to commit the authorities in the USA to informing their counterparts in the European Union of terrorist suspects , I am happy to give this resolution my support .
I am persuaded that - should Commissioner Frattini be mandated to conduct negotiations - it will be possible to achieve a good outcome in the interests of the security of the EU 's citizens .
in writing . UK Conservatives are in full support of measures which highlight fraudulent financial transactions for the benefit of funding terrorism .
However , this motion for a resolution fails to mention the results of investigations carried out by the Belgian authorities .
Also the motion fails to recognise the importance of ensuring that access to such data should be limited to appropriate law enforcement agencies trusted with counter-terrorism action .
In the case of the PNR agreement , Conservatives believe that it is the sovereign right of a country to ask for information on people entering its territory .
Any agreement on data transfer should recognise this right .
The more appropriate method to handle such agreements and ensure high standards of data protection is through a mechanism of intergovernmental cooperation .
For these reasons British Conservatives voted against the resolution .
The EU is fully committed to the fight against global terrorism , on the basis of its human values and respect for fundamental rights and freedoms .
No motive , however laudable , can justify the absence of democratic legitimacy . Accordingly , the sharing of data must be subject to constant parliamentary and judicial monitoring .
There are serious doubts regarding the processing of personal data by the US authorities , which indiscriminately hoard data , in breach of European data protection legislation .
What is more , the arrangements are not reciprocal : US citizens are afforded must greater protection in Europe than Europeans in the United States .
I therefore believe that a common framework must be set up with the United States with the aim of safeguarding guarantees regarding the sharing of sensitive information in the context of the fight against terrorism .
Parliament will have to keep a close eye on the PNR agreement to be negotiated by the Commission .
We have always expressed our opposition to the establishment of an agreement with the United States on the sharing of personal data , in relation either to PNR or to SWIFT .
This is firstly because the agreement forms part of a broad context of securitarian measures - note the programme of illegal phone tapping in the United States - on the basis of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' , which has been a pretext for unleashing interference and aggression on countries and peoples when US imperialist interests have been at stake .
We are also opposed to this agreement because no valid guarantees are given that the citizens ' legitimate rights will be safeguarded by the implementation of the agreed rules governing personal data protection , including those defined by the EU itself . Furthermore , the effective monitoring of these agreements on the part of the national parliaments is not guaranteed .
There is no doubt that the seriousness of the current state of affairs would be minimised by the establishment of more specific measures , more effective methods of controlling the personal data to be transferred , limits on the use to which data can be put , information for the citizens , and the citizens being afforded access to their personal data .
What is really needed , however , is an end to this securitarian onslaught , which , on the pretext of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' , undermines the citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
in writing . Sinn Féin believes the Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) Agreement should not be entered into lightly or behind closed doors .
The PNR Agreement forms part of the so-called ' war on terror ' and will infringe the civil liberties of Irish citizens .
EU Member States should not allow themselves to be bullied into applying an Agreement which fails to guarantee the data protection rights of its citizens .
Ireland should take the lead within the EU Council in demanding a more acceptable Agreement .
I am calling on the government to amend the proposed Agreement before its adoption to ensure that at a minimum : the annual joint review includes a requirement for an evaluation of the Agreement covering both the detail of its operation and also its effectiveness against its stated objective of ' fighting terrorism ' ; and that any change in US , EU or Irish data protection provisions relevant to the operation of the Agreement would prompt an immediate and transparent renegotiation of the Agreement requiring further approval by both houses of the Oireachtas . "
in writing . - ( EL ) The resolution by the European Parliament on the transmission of passengers ' personal data by European airlines ( PNR ) and the scandal of the provision of information on financial transactions by SWIFT customers to the US security services reveals the true character of the pronouncements by the political forces behind the European one-way street and European subjugation .
Their protests about the violation of the protection of personal data and of privacy in the resolution are converted to a belief that ' the ΕU and the USA are fundamental and loyal allies in the fight against terrorism ' .
That is why they also propose signing a new agreement on the transmission of passengers ' personal data , with the same content as the previous one , and the removal of information on financial transactions for ' judicial investigative purposes ' , provided that the USA gives guarantees that it will be protected .
The new agreements proposed add to the disclosures about the criminal activities of the CIΑ in Member States of the ΕU , with abductions , detentions in secret jails and torturing of ' terrorist suspects ' , thereby proving that , despite their hypocritical pronouncements , cooperation between the ΕU and the USA is deepening , in a bid to restrict fundamental rights and grassroots freedoms , on the pretext of fighting terrorism .
- ( SK ) I have voted for the adoption of the resolution of European Parliament on the contribution to the Spring Council scheduled for 8 and 9 March .
I have expressed my support for the amended wording of the resolution , because I consider the preservation of internal market competitiveness and the implementation of a strategic innovation policy focusing on energy efficiency to represent a clear and up-to-date response to the issue of how to achieve the Lisbon Strategy goals .
In the interests of enhancing the transparency and clarity of the Strategy , I support the process of improving the drafting of consumer protection laws .
An essential point in the resolution is the appeal to national parliaments to embrace national reform programmes , as success in meeting the ambitious Lisbon goals is dependent mainly on the initiative of each of the Member States .
In this context , I would like to mention the Slovak example where , thanks to the structural reforms made by the government of Mikuláš Dzurinda , we are already witnessing real results , for example almost 10 per cent economic growth and the creation of hundreds of new jobs .
The Minerva Strategy , which involves mobilising innovation in support of the national economy and developing scientific and educational activities , constitutes an implementation of the Lisbon Strategy that aims to make Slovakia one of the most advanced , modern and prosperous societies worldwide , and thereby possibly also a source of ideas and inspiration to other Members States of the Union .
in writing . ( SV ) We supported the resolution on the Lisbon Strategy .
We believe that , in the future too , the Lisbon Strategy must be based on the need for social policy , economic policy and environmental policy mutually to support each other .
In the ongoing work on the strategy , it is important to emphasise an overall perspective whereby it is efficient and open markets , education , an active and egalitarian welfare policy and a progressive environmental policy that together contribute to growth and job creation .
We did not , however , support the demand that obstacles to job creation , including obstacles to the creation of relatively low-paid jobs , must be removed .
This might be interpreted in terms of opening up a low-wage market , something to which we are absolutely opposed .
On the contrary , we want any such development to be prevented .
This can be done by allowing collective agreements and cooperation between the social partners to play a more significant role .
We are also opposed to wordings that encourage the exploitation of ' clean energy ' and carbon dioxide-neutral energy technology , because they might be interpreted in terms of our being in favour of the expansion of nuclear energy .
We should prefer to see increased efforts to develop renewable energy with a view to promoting sustainable development .
The resolution before us reveals the true nature of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' - the European-level agenda of the employers and the large financial and economic groups - which was reinforced by the 2005 relaunch of the Strategy and the launch of national reform programmes in all Member States in order to push through so-called structural reforms , aimed at making labour relations more flexible , deregulating the markets , liberalising services , commercialising education and research and privatising social security .
Now that the liberalisation of services has been achieved , the Strategy now has its sights set on labour relations with so-called ' flexicurity ' , total deregulation and the liberalisation of unfair dismissals .
I wish to point out that social concerns and objectives , which had previously served to help disguise the true nature of the Lisbon Agenda , have now disappeared .
The fact is that since 2000 , in the EU of the Strategy and the eurozone era , there has been weak growth in the economy and in employment , an increase in job insecurity , poverty , social exclusion and income inequalities , and unemployment remains high .
A sea change away from the EU 's current policies is therefore needed .
The ideas of the three main groups of this House are so similar where economic , trade , social and employment policy are concerned that they have straight away tabled a single resolution on the forthcoming European Council .
That , in itself , is reason enough for me to reject it .
Reflecting , as it does , a pathetic , exclusively pro-European way of thinking , this text contains everything that is responsible for Europeans ' growing hostility to your system : the little piece , written in a roundabout way , about the unemployed being responsible for their unemployment - ' poor swines ' as Gabin said in La Traversée de Paris - that about the benefits of immigration , which come at the cost of plundering of elites in the developing world and of pressure on wages in Europe ; that about the necessary reform of our social protection system ' in the light of the development of global dynamics ' , which obviously means that they are doomed ; the little piece about random acts of discrimination , when the most scandalous discrimination is directed at Europeans , on their own soil ; that about growth , with no mention ever being made of purchasing power and consumption , of the explosion in the number of poor workers or of the responsibilities of the euro ; and , finally , that about ' blessed globalisation ' , which is an oxymoron .
Your eternal solution is to have yet more Europe .
Really , you deserve to fail !
in writing . I and my British Conservative colleagues have supported this motion for a resolution as we have always been supportive of the aims of the Lisbon Strategy to enhance Europe 's competitiveness and the development of a dynamic and innovative economy , improve labour market flexibility and promote deregulation in the EU .
We also support the call for Member States to refrain from protectionism .
We believe that this resolution broadly supports these aims .
This does not mean that we endorse the entire list of detailed policy measures listed in the resolution .
Rather we are supportive of the broad thrust of what we believe to be the liberalising effect of the text , which is absolutely overdue .
in writing . I am particularly supportive of the amendment which calls for the promotion of ILO core labour standards and decent work agenda .
Further , I support the avoidance of environmental dumping as a crucial element of fair competition .
Social and environmental aspects must be built into trade development .
in writing . The 2010 deadline of achieving the Lisbon goal of becoming the most dynamic and knowledge-based economy in the world is looming .
Part of this goal is about getting more women back into the workplace .
During the Barcelona Summit of 2002 agreement was reached by Member States that by 2010 a third of children under three and 90 % of children aged three to six would be provided with childcare places .
Apparently only five Member States have achieved this goal .
If we want more women to enjoy the freedom of work we need to have the availability of quality and affordable childcare as a key political priority .
I voted against the joint resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe presenting ideas for the 2007 spring Council in relation to the Lisbon Strategy .
Indeed , two paragraphs that I considered crucial have been adopted by my fellow Members , even though I feel that they go against my European convictions .
Firstly , the European Parliament has agreed to support the policy permitting the private funding of universities and to encourage the private sector to give its verdict on market needs regarding education and training .
This measure may lead to a form of competition between universities , which could compromise equality in university education .
Furthermore , the European Parliament has decided to ask the Member States to review the ineffective social models in the light of their long-term financial viability , of developing global dynamics and of demographic trends , with the aim of making these social models more sustainable .
In my view , this amounts to nothing more and nothing less than a blatant threat to our social security systems .
Merely because of these two options , I decided , contrary to my convictions , to vote against this resolution .
The joint resolution on the Lisbon Strategy by the Group of the European People 's Party ( European Democrats ) and Christian Democrats , social democrats and liberals adopted by the European Parliament proves once again the agreement between the political spokesmen of capital on promoting their strategic choices .
The priority of euro-unifying capital is the effective and fast promotion of the guidelines of the Lisbon Strategy , which expresses its ambition to increase its profits , so that it can be imposed on monopoly competition through a barbaric attack on all the rights earned by the working classes .
The objectives of the strategy of capital loyally applied by the New Democracy government , with the support of PASOK , are set out in the resolution ; in other words , the advent of capital in the sectors of health , welfare and education , through public private partnerships , the position of research in serving the monopolies , the liberalisation and commercialisation of energy , the restructuring of employment relations and the abolition of the social insurance system .
Particular importance is attached to adjusting the education system to the needs of the competitiveness of capital .
The Greek Communist Party group in the European Parliament voted against the resolution and calls on the working classes to step up its fight against all the anti-grassroots policies of the ΕU and its ' centre right ' and ' centre left ' governments and to claim permanent , stable employment with rights , a national social insurance and health system and free state education .
in writing . ( SV ) The proposal contains quite a few constructive proposals concerning the importance of increased competition and improved conditions for enterprise and innovation .
However , the Lisbon process must be regarded primarily as a national matter , which is why it is unfortunate that Parliament is getting involved in a number of areas that it is for the individual Member States to decide on .
For example , the report discusses how the Member States are to organise their social insurance and how they are to guarantee that everyone who leaves school is offered work or can take advantage of measures aimed at making them employable .
I am therefore voting against this resolution .
The text adopted today , which follows on from the Commission communication on the Community 's policy on the radio spectrum , is rather contradictory in some areas as it creates the impression of bringing together ideologically opposed positions .
The report contains proposals aimed , inter alia , at safeguarding public service ( s ) ; maintaining a certain , possibly high , level of national sovereignty when it comes to managing the spectrum ; transferring some of the benefits arising from the new technologies to the least developed regions ; recovering frequencies for the public domain where they are not used in accordance with the commitments made ; protecting public interests and frequencies of strategic importance ; and maintaining high levels of quality in ' services of public or general interest ' .
It also makes a point , however , of welcoming the Commission 's proposal to introduce a market-based approach to the spectrum and to establish a clear legal framework providing for competition-based solutions .
Ultimately , despite its good intentions , it gives the green light to pursuing neoliberal policies and to worshipping at the altar of the market , which will jeopardise the provision of public services .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report as it argues for fair and non-discriminatory access to spectrum and maintains that all technologies should be treated the same .
A combined approach to the management of the spectrum , in order to achieve greater flexibility and market reponsiveness , will contribute to social and economic benefits arising from its use .
in writing . I would like to support the rapporteur in attempting to address the serious concerns over efforts to exclude broadcasting frequencies from the proposals , in particular regarding the digital dividend which will become available following switchovers to digital broadcasting .
There is a need to push broadcasters to use spectrum efficiently .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 2 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
External dimension of the fight against terrorism ( debate )
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , international terrorism is the most dangerous threat to peace , security , human dignity and integrity .
Being an invisible enemy , which is geographically diffuse , and which can be found inside and outside of our borders , it needs to be fought in a way that is different to the way the European Union has had to fight its enemies in the past .
The European Union 's anti-terrorist strategy must be global , multilateral and based on the United Nations system .
Any unilateral and exclusively military response is doomed to failure .
The fight against terrorism will be won in the field of values .
It is therefore crucial , in order to defeat terrorism morally , to increase the awareness of it and mobilise our public opinion .
We must at no point lower our guard .
We must not just react following a massive attack , but rather we should act in a permanent and proactive manner .
A strengthened CFSP is vital to our success .
This means making improvements , providing better resources and better coordination amongst European intelligence and information services and more work on uncovering terrorism 's funding channels .
In its external actions , the Union must focus on stopping certain States providing support for terrorist groups , through coercive measures and sanctions , and it must help weak States to strengthen their institutions and their democracy in order to prevent them from harbouring terrorists .
Madam President , preserving the rule of law and human rights in the fight against terrorism is not just absolutely crucial for moral reasons . It is the raison d 'etre of our strategy , because that is precisely what the terrorists want to destroy : the values on which our co-existence is based .
If we give ground in this area , as in the case of the Iraq War , Guantánamo , Abu Ghraib or the illegal CIA flights , we will be providing the terrorists with excuses , which they will try to use as justification , and we will be fuelling their activities .
Restricting fundamental rights does not create more security , but rather more fear .
We need free societies that feel secure in themselves .
Fearful societies have already lost the fight against terrorism .
The security / freedom dilemma is a false one .
We will be safer if we are freer , more open and more inclusive .
Prevention , which is so important and which failed both on 11 September in New York and on 11 March in Madrid , is crucial , as is greater efficiency in police and judicial action .
Our CFSP must contribute to eradicating the fertile ground upon which international terrorism thrives .
Terrorism is never justifiable .
We must never talk about causes , but rather the circumstances that feed it , the first of which is the humiliation and disdain suffered by millions of Muslims , which they perceive as arrogance on the part of the West , and the exacerbation of endemic conflicts such as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
Another is the disrespectful treatment of a religion that is followed peacefully by more than 1 300 million people throughout the world .
We are dealing with fundamentalist fanatics , who are dogmatic , but not a particular religion or belief .
We sometimes forget that there have been more Muslim victims of Islamist terrorism than Western victims .
This explains the international success of initiatives such as the Alliance of Civilisations , adopted by the United Nations , in opposition to the clash of civilisations advocated by fundamentalists from one side or another .
As well as better resources , international terrorism must be beaten by means of intelligence and tenacity , not by means of inflammatory speeches that only demonstrate fundamental weakness .
Fascism , firstly , and then Stalinism , decades later , were defeated in the ideological field , without surrendering the principles that lie at the heart of our societies , including freedom of expression exercised in a responsible manner .
My report places particular emphasis on recognising the victims as principal actors , to whom the public powers must listen .
We therefore have four direct victims of the massive attack of 11 March in Madrid in the gallery . Jesús Ramírez Castanedo , Jesús Abril Escusa , Isabel Casanova Ortega and Euclides Antonio Río Grajales .
I would like to thank them very much for being here .

Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I would like to thank your House 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , and your rapporteur Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , for the report on the external dimension of the fight against terrorism , which has been presented today .
It is a comprehensive report and discusses a number of extremely important issues on which we are largely of one mind .
The terrorist threat is now , more than ever , international in character , and the measures taken by the European Union to overcome it can , in fact , be successful only if they form part of a coordinated global effort at combating terrorism .
At its meeting in December 2005 , the European Council adopted an anti-terrorism strategy for the European Union in which the general outline of the European Union 's anti-terrorist measures is marked out , and , at the same meeting , adopted the European Union 's strategy for combating radicalisation and recruitment for terrorist purposes , in both of which documents the external dimension of anti-terrorist activity is exhaustively discussed .

There are three important points that I would like to highlight as regards terrorism 's external aspects , namely radicalisation and recruitment , cooperation with external partners and the international legal framework .
Firstly , the principal object of the anti-terrorist strategy consists in preventing people from resorting to terrorism , and action must also be taken to deal with the factors that can help to radicalise people and make them susceptible to recruitment by terrorist organisations .
In its foreign policy measures directed against terrorism , the EU has continued to endeavour to consider every possible issue connected with radicalisation and recruitment , and has shared with its external partners its experience and best practices in dealing with the problem .
The European Union has also broken new ground in including anti-radicalisation measures in a special technical aid programme for combating terrorism .
Meetings featuring dialogue between religions and cultures have been held as part of the ASEM process and the Barcelona process , and under the auspices of the Anna Lindh Foundation ; the EU has also set up working parties to discuss in depth how it might improve its public diplomacy and its contacts with Islam both within the EU and outside it , and we want to continue to move this forward in a determined manner .
Radicalisation and recruitment will also continue to be addressed in future programmes of technical support in combating terrorism and will remain an important feature of the dialogue with third countries .
Secondly , there is cooperation with external partners , and , in pursuing its objectives in the field of anti-terrorism , we have continued to collaborate closely with partners outside the European Union .
The political dialogue with partners is an essential component in the European Union 's foreign policy action against terrorism , and the status of respect for the rule of law and the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while at the same time combating terrorism as key issues in it reminds me of the debate we had this morning , in which there was a high degree of unanimity .
A considerable amount of work has been done with a number of countries in order to improve cooperation in the fight against terrorism .
The European Union and the Member States have agreed to provide technical anti-terrorist support to certain countries that are to be regarded as high-priority cases , and progress has been made in political consultations with others of their kind .
The European Union has also helped to build up capacity at regional level , for example , at the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation ( JCLEC ) in Indonesia and the African Union 's anti-terrorism centre in Algiers .
We continue to attach high priority to anti-terrorist cooperation with the United States .
Politicians and experts from the European Union and the USA have worked together on intensifying their dialogue , and the EU has extended its dialogue on anti-terrorism issues to include other partner countries such as Israel , Australia , Canada and Russia , as well as those that participate with it in the Europe-Mediterranean Partnership , in considering areas of common interest and options for cooperation , notably the provision of technical assistance to other countries .
Thirdly , in the international legal framework , the European Union has continued to press for a key role to be given to the United Nations in the combating of terrorism .
Since the adoption of a comprehensive agreement on international terrorism , including a clear and unambiguous definition of it in all its forms and manifestations , would indeed send an important signal and would show the international community taking determined action to counter the terrorist threat , the European Union will continue to make every effort to reach international consensus on one .
The recent adoption of a United Nations strategy , with the aim of stepping up international cooperation with third countries in combating terrorism also represents an important advance , and the European Union is prepared to join with all other states belonging to the United Nations in implementing it ; this is one of its priorities for the future , and it intends to make use of its dialogue with external partners to press for the implementation of this strategy across the board , as also for an exchange of ideas as to how this goal might best be achieved .

I believe that your House would , by bringing this issue to the attention of your partners in dialogue in third countries , be making a supremely valuable contribution to achieving that goal .
As I mentioned at the beginning of my speech , the institutions of the European Union are largely agreed on the priorities for combating international terrorism .
I can tell your rapporteur that his report and a long-term exchange of views such as that in which we are currently engaged help to deepen our shared understanding and help us to devise suitable measures to combat international terrorism .
It would also send a message to those who have been the victims of terrorist atrocities .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , firstly I would like to commend the rapporteur , Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , for his report .
Let there be no doubt : terrorism is a threat to all states and to all peoples .
It is criminal and it is unjustifiable under any circumstances .
The Commission therefore fully shares the view of the report that terrorism constitutes an important threat to security , to peace , stability and the democratic values on which the European Union is founded .
The Commission also shares the objective of combating terrorism globally while respecting human rights .
All anti-terrorist measures must be consistent with both international humanitarian law and international human rights law .
While largely agreeing with the report , I would like to comment on two points .
Firstly , the report is calling for the adoption of a definition of terrorism .
Since the UN has not yet agreed on a definition and since such an agreement still seems distant , although we are working towards that , I would like to recall that relevant universal conventions and protocols already provide a common legal understanding of what constitutes an act of terrorism .
The Union also has a definition of terrorist acts in its framework decision on terrorism .
These are solid legal foundations .
Secondly , the report calls for the extension of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court to include acts of terrorism as crimes against humanity .
I think we should be cautious , before altering the definition of crimes against humanity included in the ICC Statute .
Such an endeavour might be counter-productive in the efforts to broaden support for the Court .
The complex relationship between international humanitarian law and the definition of terrorism may lead to further complications .
The Commission welcomes the interest of the Parliament on the external aspects of the fight against terrorism .
In the current environment of open borders , efforts to fight against terrorism , internally and externally , are aspects that are closely linked .
It goes without saying that Vice-President Frattini and I are working closely together in order to make these efforts mutually reinforcing .
We strongly agree on the need to support the United Nations consistently with our policy of effective multilateralism .
Equally , the emphasis put on prevention is very important for the Commission .
Conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism need to be tackled .
Tackling the root causes of terrorism lies at the heart of our external policies , and the report 's recommendations for a more coherent and effective EU policy also largely go in the right direction .
Let me highlight the important contribution that the Commission makes to the fight against terrorism .
Firstly , with Member States , the Commission is implementing the 2005 EU counter-terrorism strategy , of which our colleague and President has talked .
Terrorism also features regularly during meetings with our partners and in international organisations .
For example , as I speak , a major meeting is under way with Commission participation in Berlin in order to prepare the Heiligendamm Summit of the G8 in the areas of terrorism and organised crime .
Secondly , the Commission is an important provider of capacity-building assistance to some 80 third countries aimed at improving governance and administrative capacities in related areas .
A number of priority fields mentioned in the report , such as border management and terrorist financing , are priorities for Community assistance .
Thirdly , the Commission is working in new areas which should improve EU action in the fight against terrorism , such as the protection of critical infrastructure , the fight against violent radicalisation and terrorist recruitment , bioterrorism , radiological threats , explosive detection technologies , terrorist use of the internet , as well as terrorism in the context of crisis management , and there are obvious links to our efforts in fighting organised crime and drug trafficking .
Afghanistan is , for instance , a serious case in point .
Finally , and in reply to one of the requests of this report , the Commission wishes to confirm that it intends to produce a communication in the course of 2007 focusing on global and trans-regional security challenges .
The focus will include key aspects relevant to human security and focus on counter-terrorism .
You may be aware of my personal commitment to support the human security discourse .
What better way could there be to address conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism than to promote both freedom from fear and freedom from want .
Despite what is being done , I think we can all agree that we must work together and enhance our collective performance in fighting against terrorism .
We will try to play our part , but we are certain that the collective effort with Parliament will be a more important one .


draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Gloser , ladies and gentlemen , I have been given the task , on behalf of the Committee on Development , of drafting an opinion on this report on the external dimension of the fight against terrorism , which was drafted by my colleague , Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
We can only talk about this issue by adopting an approach that encompasses our development policies , for the benefit of the countries of the South , in particular .
As uncompromising as it certainly is , this opinion highlights a series of crucial points , which have already been addressed in this House , concerning the very definition of terrorism , respect for human rights and relations with the various migrant populations of Europe , in particular .
This opinion also deals with the issue of the difficult coexistence between the fight against terrorism and the need to safeguard respect for human rights in all circumstances , so that no one can justify the denial of the one for the sake of the other .
Our report then goes on to raise the issue of the fight against terrorism from the perspective of the repercussions that its funding methods may have on the quality and effectiveness of European development cooperation .
Thus , we highlight , for example , the fact that , currently , a large number of measures adopted by the Member States that do not come directly under a policy for reducing poverty in the countries of the South have sadly been included in official development aid .
These include , for example , the funding of military investments , the repatriation of illegal immigrants , some immigration policy-related expenditure , and I could go on .
The Committee on Development also wishes to draw our Parliament 's attention to the fact that , by including in official development aid financial support for a range of activities connected with the fight against terrorism , we will merely be further compromising its main objective , which is to eradicate poverty .
This opinion was adopted by nearly all of the members of the Committee on Development , on 6 November .
However , the majority of the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs sadly did not think it worthwhile to adopt any of the paragraphs in this opinion .
That is why we have decided to re-introduce the main thrusts of this text , in the form of amendments to the report , and I therefore call on all of the democratic groups to endorse them so that , alongside the necessary fight against terrorism , we can carry out effective development policies aimed at achieving the Millennium Development Goals , which represent the real long-term - even very long-term - solution to terrorism and to all the suffering that it leaves in its disastrous wake .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( ES ) The fight against terrorism is a priority that requires solidarity from all of the Member States and commitment from the democratic countries .
Security is a genuine fundamental right that cannot be exercised at any expense , but in strict accordance with the law and respect for human rights .
International terrorism threatens human rights and freedoms .
The sinister distinction between murdering terrorists and political terrorists , between armed wings and political wings , only makes the whole thing even more criminal to the detriment of the law .
To hold dialogue of any kind with terrorists is unfair , pointless and offensive to the victims .
The Member States must pay particular attention to promoting intercultural relations and enhancing inter-religious dialogue amongst the members of civil society , with a view to improving co-existence , tolerance and mutual understanding .
The Union must rationalise , coordinate and facilitate the actions of its instruments , Europol , Eurojust , Cepol and the Situation Centre , and others pursuing the same aims , in order to detect and prevent links between terrorism and other forms of crime .
I would ask , Madam President , when drawing up prevention strategies , that the horrendous experiences of the victims be respected and taken into account in particular , as I say in my report .
The victims must be acknowledged and protected .
Terrorists begin to lose when the victims make the truth of their experiences known and society listens to them .
With regard to prevention , Madam President , prevention cannot and must not be used as a missile amongst democratic countries and States .
The last time prevention failed was on 30 December 2006 in Madrid .
We do not criticise failures in prevention . We work hard to ensure that they never happen again .
I shall draw to a close , Madam President .
We will only be able to tackle terrorism with determination when all of the democratic countries , together , and the Union in the singular , have a clear view of the threat , and the threat is lethal , permanent and destined to remain with us .

Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to take this opportunity of congratulating you , Madam President , on your office as Vice-President , in which capacity you represent the region of Eastern Westphalia-Lippe , from which we both come , and that is cause for pride .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report and point out that terrorism is a cross-border phenomenon .
We will succeed in countering it only if cross-border cooperation is in place within the European Union and with the states and organisations outside it .
Putting this in place is often a slow business , particularly if we consider the internal policy aspect of our shared security problem , which is still arranged between the states , and that is why implementing the positions of the individual Member States can sometimes be very laborious .
That is evidence of the fact that , if we want to be more secure against terrorism and organised crime , we need the European Constitution as a more effective means of making obligations in the common sphere more binding and improving the decision-making process .
Along with close cooperation between the security bodies , it is also urgently necessary that the causes of terrorism be addressed .
There may be no justification for terrorism , but it does have its causes , to which we have to give our attention , and I see political , economic and social issues as being of great significance here .
There must also be no more token gestures of a certain kind .
If it were to be possible , for a joint effort , for example by way of the Quartet , to resolve the Middle East issue , that would take much of the wind out of terrorism 's sails .
I cite that as only one example of the interconnections that exist in this area .
Something that is apparent from the report , and that I find most especially important , is the need for us to make use of inter-cultural dialogue .
We have to make it clear to people in the other regions of the world , too , that we value their culture , their religion , and their development as equal to our own , if such causes of dissension are not to arise from feelings of cultural inferiority .
That is a particular duty .
All these things have to be done in accordance with the rule of law and with respect for our values , for , if we surrender the latter , the other side will have won , and that is why we have to take our values and the rule of law as our shield .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , terrorist acts are always criminal , but terrorism is also always a political project .
I think its current manifestation aims to subvert the humanitarian values of equality , whether it be between gender , religion or nationality .
It also seeks to undermine civil rights - the civil rights of a plural democracy .
But we have to be very careful in expressing those values .
If we choose to call them ' our ' values rather than treating them as universal values , I think we will fall into the trap of the ' clash of civilisations ' .
Our best defence of those values , therefore , has to be primarily political .
We must demonstrate the strength of those values by ensuring freedom and quality of life for all in Europe and globally .
Security measures certainly have to be applied : the collection of intelligence , the prosecution of lawbreakers and , indeed , the prevention and prosecution of incitement to hatred and violence .
But the Fava report , which we spent a long time discussing this morning , indicates what can go badly wrong if we are not extremely careful .
We have to avoid simplistic analysis .
We have to avoid the assumption that every political or religious fundamentalist is a terrorist - that is simply not true , and I think it is important that we bear that in mind .
I know lots of fundamentalist Catholics who would be appalled at the idea that anybody would commit a terrorist act in their name .
I would appeal for deeper analysis than we are currently getting , and caution about the language we are using .
I would argue that , if we are going to be successful , we have to deal with inequalities on our continent , but also inequalities globally as well .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against global manifestations of terrorism is a decisive test of democratic Europe 's capacity to act .
In order to pre-empt and prevent brutal acts of terrorism , the special services must be able to make use of the most effective preventive and repressive methods , and this is unthinkable without international cooperation .
The report by Mr Fava contains a lot of criticism of the United States , but we must realise that we need even closer cooperation between the European Union and the USA as compared with that to date , that it is necessary for the USA and Europe to take united common action against the ideological causes of terrorism , and that we need a closer exchange of information , based on mutual trust .
The European Parliament and the members of the national parliaments of the Member States also need to be involved in a more focused and professional way in the drafting and implementation of the general strategy on terrorism , and active cooperation between the Member States ' services must be fostered .
In carrying out parliamentary supervision , we must ensure greater professionalism and political responsibility , especially when monitoring the lawfulness of the methods used in counter-terrorism measures .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Firstly , I would like to welcome Mr Yañez-Barnuevo 's efforts to tackle an issue which is complex and which is often subject to debates that have more to do with party politics than the fundamental issues .
But above all I would like to thank him for showing great sensitivity towards at least three of the issues that our group considers to be important .
The first has also been mentioned by the Commissioner , and relates to the problem of the definition .
The first significant problem facing us is the fact that it will be difficult for the European Union to combat terrorism in a consistent and credible fashion unless we have a definition .
Although it is true that there are many , shall we say , differing opinions on this matter , we would like to make a concrete proposal , and that is to work on the basis of the proposal which was presented and approved within the United Nations on the proposal of the then Secretary-General Kofi Annan , in turn on the proposal of the High-Level Group .
We therefore already have certain significant proposals on the table on which to base our work .
The second element of concern to us , of course , relates to the fact that the supposed fight against terrorism is often used to justify wars , massacres and torture . We saw that this morning when we discussed the Fava report , and elsewhere .
That is what cannot be allowed to happen .
We therefore also applaud , welcome and support the proposal to include acts of terrorism as crimes against humanity within the context of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court , so that that Court can deal with them as well .
Finally , another issue that we believe to be important is that , with regard to the existence of anti-terrorist lists , which have often proven to be counterproductive for certain peace processes in the world , it is also necessary to bear in mind that the current situation , on the one hand , sometimes leads to arbitrary detentions , and on the other , it hinders the efforts being made by the European Union in situations such as the Middle East , Sri Lanka , etc .
Therefore , the issue of anti-terrorist lists should also at least be revised and studied , on the basis of what has been approved by the Court of Justice of the European Communities .


on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I have to say , Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , that your speech was markedly better than your report , a certain amount of material in which was , I am aware , whispered in your ear , and it is regrettable that the Committee on Development 's opinion was not also adopted .
Terrorism , of any kind , is utterly unacceptable , but it is unfortunate that the report provides us with no concrete definition of what terrorism is , although it always talks in terms of ' international terrorism ' .
There exists the widest possible variety of groups , which , for the most diverse reasons , believe that they have to commit terrorist acts .
We have to consider each of them individually and establish just why they come to the erroneous conclusion that terrorist acts are necessary .
It also appears to me that whole subjects have been left out completely - state-sponsored terrorism , for example .
What about France 's past attack on the Greenpeace ship ?
As a number of Members have already said , we have to address the causes of terrorism .
At the moment , the Western states are engaged in a war on terror - in Afghanistan and Iraq - that is proving to be completely counter-productive , for while this war is being waged , terrorism is on the increase rather than declining .
We read in the report that measures are to be made more stringent in all manner of ways , and that fundamental rights are to be more and more eroded , and it is for that reason that we cannot endorse it .
We have therefore submitted a minority report on the subject .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the rapporteur is absolutely right to mention the medium of the high-speed and global Internet as being part of the phenomenon of international terrorism , but he does so in a paradoxical fashion .
While paragraph 12 appeals to the European Union to fight the misuse of the Internet for terrorist purposes , in paragraph 17 , the rapporteur highlights the scope the Internet offers to trace , and thus resist , this self-same evil .
At the moment , the growing number of Islamic terror websites are already demanding our urgent attention , for these form the virtual recruitment and training grounds of young Jihadists in Europe .
Allow me to quote the European intelligence service : ' these days , it is possible to become a terrorist simply by the information on the Internet ' .
Indeed , no more than a simple mouse-click is enough .
This terrifying reality demands an intensive and cohesive European approach , and , mark my words , both internally and externally .
Hence my request to the Commission and Council to provide this House with more factual information , given the intense threat emanating from terrorist websites , of which it is estimated that there are already some 4 500 Internet pages , in an attempt to trace them and indeed , to fight them in an effective manner and at European level .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , when this House discusses the fight against terrorism , there is the risk of us promptly falling back on politically correct commonplaces which hamper effective policy , or even make it impossible .
As the report rightly suggests , international terrorism currently represents the biggest threat to peace and stability in open societies , and the most direct threat to freedom , security and human dignity .
International terrorism has declared war on the whole of the western world , and that includes Europe .
It is therefore of the utmost importance for us to clearly identify this threat .
When I read in recital A of the report words such as ' international terrorism and the associated ideology ' , then I fear that we are going the wrong way .
Terrorism is not an ideology in itself , and neither is it a goal in itself .
As the chairman of the Arab television station al-Arabiya asserted a few years ago , it is a painful reality that these days , although not all Muslims are terrorists , all terrorists are Muslim .
It is a witticism which , like all witticisms , contains a grain of truth .
It is fashionable in Europe to say that we do not want a Clash of Civilisations , but whether we like it or not , this Clash of Civilisations is in full swing .
We must continue to fight poverty , and , of course , give our support , but we should not be naïve in thinking that this will also fully address terrorism .
The perpetrators of the attacks in New York , London and Madrid were not poor ; quite on the contrary , they were middle-class and highly educated .
It would therefore be in the EU 's interest to introduce democratic ideas , including the free expression of opinion , into the Islamic world .
What should really be established over there on a big scale is a kind of Radio Freedom .
Is this a plea to stigmatise all Muslims ?
Not at all .
What is important , though , is that within Islam , such things as self-criticism and introspection should be promoted .
A few weeks ago , it turned out that the chairman of the Muslim Executive in Belgium - this is the official government body , funded and recognised by the government - had given money to a convicted terrorist who is held in a Belgian jail .
This is bad enough as it is .
What I find worse , though , is that there was no reaction whatsoever to this incident from the Muslim quarters in Belgium .
Quite the reverse ; the resulting silence gave the impression that , at the least , people in those quarters were not at all shocked that the Chairman of the Muslim Executive , who claims to speak on behalf of all Muslims in Belgium , should give indirect support to terrorism .
This is disquieting and we should challenge it .
Madam President , terrorism is irredeemably evil .
Its wicked persona is not to be excused or ameliorated .
Sadly , the GUE / NGL minority report tries to do exactly that , with its focus on the economic and social causes of terrorism , its attack on the war on terror and its diversionary reference to what it calls ' state terrorism ' .
I am not surprised , because embedded in GUE / NGL is Sinn Féin , the long-term friend and political affiliate of terrorists .
We have heard much talk of human rights , as if fighting terrorism and a belief in human rights were incompatible .
Remember that terrorists are those who set out to destroy all tenets of liberal democracy , who refuse to live by our civilised laws , but who are adept at exploiting them when it suits their nefarious purposes .
Coming from Northern Ireland , I have seen that at first hand .
Sometimes , if society is to survive , it must fight back .
Some , I fear , would so cloak themselves in an exaggerated human rights mantra that they would see society perish sooner than terror .
This is a world of harsh choices .
Rabid Islamic terrorism is a particular threat to every liberty that the Western world holds dear .
It plays not by the rules , but embraces a perverted death culture that rejoices in mass murder .
With such people we cannot be soft .
If we are , they will win .
Yes , there must be a winner between good and evil , between terror and order , and it is the duty of all of us to see that good triumphs and terror is vanquished .
Madam President , This is a very important report with different emphases .
One of the big problems seems to be that numerous states have not been willing to counter the terrorist threat efficiently .
As you mentioned , Madam Commissioner , even several UN member states have not been able to agree on an international definition of terrorism .
Against this background I think the main challenge for us is to strengthen and enhance the efficiency of transatlantic cooperation and coordination .
That also means fully implementing the EU-US cooperation declarations .
I wonder whether concentrating on suspicions and accusations might give the misleading impression that US intelligence is not our ally but the main adversary .
At the same time , I would like to pay tribute to our own anti-terrorist efforts .
They have succeeded in preventing many new terrorist attacks in the UK , Germany and the United States .
But the urgent need is obviously for closer cooperation between the EU Member States and special agencies .
I can only support the idea that the EU anti-terrorist coordinator be given a stronger mandate and more resources .
I think paragraph 9 is especially relevant .
It states that one of the EU 's external actions should be aimed at preventing extremist groups and states from resorting to terrorism .
I think this is a key to practical solutions .
Without the support of such states as Iran , terrorist initiatives will be dramatically reduced .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like , if I may , to begin my speech by congratulating Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García on his outstanding report .
The positive aspect of this report is , to my mind , the balance it achieves between the need , on the one hand , for a firm , uncompromising approach coupled with more effective international coordination in the fight against terrorism , and on the other hand , the need to maintain human and civil rights and the principle of the rule of law .
The report also takes account of factors contributing to the radicalisation and recruitment of terrorists , be they outside or actually within Europe .
Among these factors are extreme poverty , lack of access to education , social , economic , ethnic and religious discrimination and collective disenchantment .
I firmly believe that the gradual elimination of these factors and causes is a vitally important prerequisite for successfully combating terrorism .
I should also like , in conclusion , to urge , through the Council , those EU Member States that have not yet done so , to sign or ratify at the earliest opportunity the 16 United Nations universal instruments on combating terrorism . Thank you .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when debating the violated rights of our esteemed terrorists this morning , Parliament was packed full , with the Commission Presidency and all the European institutions ' authorities .
Now , however , when it is time to debate and take stock of the strategy for combating terrorism and , above all , for protecting Europe 's citizens against the looming threat of terrorism , few of the people involved are present .
One day , somebody will write the story of Europe 's fight against terrorism and they will pick on this , together with the serious mistake we made this morning in adopting the Fava report , which is a huge gift to al-Qa 'ida .
The report rightly states that we need to examine the factors contributing to radicalisation .
We know what these factors are : they are the mosques and Islamic centres . It is the absolute freedom granted to thousands of Islamic centres and mosques to carry out propaganda and recruitment and to collaborate actively with Islamic terrorist organisations .
It is time we started to say that quite plainly here in Parliament .
Madam President , this report starts from the false premise that international terrorism constitutes the greatest threat to the democratic international community .
Likewise , President Bush 's concept of a war on terror is mistaken .
Violence and terrorism are only means to an end .
The greatest threat to the free democratic world comes from an ideology . The ideology in question is that of the fundamentalist and extremist Islam , which by means of terror seeks first to impose its psychological , and then ultimately its physical dominion on the world .
They believe that time and demography are on their side and they have declared war on us .
Sun Tzu remarked that the first place to win a war is in the mind of the enemy .
Islamic fundamentalists might conclude that they are well on the road to winning that war when its victims do not confront the fundamental cause of the problem .
The solution is not for the European Union to concentrate more power in its hands , as is predictably recommended in this report .
The solution is to recognise that fundamentalist , extremist and literal Islam is incompatible with Western liberal democracy and indeed any kind of civilisation .
From that starting point we can begin to adopt concrete measures to combat its manifestations through the actions of nation states and international cooperation .
Had I longer than 90 seconds to speak , I could have told you what some of those measures might be .
Madam President , I wish to begin by extending my own solidarity to the victims of the Madrid bombings with us today .
In debating international action to combat terrorism , let us recognise that such solidarity extends internationally and that the countries of the Middle East , Africa and Asia have suffered far more from terrorism over the past decade than we have in Europe or the West .
It is right to seek international cooperation , as terrorists themselves exploit globalisation through the internet , mobile communications , the media and the covert movement of people and of funds .
Europe should consistently use its foreign policies to encourage all third countries to sign , ratify and implement the 12 international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism .
However , we must be consistent too in insisting that we cannot protect the rights and liberties of our own citizens by denying those of others beyond our borders .
Our commitment must be to address the underlying conditions that draw people into terrorism , by working to improve respect for human rights , to promote democracy and good governance , to resolve conflict and to tackle world poverty and to roundly reject those , like the last speaker , who falsely seek to equate terrorism with religion by upholding our commitment to promote mutual understanding and cultural awareness in Europe and throughout the world .
Madam President , the reason why I omitted to congratulate you is that I was not in fact thinking of the great region of Westphalia-Lippe , which Mr Brok , too , calls home .

Thank you , Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , for this exchange of views .
In any debate of this kind , there will of course - how could it be otherwise ? - be differences and divergent views , but there is also agreement , and many of you made reference to this morning 's debate , in which , too , there were of course considerable differences of opinion , yet unanimity prevailed when it came to the question of how to combat international terrorism while also maintaining our common values .
A society such as our own is pluralistic and open .
The public 's right to security is , of course , one of the fundamental freedoms , but how can that security be guaranteed ?
Although this is an area that can , perhaps , be regulated only by the Member States , it is becoming more and more apparent - as a number of your Members have indicated - that there is a need for coordination , that is to say , for cooperation across borders , which also includes cross-border cooperation between Europe and the United States .
If we are to talk today about the causes of terrorism , it might be said that there is a holistic and long-term approach to it .
One of your Members warned that perhaps the wrong measures might be taken under the heading of ' prevention ' , which I see as a very important consideration .
I would like to go back to the example of last November 's Tripoli conference between the African Union and the European Union on the subject of migration .
How we handle ' good governance ' in these countries and give their peoples the prospect of education and work , are major issues .
Do they actually have any prospects at all ?
Or are they the potential victims of those whose promises to them ultimately result in their deaths ?
This I see as something from which the European Union cannot avert its gaze .
As in many other areas , there was vigorous debate among us a number of years ago concerning the European security strategy , when we came to agree that the fight against international terrorism is essential , but also that it called for a highly graduated range of instruments , one of which is prevention .
None of these measures , however , can be activated at the press of a button , and they cannot be put into effect overnight .
Doing so will demand staying power and proper coordination .
I would now like to follow up a number of things that both the Commission and I - in my introductory remarks - mentioned , one of which has to do with the importance of establishing what role the United Nations is to play in this .
What else can we do ?
I think it is important that Members of your House - not alone , but with others - should continue a dialogue on this subject with your counterparts in other regions that may perhaps also be suffering from terrorism .
In saying this , I am thinking back to the establishment of the Europe-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , where one important approach might be to discuss these issues and arrive at an agreement on how to institute coordination and cooperation .
Let me , once more , sound a note of warning against simplistic answers and quick fixes .
What is needed within the European Union is preparation for the long haul and a coordinated approach .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I think this report and the debate on its adoption confirm the importance of the fight against terrorism not only for the Member States , but also for the European Union as a whole .
It also demonstrates that respect for human rights has to remain the core of our counter-terrorism policies .
I think our colleague is right : it has to be with patience , but also with persistence , that we fight against terrorism .
I would like to make just a few comments .
First , on the question of security and development , I said that I personally have always clung to the system of human security .
Why ?
Because I think there is no development without security and no security without development .
Therefore , freedom from fear - i.e. security for citizens - and freedom from want - i.e. prosperity rather than poverty - have to be our goal and , therefore , this is as much as a development issue as it is a foreign policy issue .
Second , I would also like to speak about the victims of terrorism .
( ES ) I welcome the victims of terrorism who are here with us .
Victims of terrorism require our full attention , and the ways to assist them are under discussion in a number of international fora .
The Commission will also follow these discussions with the greatest interest .
Furthermore , assistance to victims of terrorism is provided through a number of financial programmes run by the services of Vice-President Frattini , and also by ourselves : for instance , in Colombia , where we are working hard on the reinsertion of former soldiers of the different terrorist organisations .
Dialogue between cultures and civilisations is also highly important , and I cannot agree that this should be restricted to extremist and fundamentalist Islamists .
They exist , but there are also other terrorists .
Therefore , please let us not restrict the debate to this group alone : it is much broader , and it is very important that we not only respect different religions and civilisations , but also that we work with each other , talk to each other and have an ongoing dialogue .
I should also like to say a word on the issue of the Internet , which is one of the important areas under discussion in the G8 , in the Rome / Lyons Group .
There are a lot of complexities , since important aspects - for instance , freedom of the press - are involved , not least in the United States .
What is involved ?
Sharing knowledge , helping to understand terrorists , the use of the Internet for radicalisation and recruitment , for propaganda and fund-raising , sharing best practices , how we can work against it on a voluntary basis , fine methodologies , etc .
I just wanted to say to Mr Belder that there is quite a lot going on .
Finally , it is in this spirit that the Commission will also examine the very important remarks and recommendations that have been made and are included in this report .
The overall objective remains to improve the efficiency and coherence of our collective efforts , and I think cooperation between the three institutions will be key to success in the long run .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - International terrorism is like a deadly disease .
We often see it as someone else 's misfortune until it strikes home .
Ultimately , however , in a direct or indirect way all countries , and even institutions , are drawn into the cauldron .
Terrorism knows no borders and is indiscriminate .
One has only to review the names of those who died in 9 / 11 to realise that the victims derived from so many different countries and adhered to all the major religions .
Can we talk , however , of a war on terror ?
In war your enemies are known .
In terrorist scenarios these are unknown .
A main topic of public international law is the Laws of War .
This is completely alien when dealing with terrorists .
However we have managed to produce some form of legal approach in combating terrorism .
One of the more meaningful documents was adopted in Barcelona having regard to the Euro-Mediterranean Code of Conduct on Countering Terrorism .
The participating countries made no less than 21 obligations to fight terrorism .
Perhaps this should act as a blueprint and if these obligations are adhered to at least one region will be earnestly addressing this calamity .
EC-Russia short-stay visa agreement - EC-Russia readmission agreement ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs da Assunção Esteves , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation on the facilitation of issuance of short-stay visas - C6-0169 / 2006 - , and
the report by Mrs da Assunção Esteves , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation on readmission - C6-0168 / 2006 - .

Mr President , on this occasion , I am speaking on behalf of both the Commission and the Council , both of which are entirely supportive of your House 's concerns as regards respect for human rights in the Russian Federation , and confirm that respect for human rights is fundamental to the implementation of the agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation relating to visa facilitation and readmission .
You will be able carefully to monitor compliance with this aspect of the readmission agreement and of the agreement on visa facilitation through the joint committees set up pursuant to them , and , under the second of the two , you will also be keeping an eye on the principle of mutuality in the implementation of the agreement , on equal treatment in the registration of citizens of the European Union and of the Russian Federation and on the free movement of persons within the territory of the latter .
Respect for human rights and basic freedoms is fundamental to relations between the European Union and Russia as a whole , which are underpinned by the partnership and cooperation agreements and by the timetables for the shared areas .
The European Union and the Russian Federation have also , in accordance with the timetable for the common area of freedom , security and justice , agreed to step up their cooperation through respect for the rights of individuals in the EU Member States and Russia , including those of immigrants and members of minorities , as well as respect for fundamental rights and freedoms as described in the Convention on Human Rights and Basic Freedoms and in the International Convention against all forms of racial discrimination .
The same timetable also makes reference to the promotion of cooperation in protecting the rights of children , in connection with which soundings have been taken to consider the possibility of accession to international agreements on the subject .
Another opportunity for putting general questions to Russia is afforded to the European Union by the human rights consultations between the two , which are held every six months .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , Mrs Esteves , and the rapporteurs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Pinior and Mr Vatanen , for their reports on visa facilitation and readmission agreements .
They reflect the European Parliament 's concerns and the advice to which the Commission will pay great attention in monitoring the implementation of the two agreements .
I wish to confirm the joint Council-Commission statement that was just heard by you , that Vice-President Frattini and I have addressed to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs at the request of its chairman , Mr Cavada .
I would not underestimate the concerns the European Union has over the human rights situation in Russia .
We remain worried about the shortcomings regarding in particular the rule of law and media freedom in Russia .
I understand and share the concerns raised by the European Parliament in this regard .
The Commission has always looked to the European Parliament as an ally in its promotion of the principles of democracy and the universality of human rights in our relations with partner countries such as Russia .
For their own sake , but also because they are cornerstones of peace and human development , they are indeed agreed common values and the foundations of the long-term strategic partnership which the European Union wants to have with Russia .
Since the beginning , the Commission has been and will continue to emphasise to the Russian authorities that our strategic partnership is based on common values which underpin EU-Russia relations as enshrined in the partnership and cooperation agreement and in the four Common Spaces roadmaps .
They explicitly foresee the strengthening of our cooperation through respect of individual rights in the EU Member States and Russia .
The readmission agreement fully respects human rights and fundamental freedoms and is consistent with the EU 's human rights policies .
Article 18 of the agreement explicitly clarifies that it is without prejudice to the rights , obligations and responsibilities of the Community , the Member States and the Russian Federation arising from international law , in particular from the 1951 Geneva Refugee Convention , the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights and the 1984 UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel , Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment .
The practical implementation of the readmission agreement will fall under the exclusive competence of the Member States and Russia 's national authorities .
All of those authorities are directly bound by the above-mentioned international instruments and their individual return decisions are subject to judicial review before national courts .
As far as asylum seekers are concerned , I would like to clarify that they are not included in the scope of the readmission agreement .
They have for the duration of their asylum procedure a temporary right to stay in the territory of Member States .
The agreement covers only illegal immigrants , that means people who do not or no longer fulfil the conditions in force for entry to , presence in , or residence in the territory .
In the case of asylum applications at the border , the principle of non refoulement has in particular to be fully respected by Member States in accordance with Article 18 of the Agreement .
Honourable Members , the extension of our common borders after the EU enlargement has of course broadened the scope of our cooperation with Russia .
Russia is , and should be , a strategic partner and an important neighbour to the European Union .
Now migration policy and movement of people have become strategic priorities for the EU 's external relations in general and with Russia in particular .
I firmly believe that only by engaging with Russia can we achieve real results in those areas of common concern .
Through visa facilitation , we are decisively contributing to the common objective of building a new Europe without dividing lines and facilitating travel among our citizens .
We are fostering trust and dialogue .
People-to-people contacts are intensifying and our economic and societal interaction is increasing to the benefit of all our citizens .
Through readmission we are effectively fighting illegal migration , contributing to joint migration management .
Finally , the first agreement on visa facilitation ever negotiated by the Community and the first readmission agreement concluded with a major partner country are tangible signs of our practical cooperation within the aforementioned common space on freedom , security and justice .
They are evidence of our resolve to successfully address common challenges with Russia .
They will remain , I think , as landmark , sectoral agreements within the overall new architecture provided by the strategic agreement on which we hope to launch negotiations with Russia soon .
As you had two reports , you were entitled to two times five minutes , making ten minutes , but you were concise and fulfilled your task very well .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we examine objectively the Agreement we have reached , there is no denying that it is a step in the right direction , albeit a very modest one .
We have to remember that the original proposal was very modest in scope .
One of the three main things that still cause difficulties for travellers in Russia is the registration requirement .
How can travellers today still be required to register with the police at different places ?
In practice , this completely prevents normal motoring in Russia .
The Russian Federation recently introduced a law which prevents undesirable persons from entering Russia .
What criteria are being used , though ?
Is entry into Russia denied to those who have found fault with Russia , the Kremlin , Putin or his speech at Munich ?
Are these the criteria used to make someone an undesirable person in Russia ?
There are regions in Russia , such as Chechnya and other areas , where travellers cannot even go .
What is hard to take in this whole situation is the fact that this reflects the relationship between the EU and Russia .
It shows how we are unable to resolve problems on an equal footing .
The Commission spoke fine words about common values , but where are they exactly ?
If we had common values , we would also be able to conclude balanced agreements that served the interests of both sides and our common future .
If we accept such one-sided agreements as this one , we will actually slow down Russia 's transition to the rule of law .
In this Agreement there are echoes of a time gone by , and if we take an honest look at our partnership and its development , we will need to start drawing up a new agreement immediately .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( PL ) Mr President , I was the author of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Council 's decision concerning the conclusion of an agreement between the European Union and the Russian Federation on readmission .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs welcomed the conclusion of an agreement between the European Union and the Russian Federation on readmission , in parallel to the visa facilitation agreement .
This represents a further step toward completing the creation of an Area of Freedom , Security and Justice , within the framework of the strategic partnership between the European Union and Russia .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs also believes that it is necessary to enhance the capacity of the Russian Federation in the field of migration management , in order for its authorities to be able to fulfil the obligations stipulated in the readmission agreement , as soon as this agreement enters into force .
The committee was also concerned about the absence of regulatory framework provisions for implementing the Agreement .
The European Commission should seek to provide the Russian authorities with the necessary expertise in order for the country to be in a position to meet its obligations according to accepted international standards .
That is the most important matter to be dealt with at present .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to talk about the readmission agreement between the European Union and Russia ; although in fact , both agreements - on readmission and on simplification of the issuing procedures of short term visas - are being considered together .
Relations between the European Union and Russia cover an increasing number of areas .
If we want these relations to be truly successful , it is necessary for them to be dominated by values , not just technical aspects .
Only in this way will we be able to achieve the goal of creating a more open Europe , which respects basic values and is able to change the world in a positive way .
In my opinion , the basic problem relating to the readmission agreement between the European Union and Russia is that it is unclear whether the primary focus is human rights or whether priority is being given to a generalised approach to refoulement of individuals , that is , priority is given to security considerations rather than to humanitarian aspects .
I fully understand that when readmission agreements are being drafted , the temptation to equate illegal migration with criminal activity must be resisted .
Similarly , when such agreements are being drafted , there should not be an inclination to focus on the issue of refoulement as a cornerstone of migration policy .
In our endeavours to obtain satisfactory statistical results , we must still pay particular attention to human rights , that is , practical considerations should not upstage moral considerations .
It only takes a single case of non-respect for human rights to raise a concern .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think it is necessary to mention one major failing : the fact that there is no system of regulation by which the agreement could be implemented .
I believe that in principle this agreement could be supported , but I would like to emphasise once more that it is imperative for the Russian Federation to strengthen its migration controls , so that its government bodies are able to respect the commitments that they will have to enter into from the day the readmission agreement becomes operational .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Gloser , I must say that the two international agreements with Russia that you are presenting to us today , one on the measures aimed at facilitating the issuance of visas and the other on readmission , have made us extremely worried .
The European Union 's cooperating with Russia must result in the protection of fundamental rights , including the rights of migrants and asylum seekers , being promoted more effectively .
Admittedly , these agreements enable progress to be made , in particular on the price of visas and the simplification of the procedure , but several problems remain .
Indeed , the events that took place recently in Russia show that freedom of the press and freedom of expression are not systematically guaranteed there .
Europe must therefore keep issuing strong demands to ensure that human rights are protected .
You responded to some of our concerns in your statement .
The Commission has committed itself to guaranteeing reciprocity in the implementation of the agreement on visas , equal treatment regarding registration procedures and free movement within Russia .
Obviously , I would have liked firmer commitments to have been made , particularly on the protection of migrants and the rights of children .
I am particularly concerned by the accelerated procedure provided for by the readmission agreement .
Will the Commission ensure , moreover , that this procedure complies with the principle of non-refoulement ?
We also requested clearer commitments for visas , which , in the long run , would have meant putting a stop to the invitation and registration system and simplifying the procedure for bona fide travellers .
Finally , I must once again reiterate our Parliament 's dissatisfaction with the fact that we were simply consulted on these international agreements , and this , long after they had been concluded .
Prior consultation of the European Parliament during the negotiations would also - it must be said - lead to greater democratic control .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the right to travel within Europe is an issue of absolutely fundamental importance to our lives .
The fact that the EU is now discussing visa facilitation agreements with its eastern neighbour is , of course , a good thing .
It cannot be emphasised enough how important visa rules , in particular , are for the way in which the European Union is perceived by the surrounding world and for the way in which the third country , in this case Russia , is perceived by EU citizens .
For anyone who travels in the EU 's border regions , this is often the first issue they encounter .
We parliamentarians have a big responsibility .
It is our responsibility to assess the agreement and its actual content .
It is no secret that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has not been happy .
In practice , European travellers to Russia encounter two problems if they are not on a group visit .
They have to have an invitation from a Russian organisation or individual .
What ordinary EU citizen has such contacts ?
The second obstacle is that they have to register with a Russian local authority within three days of their arrival , and this can take several days .
What are they to do if they are not in Moscow or St Petersburg ?
None of these issues is addressed by the agreement .
We must be clear that the agreement is a declaration and not a document with significant content .
If I guess correctly , many people in this House too believe that the agreement involves visa facilitation for all young people and all students . That is not the case .
Only those who already have study places would experience some limited relaxation of visa requirements , and , in such cases , visits could not , in any case , exceed 90 days .
There are not many study programmes like that .
In spite of all the shortcomings , Parliament has shown a constructive attitude .
We understand the importance of sending out a political signal .
However , it is important for all our citizens that the Commission and the Council should undertake single-mindedly to bring about an appreciable relaxation of visa requirements , beginning now and extending into the future .
Without such a pledge , the ALDE Group will vote against the proposals .
The Commission and the Council have put forward a declaration that is partially in keeping with Parliament 's wishes .
I do , however , have a question for Mrs Ferrero-Waldner : what is the next step that you now intend to take in order to abolish in practice the duty of registration and the system involving invitations ?
Both issues are , of course , relevant to the general , overarching objective of the whole agreement , namely that of abolishing the visa system .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the agreements currently being debated are a very important step towards a closer relationship between the European Union and Russia , especially as their adoption will make it significantly easier for people to cross the border .
That is the theory .
However , in practice , the situation is not ideal in several respects .
Travel to certain regions of the Russian Federation , notably to Chechnya , will still require additional permits , and the reasons for such decisions by the Russian authorities are surely obvious .
The agreement on facilitation does not contain a reciprocal clause on human rights and democracy , which ought to appear in agreements between the Union and third countries as a matter of course .
It is also difficult to understand why the Joint Readmission Committee is not authorised to monitor compliance with human rights and why individuals seeking political asylum are covered by the Agreement .
It would appear that practical and technical matters were prioritised during work on the aforementioned documents , whilst issues relating to respect for the dignity of human beings were sidelined , although they ought to be at the heart of all agreements , especially those entered into with Russia .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur for her consistent work in preparing Parliament 's opinion under consideration .
As a shadow rapporteur , I am especially satisfied that , following a two-hour discussion with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , my proposal to mention the requirement to undergo a mandatory registration procedure as being a serious obstacle to travel within Russia and the EU has been taken into account .
The requirement to undergo registration in Russia has become an enormous problem for those EU citizens applying for private short-stay visas to Russia .
Latvian citizens and non-citizens know this problem from their own negative experience since many of us , especially Russian speakers , mainly go to Russia in order to visit our relatives and friends living there .
The new law on migration registration of foreign nationals and stateless persons in the Russian Federation entered into force recently , on 15 January of this year .
The law provides some facilitation of the registration procedure and abolishes registration fees but , nevertheless , the system as such is preserved .
Unfortunately , such a system is reciprocal , since some EU Member States also demand the registration of certain categories of third-country nationals .
Both the Russian and EU sides have to make immediate efforts to find a solution for essential facilitation of movement of people between our countries .
Nevertheless , since some facilitation of the issuing of short-stay visas is better than none at all , our political group is supporting the agreement on this .
On the other hand , we maintain our principal reservations with respect to the agreement on readmission .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , nationals of both the EU countries and Russia are required to have visas to travel .
Russia has actively called for visa-free travel .
To facilitate the granting of visas , we first have to have reciprocal agreements , examples of which are the proposals now before us .
The reports by the parliamentary committees condemn the situation regarding the rule of law - its absence , in fact - in Russia .
They voice the concern that visas may not be granted for free civil action .
They also criticise the compulsory registration procedure and complain about the lack of any rules to implement the Agreement on readmission , human rights problems and so on .
It would seem that the time is not yet ripe for visa-free travel .
As long as visas are required , they need to be made easy and cheap for law-abiding citizens to acquire .
We should be wary of making visas a political issue .
( PL ) Mr President , reciprocity and solidarity are two values that should be crucial to relations between the European Union and Russia .
They are also essential conditions for such a relationship .
Reciprocity underpins all international relations .
I cannot conceive of agreements between states in which their mutual rights and responsibilities were not presented as being of equal value .
Any imbalance would immediately cause an outcry .
I am therefore quite certain that the principle of reciprocity must be observed in agreements between the Union and the Russian Federation .
I believe there are two aspects that should be considered in relation to the second value , namely solidarity .
Firstly , there is the solidarity between the Member States of the Union , who gave their consent for both agreements to be drafted .
I am glad that my own country , Poland , took part in this process .
We have been Russia 's neighbour for centuries , and there have been ups and downs in our relationship , as is often the case with neighbours .
These agreements prove that we wish to have a good and normal neighbourly relationship with Russia .
The second aspect to consider is the solidarity between the citizens of the Union and the citizens of the Russian Federation .
We will demonstrate this solidarity if we treat Russian citizens as people who are travelling around the Union in good faith , and facilitate their entry and stay amongst us .
I should like to emphasise that the citizens of the new Member States are particularly aware of what a blessing freedom of travel is .
We know what reducing border crossing formalities means and we value it a great deal .
We wish to share those benefits with the Russian citizens , on the basis of the principle of reciprocity and respect for human rights .
I think Parliament should support these agreements , because they create a good neighbour policy for the Union .
( FI ) Mr President , relations between the EU and Russia have not made any progress for a long time now .
For this reason , the Agreements before us now are important , even though they are rather undemanding in terms of their content .
It is very regrettable that the EU and Russia have not as yet got round to negotiating arrangements for the new agreement between them .
There need to be continued efforts to commence talks .
The delay in negotiations on this new agreement should not , however , be a reason for preventing both sides from developing their vital partnership .
The new strategic partnership can and must also be structured within the framework of the current Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , resolving the issue of visa facilitation and readmission is an important task that would promote the consolidation of common values .
Both the debate and the answers given by the Commission and the Council show , however , that in truth nothing has been achieved in discussions with Russia - neither a registration procedure nor a simplification of the invitation system .
That has been left to rely on Russia 's goodwill .
It is not clear why Russia has been given a transition period for the readmission of persons from third countries .
Our report of May 2005 on relations between the European Union and Russia stressed that the European Parliament was repeating its call on Russia to ratify the border agreement with Estonia and to sign and ratify the border agreement with Latvia without delay .
I believe that the demarcation of borders and the conclusion of a readmission agreement are preconditions for the signing of a visa facilitation agreement .
In this respect Russia has not displayed any initiative , but has just dictated its conditions to both countries .
Since Parliament has been placed in a totally humiliating position , we believe that it is not possible to support these agreements - a lot of serious work still remains to be done on them .
( CS ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , from my point of view , the agreement on the facilitation of the visa process with Russia is , despite all the comments and reservations that have been expressed , a step forward .
It demonstrates that it is possible for the European Union and Russia to reach a compromise even on complex issues .
Furthermore , let us answer the following question : do we want to make it easier , quicker and cheaper for students , scientists , businesspeople and family members to have access to visas ?
I believe the answer is yes .
Otherwise , access will be selective , something that we in the Czech Republic know all about in our relations with the EU .
For example , the process of joining Schengen was slow and fraught with difficulties .
Naturally , as someone who has spent many years in Russia and as a member of the Delegation for relations with Russia , I am well aware of the complications regarding visas and I therefore believe that simplifying at least part of the visa process is better than nothing . Thank you .
( LT ) The European Union is bringing down the barriers that hinder people of good will from associating with each other .
After five years of negotiations with Russia , the ' visa wall ' between the EU and Russia has become a little lower .
Once the visa simplification and readmission agreements come into force , a sizeable group of people will be able to travel and interact easier .
Those who are still disadvantaged are Kaliningrad residents who wish to visit Lithuania and Poland , and Lithuanians and Poles who wish to visit Kaliningrad .
At the moment there is no charge for visas , but the agreement , which is supposed to make things easier for them , will actually impose the hardship of a EUR 35 charge for a visa .
This goes against the principles of cross-border cooperation and against the Kaliningrad region 's anti-isolationist policy , which interests both Russia and the EU .
Vilnius , Warsaw , Brussels and Berlin , as well as Moscow , are trying to negotiate bilateral solutions within the margin of flexibility of the Schengen Agreement provisions .
Lithuania has led the way as the first and only EU nation so far to have a readmission agreement with Russia .
Three years of experience have been positive .
Since the agreement has been in force , the Lithuanian-Russian border has been crossed by almost 2 million people ; however , not once have the provisions of the agreement needed to be invoked .
I agree with a number of colleagues who have sharply criticised the agreement , especially for the lack of sufficient nexus to human rights and liberties .
Nonetheless , it is a step in the right direction .
On the long road toward the ' demolition of the visa wall ' there are still a lot of obstacles .
EU citizens coming to Russia have to register , and if they want to visit certain regions , extra permits are needed .
These ' hidden ' internal visas need to be done away with , because they restrict EU citizens ' freedom of movement .
This issue must be talked about honestly .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for the many important things you have said , but also for being realistic enough to see that it is not , of course , possible to agree on everything .
The fact is that all of us would have liked to see something in line with our own thinking , and , as indeed one speaker said earlier on , all this is an important step forward , but we need many more of them .
It is clear from the joint statement by the Commission and the Council that we had , in various areas , due regard to the principle of mutuality , which is an important one .
What is equally important is respect for human rights , and of that you rightly reminded us .
While I do not wish to confuse these two considerations , they are , of course , connected in some way .
The importance of dialogue with Russia has already been highlighted in various debates .
Although demands are always being made that we should get our way on various fronts , if , for example , there is still no go-ahead given for the negotiation of the partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia , there is no possibility of our making demands , expressing aspirations , or putting forward what you have requested , and it is for that reason that it is high time that the green light was given .
I hope that we will be able to find a suitable solution to the problem that still hangs over this issue .
Even though there may be things that we cannot accept as regards respect for human rights , there is nonetheless the twice-yearly human rights consultation between the European Union and Russia , which present an opportunity for raising such issues .
Some of you made reference to the issue of bureaucratisation .
While we would , of course , have wished to do many things differently in this area , the regime has nonetheless been relaxed as regards necessary invitations , and I am sure that the Commissioner will have something more to say about this .
This has not , of course , been done to the extent that some of you demanded , but it is nonetheless evident from this that we are making progress , albeit often with only small steps , for it is small steps forward that are called for in dialogue , particularly with Russia .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , honourable Members , I have taken good note of the many concerns you have expressed , but let me first say that Article 300 ( 1 ) of the EC Treaty clearly states that negotiations on international agreements on matters falling under Community competence are conducted by the Commission on the basis of negotiating directives approved by the Council .
The European Parliament needs to be consulted before the conclusion of the agreement , as laid down in paragraph 3 of that article .
This provision also applies in areas of codecision , so in my view the procedures set up by the EC Treaty have been fully respected , both on readmission and on visa facilitation .
I wanted to say that , because it came up in the discussion .
At the same time , however , I can also reiterate that of course we are at your disposal to provide any relevant information , even during the ongoing negotiations .
I also fully share the view that the promotion and the safeguard of human rights in our relationships with Russia , and in connection with those agreements in particular , are of course a fundamental aspect .
The Commission , assisted by the EU Member States , will therefore monitor this issue very closely in the context of the joint committees set up by the agreements and , of course , human dignity - the dignity of the human being - is certainly very important here and has priority .
Furthermore , the regular semi-annual consultations between the European Union and Russia on human rights are always an occasion where we can address broader concerns with Russia and human rights issues are always raised at the Summit and at ministerial levels , as appropriate .
The visa facilitation agreement constitutes a real improvement of the status quo .
It is indeed , as our colleague said , a step forward .
It contains important facilitations for issuing short-stay visas which will then apply on a reciprocal basis to citizens of the Schengen Member States and of the Russian Federation .
Some of these facilitations apply to all visa applicants and others to specific categories who have a particular interest in travelling , while the agreement provides for legally binding rights and obligations , which will ensure somewhat greater flexibility in the visa procedures .
I wish to draw your attention in particular to the fact that we , the Commission , have managed to negotiate important visa facilitation for journalists , for instance , who will no longer require an invitation or a validation by the Russian authorities , and special attention will also be paid to effective reciprocity in the implementation of the agreement , equal treatment regarding registration procedures for EU and Russian nationals and the free movement of persons within Russian territory .
You raised two topics , namely registration requirements and the removal of invitations .
I would like to just say that the agreement includes a commitment to simplify the registration procedures , with a view to ensuring equal treatment for EU and Russian citizens , and I would like to remind you that the Schengen acquis also imposes a general obligation for aliens to register .
We have raised this issue with the Russian authorities on several occasions and new legislation , which entered into force in Russia last month , is already in place to simplify these procedures .
According to this law , an appearance in person will no longer be required for registration .
Of course , we will now monitor and seek further clarification of these rules .
I would also like to say that the visa facilitation agreement introduces another important change , namely the fact that validation of invitations by the Russian authorities is no longer required .
In comparison with the current situation , where the invitation from the Russian host needs to be validated , this is , I think , a great improvement for a large category of citizens .
Of course , the agreement does not abolish the invitations and their validation for all EU citizens applying for Russian visas .
However , it should be borne in mind that the Schengen acquis also requires any person applying for a visa to justify the purpose of the travel and present supporting documents .
I also would like to say that the readmission agreement contains important elements for humane and more effective return management in the future and I would just like to reiterate what I said at the beginning .
In the case of asylum applications at the border , the principle of non refoulement has to be fully respected by Member States in accordance with Article 18 of the agreement .
So it is clear that this will be an important aspect .
I could go on giving you all the details , because I have listened very carefully . However , I think this matter has already been discussed in the LIBE Committee , so just let me say that I hope the House will follow the committee 's recommendation and give a positive opinion on both agreements .
It will make a change for our citizens and ultimately this may be what matters most .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( ET ) The groundwork for the agreement signed between the European Union and Russia concerning the facilitation of the issuing of short-stay visas was laid in May 2003 at the St Petersburg summit .
The agreement was intended as part of a process that was designed to strengthen relations between the parties through the creation of a common area founded on freedom , security and justice .
I see an agreement , but not the common area that was meant to arise .
Parliament will not retreat from its repeated demand that international agreements signed on behalf of the European Union contain a mutual human rights and democracy clause .
The agreement on the facilitation of the issuing of short-stay visas with Russia does not contain that clause .
At the same time , Russia has paid lip service to a significant requirement of the European Union 's visa facilitation policy , according to which the agreement on readmission should already have been concluded , or be at the active negotiating stage .
The readmission agreement was proposed by Parliament together with the visa facilitation agreement .
In addition , Russia has been granted a very generous transition period before the actual commencement of readmission .
I repeatedly drew attention to the absurd situation according to which the European Union makes it easier for Russian citizens to cross a border that Russia itself does not recognise .
Moscow has not yet ratified the Estonian-Russian Border Treaty .
Logically , the recognition of that border should be the precondition for the establishment and amendment of the border regime .
In order to support democracy , 16 years ago the European Union and the United States adopted an approach that treated Russia as a promising young country .
This overly generous treatment continues , though it is no longer appropriate .
It is in Europe 's interests to treat Russia as a full partner that must fulfil its international obligations just like any other .
Economic policy guidelines for 2007 - Member States ' employment policies ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Bullmann , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the situation of the European economy : preparatory report on the broad economic policy guidelines for 2007 , and
the report by Mr Andersson , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States - C6-0036 / 2007 - 2006 / 0271 ( CNS ] .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Mr President , thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to make a few comments on your Members ' reports on the economic policy guidelines for 2007 .
You will recall that it was last December that the Commission presented its annual report on the Lisbon process , in which it discusses the progress that has been made with the Lisbon Strategy across the Community and in the Member States , and also makes recommendations specific to individual countries on economic and employment policy , which will be elaborated by the ECOFIN Council and by the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Protection Council jointly , although each Council configuration will concentrate on matters within its own remit .
We are therefore glad to see that your House has given thought to these economic policy guidelines , and , in addition to this debate today , we will also have another opportunity for exchanging views at the Troika meeting on 26 February .
The Commission 's progress report met with broad approval from the ECOFIN Council when it met in January .
In particular , we can endorse the report 's fundamentally positive outlook .
The first concrete results of the reform process are becoming visible across the EU and in the Member States , in that we can see the beginnings of an overall improvement in the economy and employment in the European Union as the renewed Lisbon Strategy bears fruit .
It nevertheless has to be said - as it was yesterday in various ways - that there is no reason for complacency .
We should be set on using the present favourable economic position as a means for accomplishing further reforms , and this is made all the more important by the prospect of demographic change presenting financial policy with considerable challenges .
What is needed in order to consolidate the long-term sustainability of public finance is a three-pillar strategy , in other words a combination of reform of the pension and health care system , reduction of state debt and enhanced employment and productivity , while the quality of public finance needs to be improved by restructuring public budgets with a greater bias towards expenditure that promotes productivity and innovation and builds up human resources , and so the country-specific recommendations are a good instrument for moving the modernisation of our economy forward and enhancing the European Union 's ability to hold its own in global competition .
Starting with Mr Bullmann 's report , there are two aspects of it on which I should like to comment briefly .

Firstly , one point made in it is that financial and economic policy needs to be better coordinated , especially within the euro zone .
Demands that this be done come as no surprise to me , for they have been made repeatedly over the years , but , if one considers closely the present situation , it quickly becomes evident that there is no lack of coordination procedures in the economic and monetary union ; indeed , there are too many of them rather than too few , with , for example , the economic policy guidelines - which we are discussing today - and the budget policy monitoring procedure , to name but two .
What matters most of all in practice is that these procedures be applied consistently and effectively , and , by presenting its country-specific recommendations , the Commission has taken the first step to this end .
My second point has more to do with the institutions ; it relates to the concrete proposal in Mr Bullmann 's report for the setting-up , following the Spring Summit , of an interinstitutional working party to consider the review of the Integrated Guidelines scheduled for 2008 .
Far be it from me to give a final evaluation of this proposal today ; I am sure you will understand that it is an in-depth examination , rather than a personal estimate , that is called for , but I have to say that it does not , at first sight , appear to me to be wholly compatible with the way work is shared out between the institutions under the Treaties .
Quite apart from that , though , the fact of the matter is that communication between the Council and your House has constantly improved over recent years , something attributable not least to the troika meetings and sittings such as this one .
I am also aware , however , that there is always progress to be made .
Let me now turn to Mr Andersson 's report .
As required by Article 128 ( 2 ) of the European Communities Treaty , the Council , acting on the Commission 's proposal , lays down every year guidelines that the Member States follow in their employment policy .
In order , however , to ensure the continuity needed for proper implementation , it was agreed in 2002 that the employment policy guidelines would , in principle , be altered only every three years .
It was also agreed that they should be brought into line with the economic policy guidelines .
It was on this basis that , in 2005 , the first integrated guidelines were laid down for the period from then to 2008 .
In 2006 , then , the Commission proposed that the employment policy guidelines laid down in 2005 should be left unchanged .
Your House has repeatedly urged that it be allowed sufficient time to carefully elaborate its position , since the tight deadlines involved in the annual employment cycle usually made it necessary to invoke the urgency procedure .
There has been an exchange of letters on this subject between your House and the Council .
For 2008 , your House has asked for more time for a hearing , on the grounds that it will involve a comprehensive triennial examination of the employment policy guidelines , and we will consult with the Commission when considering this .
A position on the timetable for the procedure in 2008 is unfortunately not available at the present time .
This year , it is to be expected that the Council , as soon as the opinions of your House , ECOSOC , the Committee of the Regions and of the Employment Committee are forthcoming , will , at the 30 / 31 May Council meeting , be able to achieve policy agreement on the employment policy guidelines for 2007 , which would then be formally adopted before summer this year .
As Mr Andersson indeed stated in his report , the fact is that - quite apart from previous successes in terms of more people in work and fewer people out of it - there is a need for further purposeful effort if the goals set are to be achieved within the European Union .
By way of conclusion , I would like once more to emphasise that these include , in particular , an increase in the participation of young people and older persons in the labour market , together with an improvement in the compatibility of work and family life .
While I am aware that this is right at the top of the agenda in many Member States , I am also aware that there are those in which action is needed in this area .
Mr President , with your permission , I shall speak in my mother tongue .

( ES ) Ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating jointly the report by Mr Bullmann , on the broad economic policy guidelines , and the report by Mr Andersson , on the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States .
Both reports are based on last December 's Commission Communication on the implementation by the Member States of the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment , and the integrated guidelines for 2005-2008 , which was approved by the Council following consultation of this Parliament and on the proposal of the Commission .
Today 's debate is taking place during the weeks leading up to the Spring European Council of 8 March and involves cooperating in the preparations for that Council .
Just this morning , this Parliament adopted a resolution expressing this Parliament 's assessment of the implementation to date of the renewed Lisbon Strategy and stressing the areas and policies in which decisive action by the Member States and the European Union is needed .
It is important to stress that the reports that we are debating today and the opinion of this Parliament and of the European Commission are in agreement on a series of fundamental points .
Firstly , both Parliament and the Commission acknowledge the results that we are beginning to see , both in terms of economic growth and in terms of employment , thanks to the application of the policies agreed within the renewed framework of the Lisbon Strategy and thanks in particular to the budgetary consolidation and structural reform efforts made by the majority of Member States .
Just yesterday , Eurostat published the European Union 's GDP growth figures for the fourth quarter of 2006 .
That information indicates that the joint growth for 2006 was practically 3 % . That would represent the highest rhythm of increase in our GDP since the Lisbon Strategy was launched in 2000 .
Although Parliament and the Commission are in agreement , we must nevertheless be sure to emphasise this point , to emphasise the fact that we are beginning to see the positive results of the strategies implemented a few years ago .
It is important that the citizens receive the message that the efforts made since the Stability and Growth Pact was implemented , since the Lisbon Strategy was implemented - efforts that have not always been easy to accept or understand - are yielding fruit and helping to strengthen the European social model within the context of globalisation .
Many of the difficulties faced by the European project in terms of public opinion over recent times result from the fear amongst the citizens , in certain sectors of our society , that globalisation is lowering standards in a way that undermines the foundations of our social model , and that the European Union and the policies and strategies decided upon here are unable to prevent it .
Some people even accuse the European Union of provoking and speeding up that deterioration of the European social model .
The results we are seeing demonstrate clearly that that is not the case .
Those people who believe that Europe has become stagnant and that the rigidity of the labour markets is preventing job creation are also wrong .
The figures show that , since the euro was created on 1 January 1999 , eight years ago now , the European Union has created four times as many jobs as it had created over the previous eight years .
Furthermore , during this decade , since the Lisbon Strategy was launched , the European Union has clearly been creating more jobs than the United States .
Some people describe the budgetary policies as restrictive and accuse the Stability and Growth Pact of slowing down economic growth , but the reality is that it is the countries with the best budgetary accounts , with budget surpluses , both in the euro zone and in the European Union as a whole , that for some time have been experiencing the highest levels of economic growth .
The truth is that fiscal consolidation makes progress and improves in parallel with the increase and improvement in our growth and job creation figures .
There has recently been a lot of talk about the strength of the euro against the dollar and the yen being an obstacle to our exports , but the fact is that the euro zone 's trade balance , in relation to the United States , has improved again in 2006 and that the rise in oil prices has partly been compensated for by the rise in the value of the euro against the dollar .
In short , ladies and gentlemen , the improvement in our economies and the acceleration of job creation are clear evidence that the European social and economic model , with its high level of social protection and its environmental demands , is perfectly compatible with the globalisation of the economy and with economic growth .
Europe , its countries , our economies , have always worked better when they have opened up to the world and , now that the global economy is undergoing an unprecedented expansion , Europe and its citizens have much to gain from this opening up of our borders and the increased integration of our economies at global level .
Sending this message to the citizens is not just a way to vindicate the economic and social policies that we have been advocating over recent years : it is crucial in terms of increasing confidence in Europe 's capacity to provide the European citizens with well-being and offers us a solid basis for strengthening the political will necessary in order to move ahead with the structural reforms laid down in the Lisbon Strategy .
The second point on which there is fundamental agreement between the reports we are debating today and the opinion of the European Commission is the need to enhance the reforms initiated through the implementation of national reform plans by the Member States .
In this regard , the dynamism of the emerging economies , the ageing of the population , the growth potential , which is still low , in many European economies , the continuing budgetary imbalances in certain Member States , the low growth in productivity and the segmentation of the labour market are some of the very powerful reasons for continuing to implement policies leading to greater innovation capacity , greater life-long training opportunities , better functioning of the markets and healthier public finances .
The third significant area of agreement between Parliament and the Commission relates to the need to act not just in each of the Member States , but also at European level , in order to make progress on achieving an internal market in sectors that are crucial to our economy , such as the energy sector and the financial services sector , in order to increase support for innovation , in order to create a more favourable environment for business activity and greater adaptability of the markets in products and services and of the labour market .
Of these priority areas for action at European level , the reports rightly place the emphasis on the issue of energy , which will be one of the key issues at the Spring European Council , which is going to debate the energy package proposed by the Commission on 10 January .
The degree of commitment and ambition demonstrated by the Heads of State or Government in terms of creating a genuine common energy policy will be decisive when it comes to assessing whether the response to the challenge of guaranteeing our energy supply , while at the same time tackling climate change , is credible .
When it comes to tackling these challenges , action by each of the Member States separately will clearly be insufficient and joint action at European level will therefore be required in order to defend the interests of the citizens properly .

Finally , both the report by Mr Bullmann and the report by Mr Andersson express the need for Parliament to be able to exercise its prerogatives properly when it comes to revising the integrated guidelines of the Lisbon Strategy , which is scheduled for next year .
I can assure you , ladies and gentlemen , that the Commission is fully committed , particularly those of us in the College who are directly involved with the Lisbon Strategy , Vice-President Verheugen , Commissioner Špidla and myself , and we have a common desire to explore all possible ways to involve Parliament effectively in this revision .
I shall end , Mr President , by expressing my desire for this plenary to endorse the practically unanimous support of the respective committees for the reports by Mr Bullmann and Mr Andersson .
Through this support and through the high degree of consensus between Parliament and the Commission , we will be sending a clear signal to the European Council and to the citizens in general of the European Union 's will and capacity to create a specific instrument to tackle the risks and take advantage of the opportunities presented by globalisation , while defending and enhancing Europe 's economic progress and social cohesion .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Who would have guessed thirty-three years ago that we would be together in a debate like this in our respective posts ?
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , the report I have prepared on the employment guidelines is extremely short and has been accepted unanimously by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
It is really about how we are to deal with next year 's employment guidelines and integrated guidelines , for our current guidelines are to remain unchanged this year , but next year we shall see a more radical review .
Just as Commissioner Almunia said , we therefore anticipate being able to devote a little more time to the issue , and we need more time in Parliament too .
That is something I really wish to emphasise , for there is a difference between the employment and the economic guidelines .
The employment guidelines cannot be adopted by the Council until Parliament has made its position known .
Constructive cooperation between the institutions is therefore required before next year .
We made things easier in the run-up to this year . We did so last year too , when no great review took place .
Next year 's review is to be a major one , so we are expecting cooperation extending over several months .
We have , in actual fact , already had a discussion in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs between the coordinators and myself about not delaying in appointing a rapporteur to prepare the work before next year 's changes .
I wish , for all that , nonetheless to say something about the situation , even if it is only addressed in the justification .
Things are genuinely going better for Europe .
Employment trends are more encouraging than they were a few years ago .
Unemployment is declining .
We have sound growth .
We must not forget , however , that there are still deficiencies which we must concentrate on remedying .
I am thinking of young people who leave school early and young people who become unemployed immediately their education is finished .
We know that , if they remain outside the labour market for a long time , it becomes incredibly difficult to get them back into it again .
I am thinking of the still considerable differences between the situations of men and women in the labour market .
I am thinking of people who have come to us from other parts of the world and who , even today , have problems entering the labour market due to the shortcomings of our integration policy .
I am thinking of people with disabilities , who are also excluded from the labour market .
I attended the informal Council of Ministers meeting involving the employment ministers , a meeting that addressed another aspect of employment , namely that we want jobs that are actually better .
It is true that we have more jobs , but we want higher-quality jobs too .
What , then , is meant by ' better jobs ' ?
The fact is , we mean jobs that offer living wages and jobs that entail professional development and offer the further training that is so necessary if people are to be able to cope successfully in the labour market .
We are also concerned here with good working environments and with giving employees the opportunity to exercise influence , both individually and through their trade unions .
The current trend towards more jobs does not always mean better jobs .
That is a state of affairs of which we are aware , and there are debates about it in quite a few countries , for example in Germany , which I visited recently .
I also know from my own country that a proportion of the new jobs are what are known as atypical and do not always provide a living wage or opportunities for further training .
The influence that people in these jobs are able to exercise is also fairly minimal .
We must , then , also concentrate on creating not only more jobs but also high-quality jobs .
Europe will never be able to compete in the world market by creating low-wage jobs and jobs that do not enable people to provide for themselves . Instead , it will only be able to compete by creating high-quality jobs that offer , for example , further training and the opportunity to exercise influence .
This is a subject to which we intend to return next year when we carry out the more thorough review of employment trends , looking at more and better jobs and at groups that at present still have difficulty entering the labour market .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , as Commissioner Almunia pointed out , we have , in practical terms , got our growth back up to 3 % , and are therefore back on the course set by Lisbon .
It is this continuous 3 % growth that we aimed to achieve by means of the Lisbon Strategy , enabling us to implement the social and economic reforms that are needed in order that everyone in Europe may benefit .

It is precisely because there were many years in which we did not achieve this that we need to remind ourselves that this will not happen on its own .
Much in this upturn has to do , in the first instance , with the economic cycle , and it is because we cannot be certain that it will continue that our report takes the line that action on our part is needed , that we need to manage and direct , that we must not take time out and allow the clock to keep ticking while we neglect to take the necessary political steps .
The single market is our great trump card , performing better than the internal market in the USA .
90 % of what we manufacture in the European Union , we - as consumers - buy back from our own companies , and that gives us strength to cope with the vicissitudes of globalisation .
It is right , then , that this internal market should be completed , whether as regards financial services , energy , or the free movement of workers in Europe , for whom this is a fundamental right , albeit one that we have yet to put into effect , but this single market can function only if we endow it with a political framework - only if we are bold enough to give it form and ensure that the social checks and balances are in place .
That is why it is so important to call to mind the fact that we have succeeded in creating that social balance ; we did so with the Services Directive .
It is only when people are able to support themselves properly by their own labour in this internal market that they will be able , as consumers , to support an economic upturn ; it is only then that they will be able , as consumers , to invest , and only then that they will be able , as workers , to acquire further skills and qualifications and to play their decisive part in fostering innovation in our societies .
That is why it is so important that this report should ask the Member States just where they are , how far they have come , and just what they have done about achieving the great targets that we set ourselves at Lisbon .
It is crystal clear that they are beginning to come up with some answers , but those answers are still slow in coming and are not framed everywhere with the same quality that we would like to see ; active employment policy and social integration policy , in particular , leave something to be desired .
Looking at the positive outcomes , we can see that the countries that are ahead are the ones that are bold enough , instead of making savings to the point where nothing works , to invest in the active parts of society , in small and medium-sized enterprises , in those who are at school , in those who are doing their apprenticeships , in those who are studying for university degrees and are thereby bringing new creativity into society .
It is not fortuitous that many Scandinavian countries , working according to the Nordic model , are producing the best results on this front .
While it is up to each and every country to find its own best solution , we would strongly encourage the Member States to play their part in putting the pro-active Lisbon approach into practice and carrying on with it .
I am grateful to the President-in-Office , Mr Gloser , for not , in his speech , disregarding the report , but instead saying ' yes ' to dialogue , and I would urge him to be courageous , for I can find nothing in the Treaty that forbids us from developing closer forms of cooperation where the reform of the Integrated Guidelines and preparing Lisbon and the economic policy guidelines for a new stage are concerned .
This House expects to be involved - as is only right and proper - for that is the only way in which we can help to communicate the Lisbon goals to the public , to businesses , to trade unions and to workers .
I think the Commission is right to think in terms of coming up with more proposals on this front ; why should such proposals not be adopted by the European Council as guidelines and thus give the Member States firmer guidance ?

I do not want to close without extending very warm thanks to the services - both the committee 's and those of the groups - for their contribution to the production of the report , and also to the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Montoro Romero , Mrs in ' t Veld , Mrs Rühle and Mrs Wagenknecht , whose excellent cooperation has made it possible to present a unanimous report .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) We are dealing with a good report .
I believe that Mr Bullmann has done an excellent job , an open job , in order to produce an analysis of the European economy at this time . It is a hopeful time , but it is also a time for realistic analysis .
This report also stresses that we must make a precise diagnosis of whether we are dealing with a strictly cyclical recovery or something more .
I hope that it is something more , but we must also tell the European citizens that we must carry on working because the rationalisation of public finances we saw last year may also be due to cyclical factors and not to deliberate or structural decisions .
As the report does , we must accept that what has failed in the European economy over recent years has been the weakness of internal demand , that is to say , confidence , consumer and investor confidence , and that is extremely negative in terms of the European project .
We must also stress the need for reforms : reforms of the labour market that have been discussed and agreed ; reforms of economic policies to promote small and medium-sized businesses , which are key to the growth and creation of employment ; reforms intended to complete the single market , particularly in services and in the energy sector ; reforms to improve the efficiency of the markets in goods , services , work and capital ; and also fiscal reforms aimed at providing a coordinated fiscal framework that stimulates the creation of jobs and promotes the creation and development of the fabric of small and medium-sized enterprise that we believe to be fundamental .
Furthermore , this report stresses the need to combat protectionism , which unfortunately is present in many of our current European governments , and we also warn that the risk associated with the euro-dollar exchange rate may threaten the quality of our economic growth .



on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Almunia , Mr Gloser , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his work ; I believe that this report presents both an analysis and recommendations that my group can fully support .
I should like simply to highlight three aspects .
The outlook for the euro zone in terms of growth and competitiveness is improving .
However , as the report says - and this is my first remark - there are some very important differences between the Member States .
I believe that we should try to learn some lessons from this , or , in any case , try to understand why this is so .
Things are not always easy ; many elements come into play .
In particular , the report mentions the difference between the situation of a number of large Member States and that of smaller ones , but , ultimately , it is more complicated than that , since we can also observe spectacular differences in results among the large Member States .
Germany has performed averagely , with 2.7 % growth last year , which is a very good result compared with previous years .
However , with 2 % growth , other large Member States , such as Italy , and also my country , France , are below average in terms of EU growth , something that only happened two years ago .
This is combined with other elements that are fairly worrying , since the differences in external trade are just as spectacular .
Germany is a record-breaker again , showing an ability to conquer international markets , while France , which for a very long time was a country with a very strong international trade surplus , is producing one record trade deficit after another , quarter after quarter .
It is true that the Scandinavian countries , the Netherlands and a number of small Member States have obtained good results in terms of growth , employment and international trade .
There is a first lesson to be learnt from this , one that has perhaps come to my mind as a result of my country 's situation . It is that , in a country in which for five years , there has been one , let us say , liberal , structural reform after another , in which it was explained to us that that which was going to enable us to resolve the crisis , and the employment crisis in particular , was to reduce taxes - corporation tax , income tax - to jeopardise some forms of employment protection - we had a ' new employment ' contract , which undermined protection against redundancies , etc . - to weaken public services and to privatise , we have not obtained a single result .
On the contrary , some countries that have kept compulsory levies and higher labour costs than France are , for their part , showing important results .
I have learnt a second lesson from this , which is that not only has this formula been ineffective , but it is wrong to think that Europe will cope if it practices downwards competition .
It is not by practising a form of competition based on low costs that Europe will manage to extricate itself , but by investing in human resources , in innovation , in research , in training and in universities .
My third remark , and a point rightly noted in the report , is that , despite this overall increase in growth and economic results , poverty continues to be a problem .
Even when compared with the 1990s , the level of poverty within the European Union has gone up again .
At the end of the day , there are 80 million Europeans living below the 60 % average income threshold .
On this issue , I believe that we should also learn a lesson from what took place under President Clinton in the United States , which back then experienced a boom with the new economy , a boom that at the same time did not prevent serious poverty from continuing to somewhat poison society , because the Welfare programmes could not be implemented .
We too must combine investments with the knowledge-based economy , the competitive economy and social cohesion .
The two go hand in hand and support each other .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate and thank the rapporteur , who has considerably lightened the shadow rapporteurs ' load by submitting an excellent text that needed hardly any editing , and. with which , as it is now before us , I too am pleased , for it contains many excellent recommendations , although many of them we have , of course , made before , and what is lacking is action .
Many of these things have not been implemented .
It is true that the economy is picking up , but this is no time to rest on our laurels .
Where , for example , the Stability and Growth Pact is concerned , now is the time when the preventive leg should enter into force .
Rather than blowing the kitty , we should keep the budget in good shape , reduce debts , invest , and in that sense , I am completely at one with Mr Bullmann .
This should not , however , take on the form that it often does , namely subsidies that distort the market and replace the desperately-needed reforms .
This is often simply used as a fig leaf , which is not the idea .
I am all in favour of completing the internal market , and I hope that the Services Directive , which was far too weak for my liking , will have some impact on that front after all .
A great deal needs to be done in the area of labour market measures too , and I would like to say , briefly , that I see the social model as one in which all Europeans are given opportunities , but the one we have at present is still systematically excluding 8 % of the people from the labour market , and not only eastern European workers and immigrants .
We would rather have them drown in the Mediterranean than give them access to our labour market .
It is meanwhile the case that we have been turning a blind eye to the fact that people working illegally on our markets under the most abominable conditions are almost kept as slaves .
This is not so much a social model as a disgrace for Europe , so as far as I am concerned , the free movement of eastern European workers could not come any sooner , complete with an immigration system and green card .
Finally , some question the merits of more coordination of national economic policy .
We should have another discussion on this some time .
I think it is , at any rate , far preferable than the current trend towards protectionism and Member States competing against one another , for the fact is that , if we in Europe want to be of any significance in the world economy , we have to ensure that we have a strong , open market , which means that we have to focus on areas of future significance , that is to say on energy , innovation and sustainable development - areas in which we should become world leaders .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteurs on their work .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group will support these reports .
As I only have a short time available , I shall just raise a couple of issues .
At present , the economies of the Member States of the European Union are in need of genuine internal solidarity and cohesion , in order to meet the challenges of competition in the long term .
We can congratulate ourselves on a real economic revival , as demonstrated by the growth of GDP .
However , we would do well to remember that we are not alone .
Our population of 500 million does not even account for 8 % of the world 's population .
Our competitors include not only the United States , but also , and maybe most importantly . India , China , Indonesia , Brazil and Russia .
Nowadays , it is the economy , access to strategic raw materials and demographic potential that represent real strength .
These three pillars are closely related .
Accordingly , if we do not adopt a family-friendly policy that is truly harmonised with the economy , and also with regard to employment issues , then we are likely not only to lag behind in the near future but to actually collapse altogether .
The Lisbon Strategy is not an end in itself .
All its actions must aim to promote the individual and his or her development , that is to say , the development of a European citizen .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the first thing I have to say is that the ' Lisbon Strategy ' label now gets stuck on everything , irrespective of how little it has to do with the Strategy 's original objective .
Although it was employment policy that first prompted the Lisbon Strategy and constituted its primary goal , that is now becoming no more than an appendix to it .
This redefinition has been accomplished as a matter of policy , as a means of obfuscation and avoiding the admission that , while the EU 's economic data may be taking a turn for the better , no comparable upward trend is to be found in the employment figures .
Secondly , I would like to remind the House that the EU 's Heads of State or Government , at every spring summit , undertake to apply the growth and employment guidelines to their own national policies .
Thirdly , when they do so , the core concern is to combat the social exclusion of people , for that is the only way to effectively reduce long-term unemployment and poverty , and , in so doing , particular attention needs to be given to groups who , by reason of their personal characteristics , are especially subject to discrimination in trying to get into the labour market , such as , for example , people with disabilities and migrant women .
This year , though , the Council and the Commission have simply allowed this core concern to be forgotten about , even though there is no cause for them to do so , for exclusion is as much a problem as it ever was .
We cannot accept that employment policy should be biased towards those who are already in work .
The guideline currently in force must be taken as seriously as it ever has been , and the great coalition must not be allowed to get away with giving it a different priority and simply looking away when social need is most pressing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report on the economic policy guidelines contains a large number of statements that I can go along with .
It states that , rather than economic growth being an end in itself , the focus must be on people 's quality of life .
It advocates not only that economic growth should be export-oriented , but also that it should be responsive to demand , and it manifests concern about the continuing high incidence of poverty within the European Union .
Although all that is laudable and - alas - not always obvious to the Members of this House , the report does also include passages that make a vote in its favour impossible .
What is certainly not acceptable from our group 's standpoint is the favourable mention given to the neo-liberal Services Directive , which will further encourage wage dumping and the despoliation of social services in the European Union , thereby helping to make poverty and social exclusion even more widespread .
We also see it as unacceptable that the report should call for further liberalisation of the energy sector .
What Europe in fact needs is not even more deregulation , liberalisation and privatisation , but the very opposite ; what we need is a radically different economic policy in which , for once , the interests of workers and consumers are treated as more important than big business 's interest in private profit .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that the Bullmann report shows that economies of countries which have not yet adopted the euro are performing better than those who have .
Indeed , I must congratulate Slovakia , Latvia , Lithuania and Estonia .
They have not only shaken off the shackles of Communism but also embraced the free market , low taxation and minimal regulation .
Is it any wonder they have the highest growth rates in Europe ?
However , I must warn them that this has ended .
It will all be downhill from here .
Latvia will adopt the euro in 2008 , Lithuania and Slovakia in 2009 and Estonia in 2010 and they will be hamstrung by EU regulation , EU targets and by the EU continually meddling in their economic affairs .
I think we should all worry when the report informs us that the European Union must play a more active role in determining economic policy .
One size does not fit all and individual countries know best how to find their markets , manage their economies and trade with the world .
Please give them economic independence .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the latest data on the economic situation are on the whole positive but , as the Commission has stressed , growth in productivity and job quality are still below the levels that Europe needs .
I hope that these encouraging data will not be an excuse for making less effort , but a clear signal that we have identified the key , strategic points and that we must continue to concentrate on these .
I appeal to both the European institutions and to the individual Member States in this respect .
I refer in particular to three areas of action : 1 ) learning and retraining programmes , and programmes linking universities and other training establishments with the world of work ; 2 ) responses to the demographic challenge , such as support for women and families , and the reform and harmonisation of social security systems ; and 3 ) support , as yet insufficient , for small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular to enable them to adapt to the latest challenges of international trade and to using new technologies and innovations .
These are the areas that still need a lot of work .

( ES ) Europe is currently facing two great challenges : on the one hand , economic globalisation and , on the other , the ageing of the population , and all of this combined with the phenomenon of immigration .
Both require clear modernisation of the European social model .
As you know , competitiveness is the key element in terms of facing the challenge of globalisation .
We all know that we cannot compete with the emerging countries in terms of labour costs , but we have a clear advantage , our human capital , given its capacity , its flexibility and its creativity , and we also have the crucial values of solidarity , equal opportunities and inclusiveness .
With regard to the ageing of the population , in order to confront this challenge and to be able to guarantee pensions and healthcare in the future , it is essential that we increase productivity , and amongst other things that requires more jobs and also better quality jobs .
There is a general consensus amongst the Member States that it is necessary to modernise legislation in the field of employment protection .
In this regard , the combination of flexibility and security , which we often call ' flexisecurity ' , is a key element that must be developed in the future .
We also need , firstly , to apply a strategy of active ageing , with more training for people over 45 and with financial and tax incentives to extend working lives beyond 65 .
Secondly , to guarantee an appropriate immigration policy , in accordance with a proposal that is based on a broad European agreement enabling it to be controlled in an ordered fashion and immigrants to be integrated by means of training and recycling plans suited to their profiles .
Finally , to promote a reform of public pensions systems with a view to ensuring that they are sustainable through consolidation of public finances and incentives to supplement them by means of individual plans .
I shall end , ladies and gentlemen , by stating that we still have a long way to go in order to achieve an effective and inclusive European labour market , which above all is focussed on life-long employment , and in which everybody , regardless of their age and conditions , receives the assistance and opportunities they require .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur on his excellent report , and I am pleased that other political groups are backing it too .
The report can already be seen as a first instalment on the discussion which is indeed to take place some time later this year about the review of the broad economic guidelines .
It is vitally important for this report to be used properly in this context , because it contains a number of points that will prove very useful during this evaluation .
It assesses the achievements by the Member States and the European economy as a whole in the light of these recommendations .
I would , in this connection , like to move the focus slightly away from Commissioner Almunia 's statements .
He claimed that the countries that comply with the Stability and Growth Pact most effectively , are the best achievers .
I would , based on my own experience in the Netherlands , put this slightly differently , and I can identify more with the rapporteur 's statement that it is mainly those countries that have carried out structural reforms , combined with investments , that have done well .
I am delighted that we will now have a Cabinet in the Netherlands - the team of ministers will be put in place this week - which will put investments first , in combination with the reforms that have already been carried out , while carefully observing the standards of the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is a very important basis , to my mind .
A number of recommendations that are made in the guidelines are also reflected in the present government agreement , for example about labour market participation of the elderly , women or migrant groups .
One point that is very important in this connection - and I should also like to underline it on behalf of my political group - is the emphasis on European coordination .
Member States should not have to act as individuals , but a simultaneous , coordinated effort is , in fact , of key importance .
This is why I should very much like to advise the German Presidency to work hand in hand with this interinstitutional working party that is being introduced , and , in particular , to look at what can be coordinated macro-economically at European level .
This whole discussion on more coordinated economic and employment policy started in Essen 10 or 12 years ago .
It is a challenge for Germany to develop this further now .
( ET ) Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the new three-year steering cycle that was launched two years ago with the revision of the Lisbon Strategy , with which the general guidelines of labour and economic policy were merged , permits Member States to adapt national Lisbon programmes to the conditions in a particular country .
For the first time after the slow economic growth or even standstill of the past six years , European economic growth has begun to accelerate .
This positive trend is also reflected in the labour market , and proves the mutual connection between economic policy and social protection .
The twofold increase in labour productivity has reduced average unemployment to eight percent .
Last year 2.9 million new jobs were created , but much still remains to be done , and we should not yet feel completely satisfied .
Today only a few Member States have adopted a fully integrated life-cycle-based approach to work .
We must take seriously the implementation of decisions we have already made ; that is , that each young person who graduates from school or university be offered work , that child care be broadly available , that laws and regulations concerning labour protection be up to date , and so on .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a realistic report and emphasise that the European Parliament is a suitable forum for the assessment of strategies and measures to enable us to fulfil the Lisbon objectives through joint action and improved cooperation .
This is the right and obligation assigned to us by the people .
( EL ) Mr President , I have read both reports by my honourable friends with interest and would like to comment on three numbers : 8 , 17 and 12 500
It is true that unemployment in the European Union is fluctuating today around 8 % , which is an unacceptable figure in a Union with the declared intention of becoming the best and most productive economy by 2010 .
The second number is the percentage of citizens in the Union living below the poverty line which , at 17 % , corresponds to 80 million European citizens who cannot get by on a daily basis .
Finally , as you will already know , the multinational Alcatel Lucent has decided to lay off 12 500 workers over the next three years , most of whom work in Europe .
After the Volkswagen scandal , you will understand that the social and employment fabric of the Union is being seriously shaken up .
We can therefore continue wishful thinking about the Lisbon Strategy repeatedly .
Unfortunately the truth is different and bitter .
However , if there is one thing that I can retain from the reports , it is the need for Parliament to have more say on employment matters .
( PT ) The news brought to us by Mr Almunia is encouraging but I feel that more ambition is needed when it comes to productivity and job quality .
Jobs - productive jobs - are what Europe needs and they are created in companies , and companies will only appear if there are plenty of high-calibre entrepreneurs ready to take risks .
Consequently , we must do everything we can to promote an appetite for risk-taking and to raise the profile of entrepreneurship .
It is an area in which I feel much more can be done .
Another vital ingredient in creating jobs is confidence , without which it is very difficult to have investment growth .
The factors that can help engender that confidence include balancing public accounts , developing the internal market , and good coordination in the Member States ' economic policies and in economic and monetary policy .
Much has been done already , but much remains to be done .
Job creation should be a priority for a number of reasons . Firstly , because unemployment discourages people and makes them stop believing in themselves and in others .
It is also the biggest factor in social exclusion . Job creation is the only way of preventing young Europeans wasting their opportunities and talents .
Yet there are other reasons why job creation remains necessary in Europe , the most important of which relates to the financial sustainability of social protection .
It is indisputably true that it will eventually be impossible to maintain the systems we have inherited if we are incapable of creating more jobs .
Remedying this situation entails reform in many fields of the social economic systems of the various Member States .
These are necessary reforms , not on account of any kind of accommodation with liberalisation theories that see the market as the solution to all evils .
These reforms are urgently required and are justified in the name of the values that lie at the heart of the European project that they seek to preserve and to leave for future generations .
The extent to which European labour markets are able to respond to the challenges of globalisation , of the technological revolution and of the ageing population continues to be a key issue , despite the positive progress that has been made in the past two years .
Mr President , we cannot afford to be complacent that the unemployment rate is currently reduced .
The Lisbon Strategy calls for both more and better quality jobs .
Currently , the concept of ' flexicurity ' is seen as a threat by many millions of our fellow citizens .
It means for them and their families ever-greater insecurity .
The Commission 's proposal on the employment guidelines notes this , saying : ' a more comprehensive approach is necessary , better combining flexibility and security ' .
That is often repeated , but in reality things are getting worse , not better .
In its Green Paper on modernising labour law , the Commission highlights some of the issues ' through non-standard contracts , businesses seek to remain competitive in the global economy by avoiding the cost of compliance with employment protection , notice periods and the cost of social security contributions ' .
That does not sound to me like the path toward competing through quality and high added value in a globalised world .
The Commission also notes that fixed-term , part-time , on-call and zero-hour contracts , contracts for workers from temporary employment agencies , freelance contracts , etc. have become an established feature of European labour markets .
It notes that they are on the increase , up 4 % between 2001 and 2005 , and show that a significant minority , round about 16 % , remain trapped in a succession of short-term low-quality jobs , with inadequate social protection .
Thankfully , we now have directives covering part-time and fixed-term contract workers .
But those initiatives date from a time when the Commission still believed it had a role to play in establishing minimum standards , when it believed in using the legal bases available to it .
But what about those other proliferating forms of insecure , low-paid , low-quality , atypical jobs ?
The best the Commission can do nowadays is to ask a series of rhetorical questions in its Green Paper on how to rebalance ' flexicurity ' .
Well , maybe it is time the Commission returned to a social agenda with legislative content ; a signal is desperately needed to the Member States .
Mr President , this is an important debate on two very important reports , but it is an issue which the House has been covering both earlier today and indeed yesterday .
Earlier today we voted through by a large majority a resolution in relation to the Lisbon Strategy regarding the Spring Council .
It covered growth , employment , competitiveness ; it was an important statement of what needed to be done and how to get here .
Yesterday there were other important statements .
Commission President Barroso reminded us that EU institutions had to focus on citizens ' priorities ; that we cannot build tomorrow 's Europe with yesterday 's tools ; that we needed change .
Chancellor Merkel , on behalf of the Council Presidency , said to loud applause that we needed less bureaucracy , not more ; that better and simplified regulation was the direction to follow ; and she urged the Parliament to back this process .
With our resolution today we have formally given this backing .
But I do wish that this might mean that here , across all political groups and indeed within political groups , the old argument that we can either have more competitiveness or more social justice could be seen as an old argument .
The reality is that they are two sides of the same coin .
The biggest social injustice of all , as several colleagues have mentioned , is that which is inflicted on those millions still unemployed who want to work but cannot find a job .
This is not just their problem , it is our shame .
MEPs should no longer be seen in two camps , either on the side of employers or on the side of employees .
Let us please all agree to be in the same camp on the side of employment - of more jobs .
That remains the priority of all our citizens .
So let us not just give the Council Presidency and the Commission our backing for their agenda , let us make it our job to work together to deliver it .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report makes it a good day for Parliament for a number of reasons .
First of all , the inseparable links between economic , social and environmental policy have , as has already been pointed out , gone beyond the level of trite statements and can now be seen in practice .
We need only compare the title and the content to appreciate this shift .
The report states quite plainly how long this has been on the books of the Community institutions .
The economic policy guidelines need to include the social and environmental dimensions , in the sense that these are the most important aspects of them .
It is not just a case of combining three equivalent areas in the best way possible , but of recognising that economic development is based on social cohesion and environmental alertness .
Secondly , since competitiveness requires compatibility , action is needed in specific sectors , such as research and development , energy and the environment , as well as equally specific objectives for creating full employment and good quality jobs , guaranteeing dignity and security for people in work , and addressing calls for flexibility from both sides of the employer-worker relationship by means of measures aiming not just at conciliation but also at worker redeployment .
In addition , since the coordination method can provide useful results , it is not only good practice that should be pointed out and exchanged , but also obstacles , difficulties and adverse outcomes .
Great care is always needed when going down the road of harmonisation , since it is important to take account of contexts and legal systems ; they may appear similar , but they retain their own peculiarities .
However , understanding not only the proposal but also the implementation procedure and the impact caused will facilitate everybody 's work at European , national and regional levels .
The final reason is that national decisions must in turn follow an integrated , cross-cutting approach , and the prearranged plans and priorities must be reflected in the national budgets .

( ES ) The representative of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Mrs in ' t Veld , began her speech by saying that Mr Bullmann 's report was a good report , as previous reports on the broad economic guidelines had also been , but that those fine words had not been turned into concrete action , that we have never been able to move beyond the talking stage .
In the short space of time available to me , I am going to focus on the institutional reforms .
A period of reflection on the Constitutional Treaty has been opened up and is now on the point of being concluded , and practically everybody has expressed their opinion .
Mrs Merkel is proposing a roadmap ; the Socialist candidate Ségolène Royal , to question the role of the Central Bank ; the presidential candidate Sarkozy , the reforms that need to be introduced in order to make the Treaty viable .
Everybody talks about this issue apart from us .
I know that Mr Almunia believes that the great economic Treaty was Maastricht , and that may be true , but in Marxist terms , what Maastricht did was change the economic structures .
It now falls to us to change the political superstructures , to bring the institutional architecture into line with these changes .
I would propose that Parliament become involved and produce a few lines on what the Commissioner , from his vantage point , believes should be introduced in the Constitutional Treaty .
An exercise of this kind was carried out in Group VI in the European Convention that failed , but the list remains in force .
What are our views about what should be done on the Union 's list of economic objectives ?
How do we believe , and how far do we believe , the codecision procedure should be extended in the field of economic policies ?
What should we do about the power of retrieval in the Lamfalussy procedure ?
How can we guarantee the democratic control of the European Central Bank without undermining its independence ?
What should we do about economic governance ( this morning , the Italian President , Mr Napolitano , referred to the need for greater economic coordination ) ?
What should the President-in-Office of the Council do ?
Here we are still saying nothing though .
In the area of taxation , and I shall end here , all we need to do is incorporate into the Treaty what jurisprudence has already said , a single definition of tax domicile , an agreement on double taxation , the application of the non-discrimination principle , and I shall not go on because my time has run out .
What I propose , Mr Almunia , is that you produce a few lines and bring it to that dialogue that we approved in previous broad economic guidelines , and that we reach agreement so that we can speak with one voice and make constructive proposals in this reform of the Constitutional Treaty , because tomorrow it will be too late .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the broad economic policy guidelines could be described as a moral , or regulatory , framework for the Member States , since economic policy is a matter for the Member States but our objectives are pan-European .
This tension characterises all our debates .
Those failing to comply with the broad economic policy guidelines undermine and endanger European economic policy objectives .
Secondly , we are seeing a welcome development in economic policy , one that will provide the scope and tailwind for us to apply ourselves to our policy objectives and the necessary reform measures more actively , proactively and courageously than without the economic upswing .
Thirdly , there is no contradiction between the tasks of utilising the internal market , pursuing the Lisbon objectives , complying with the Stability and Growth Pact and meeting the challenge of the consequences of demographic developments .
On the contrary , all these measures must be taken if we are to realise the EU 's broad economic policy guidelines and their objectives .
That is why I say that it is not true what is often bandied about in election campaigns : that the independence of the European Central Bank - as the French believe - or the objectives of the EU are the cause of national problems . Instead , it is the failure to meet these objectives that is causing growth and employment problems at national level .
Let us use the time at our disposal to apply ourselves more actively to our objectives and our agreed policy reforms .
Let us reform our social security systems so that we are able to meet the challenge of globalisation .
Let us make energy efficiency and the strengthening of innovation in small and medium-sized enterprises the model for the European Economic Area , and let us improve economic policy structures - let us make savings to give ourselves scope for the investment needed - to make ourselves sustainably competitive at global level .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I should like to start by expressing my sincere thanks for this stimulating debate .
The positive data reported in various fields are of course welcome , yet we must not rest on our laurels on this account - further action is needed .
Various arguments have also been put forward as to the EU 's position on , for example , the issue of employment and economic policies - focusing on the Lisbon process .
It was also important to mention that competition and jobs were joined by sustainability in Gothenburg .
The Spring European Council due to be held in a few days ' time will address an issue that intersects with the field of jobs - namely that of energy .
This issue involves , on the one hand , energy as a product and , on the other hand , the question of how to deal with energy in future .
Can alternative forms be found ?
How can new fields be developed in this regard ?
After all , this is not something dreamed up by one party or another ; it has become clear that the promotion of renewable energies represents an important element .
I should like to state on behalf of the Presidency that what is equally important - and Franz Müntefering , the President of the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council , held a meeting on this issue just last week , in Nuremburg in Bavaria - is how Europe can continue to incorporate the social dimension .
What challenges are to be met ?
How can we show that Europe does not represent a threat , but rather an answer to the challenge of globalisation and the issue of maintaining the social security system ?
These are very important points , which we shall also pursue within the framework of the G8 .
I have already given my assurances that , in terms of not only the dialogue , the Troika , but also of the issue as to how Commission , Council and Parliament deal with each other in order to stay in close contact on this , we are pursuing the same objectives .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) I would like to begin by once again thanking the two rapporteurs and everybody who has been involved in the drawing up of these reports and this afternoon 's debate - which I believe has been extremely illuminating - on the situation we are experiencing and the challenges we need to face .
The situation - to use a Castilian figure of speech , though I believe that similar expressions are used in the few languages that I know of other countries of the Union - can be defined optimistically as a half-full bottle , or , if not pessimistically , then at least if we are to place the emphasis on what still needs to be done , as a half-empty bottle .
At the beginning of the debate , some of you asked me , ' Is the growth we are seeing cyclical or does it also have structural components ? ' , ' Will the improvement in employment just be temporary for as long as the economic expansion lasts or is it true that we are achieving a better combination of economic efficiency , more employment and greater social cohesion ? '
I believe that it is a combination of the two elements .
I believe that the structural reforms that have been carried out over recent years , together with the budgetary discipline and the macroeconomic policies , the mix of macroeconomic policies implemented since the launch of the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union , are beginning to bear fruit .
I believe that it is right that the European citizens should be aware that we are beginning to harvest that fruit , that the economic growth of close to 3 % , the two million jobs created last year , the twelve million jobs created in the euro zone since 1 January 1999 , the very good economic results of the huge majority of the new Member States , the greater consumer confidence and the increase in investment are linked to the efforts and decisions of recent years .
It is not merely a matter of chance . Otherwise , how can we expect the citizens to believe us and support us when we say to them , ' Look , we have to carry on with our efforts ' ?
We have to carry on improving the functioning of the markets in products , goods and services .
We have to carry on integrating Europe 's financial systems . We have to carry on improving the quality of legislation in order to create a favourable environment for small and medium-sized businesses so that they can compete without any administrative burden , without a series of obstacles preventing them from moving forward .
We need to provide good arguments so that we can ask workers to allow the improvement in the functioning of the labour markets to go ahead . Only by making that effort will we genuinely be able to offer high-quality jobs , a future for coming generations and a combination of environmental policies to combat climate change and energy policies that are capable of improving our competitiveness .
Only by doing that will we be able to offer that result .
Therefore , the Lisbon Strategy reforms , which we must continue , call for effort and responsibility on the part of the European Institutions and the Member States , of the public institutions and of the public sector , and the citizens and companies in the private sector , but they also need to be based on certain steps forward that we are already taking and which must be demonstrated .
I do not believe , ladies and gentlemen , that the European institutions should draw up policies pessimistically and with the feeling that the future will be worse than the past , because if we do , if that is the only message the European institutions send out , the citizens will wonder what they want Europe for .
Europe is the best instrument available to us in the 21st century , as the Lisbon Strategy stated from the outset , for making economic dynamism compatible with social cohesion and solidarity with future generations in terms of sustainability , with the elderly , with the environment and with future generations .
Finally , I would like to comment briefly on two aspects that have been raised in the debate .
Firstly , the coordination of economic policies .
If I remember rightly , the Messina Declaration back in 1955 - since we are now talking about the Berlin Declarations as if they are similar to the Messina Declaration - talked about the need to coordinate economic policies , but to that end , Mr García-Margallo , there is no need for you to give a humble Commissioner a mandate to become the next European Convention .
What we need to do is to discuss the stability and convergence programmes in depth , as the Commission and the Ecofin Council are currently doing .
What we need to do is to discuss the application of the national Lisbon reform programmes and the Community Lisbon Strategy in depth , as the Spring European Council is going to do , to discuss how to draw up a common energy policy that is compatible with an ambitious European environmental programme .
We need to carry on integrating financial services , to carry on improving our internal market , which , as some of you have said , still provides Europe with an excellent tool for confronting globalisation with optimism .
Furthermore - and this is more a job for national governments than for European directives , given the way things are - we need to improve the functioning of the labour markets , combining flexibility and security , because if there is no security for workers , there will be no flexibility in employment , and if there is no flexibility in companies , there will be no jobs for workers .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that that is the message that emerges from this debate , and the Commission is entirely in agreement .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate on these two reports is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - Within the framework of the recent socio-economic developments in the Union and even if unemployment figures seem to decrease , genuine and thorough attention should still be given to social cohesion in the Union as a whole .
As a matter of fact , despite the increase in employment data , poverty is still growing in the eurozone and part of the jobs that are created are unfortunately of a precarious nature .
Quality and secure employment should go along with economic growth through the achievement of the Lisbon Strategy objectives .
With the increasing disparities between the growth rates of the Member States and the relatively low growth rates of certain large Member States , significant efforts are needed in order to enable the Union to face the new challenges of an ageing population and growing competition as a result of globalisation .
The Bullmann report , by focusing on the role of SMEs , research and development , the environment and the energy sector , aims clearly at creating greater coherence in the policy-making processes and the economic governance of the Union while attempting to develop a genuinely effective and inclusive European labour market .
I therefore support the line adopted by the rapporteur .
Council Question Time
Madam President , I can answer the question as follows .
The objectives of the European System of Central Banks ( ESCB ) are laid down in Article 105 of the EC Treaty .
The main purpose of the provision is the maintenance of price stability .
Apart from this objective , however , the ESCB supports the general economic policies of the Community with a view to contributing to the achievement of the Community 's objectives pursuant to Article 2 EC .
The ESCB acts in accordance with the principles of a market economy and free competition .
This includes , in particular , the effective allocation of resources in compliance with the principles of the EC Treaty .
The provisions of Article 107 ( 5 ) EC may be amended by the Council acting by a qualified majority ; that is , acting either by a qualified majority on a recommendation from the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and after consulting the Commission or unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB .
In either case , the assent of the European Parliament is required .
Since , however , Article 105 EC mentioned at the beginning is not among the provisions listed in Article 107 ( 5 ) , it can be amended only using the general Treaty amendment procedure pursuant to Article 48 TEU .
The Council is not currently dealing with any proposals to this effect .

deputising for the author . - ( PT ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , how do you explain the fact that the European Central Bank is threatening to raise interest rates still further , after almost doubling them over the past year ? This has had serious detrimental consequences for the economy , for micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises and for families , especially in countries such as Portugal with the weakest economies .
Is this an example of the Community solidarity and economic and social cohesion that you are advocating ?
If so , why not amend the objectives and the modus operandi of the European Central Bank ?
When the European Central Bank was established , we laid down an important principle : that of the independence of the Central Bank .
Its job is to assess , on the basis of various indicators , how to regulate the money market at the end of the day , including in the matter of interest-rate increases .
This means that there is no way the Council or a Member State can influence monetary policy .
( LT ) The European Central Bank has its own stable inflation indicator , which is just nearing 2 % .
However , when the Maastricht criteria are applied , this is not taken into consideration .
Under the Maastricht criteria , the inflation indicator is calculated according to an entirely different methodology , which in no way correlates to the inflation indicator of the European Central Bank .
Would it not appear that these indicators should be coordinated , so that it would be clear to everyone just what exactly the stable inflation rate is ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) The EU-Africa Ministerial Conference held on 22-23 November 2006 in Tripoli was an important event , bringing together for the first time all the Member States of the EU and - I should like to underline this very clearly - all African countries , namely the members of the African Union plus Morocco , to discuss migration and development issues .
The purpose of the Conference was to strengthen cooperation in the spirit of partnership in these fields , which are of vital importance to both sides , and also to decide on joint action .
The Ministerial Conference closed by adopting a political declaration listing a series of fields in which action is needed , from development issues through to legal channels for immigration and the fight against illegal immigration .
In addition , an Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings , Especially Women and Children was adopted .
The implementation of these two instruments is expected to begin in the next few months .
( ES ) As you know , the Commission is currently making a series of proposals to regulate legal immigration , in agreement with countries of origin , particularly with the African countries .
I would like to know whether , within the context of this Tripoli Conference , the Council will be in a position to support the Commission 's proposal in this regard .
Mr Medina Ortega , a whole package of measures was discussed at the Conference in Tripoli , since we take the view that the migration problem cannot be solved by a single proposal or solution , and that a series of measures is needed .
The issue of legal migration was also discussed , including various points relating to the feasibility of addressing this aspect .
Equally , however , the Conference addressed the feasibility of Africans who live in Europe - in the Diaspora , as they see it - returning to their home countries for a given period to help with the development of education systems and with job creation , for example .
It also discussed the possibility of reducing the cost of money transfers to these countries .
For example , it could happen that , out of EUR 1 000 remitted to a country , only EUR 800 reaches the recipient since the charges are so high .
A whole package of measures was discussed with the countries of the African Union plus Morocco , therefore .
Furthermore , discussions are continuing on what possibilities the EU and the African countries could open up for temporary employment in Europe , for example .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , another of the objectives of this Conference was undoubtedly to discuss ways of reducing the causes of migration ; that is , to take the relevant preventive action .
There are good examples of where such action has been very effective , such as the Democratic Republic of Congo . There , European police units have provided assistance in the field of legal education and the military field , resulting in the development of the rule of law , with a view to achieving greater stability and enabling economic investment .
Are we prepared to extend this model to other African countries , too , since we know that migration flows come not only from North Africa but also from Central and Southern Africa , where there is instability ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Pirker , back in July , a Conference was held in Rabat : not one entitled ' EU-Africa ' , but one initiated by Morocco , Spain and France . This addressed the West African migration route .
It became clear at the Tripoli Conference , however , that there is a further African route , the East-West route , that should also be the focus of our attention .
To return to your specific question , however , there are indeed examples of successful action .
Another important thing that this Conference needed to make clear was that one way of tackling the causes is through ' best governance ' , by the Government choosing a form of governance that gives its citizens the chance to become involved in the generation and sale of raw materials and in education .
The obligation of the EU - the Member States - to offer assistance in the field of administration and of police and judiciary systems , where this is requested , was also emphasised .
A few years ago , in the course of various debates in Europe , ' best practices ' were discussed - that is , looking at what one 's neighbours are doing successfully - and this concept could certainly be transferred to certain African countries .
This kind of comprehensive approach was discussed , and it is now up to us to decide what action to take in the various fields - although I have to say that not all measures are needed in all cases , as some countries have already made very great progress thanks to domestic developments .
However , the EU did give assurances of its support and solidarity on this .
( LT ) Madam President , Malta is the country that has suffered the most as a result of illegal migration from Africa .
Several nations , mine among them , in the name of solidarity with Malta , have invited illegal migrants to come to our countries legalising their status at the same time .
Is it the view of the Minister that this will have a positive effect , or will it adversely affect the illegal migration situation ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) Demographic change in Europe concerns all the Member States of the EU .
A major feature is the low or even falling birth rates throughout Europe .
The changing demographic of nations necessitates comprehensive structural changes as part of a long-term strategy if the social cohesion of the generations and the competitiveness of the European economy are to be preserved .
In its Communication entitled ' The demographic future of Europe - from challenge to opportunity ' of 12 October of last year , the European Commission notes that Europe has never in its history experienced economic growth without population growth .
In this light , confronting the demographic challenge with the help of the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs takes on particular importance .
A priority for the German Council Presidency in this regard is enabling men and women wishing to start a family to do so with the help of family-friendly policies .
Experience in a number of Member States has shown that political measures are possible as well as necessary .
There should be a European ' alliance for the family ' to serve as a platform for Member States to exchange views and experiences . Its field of competence should include key tasks relating to the management of demographic change .
This alliance should also actively involve the social partners , civil society and representatives of science and industry .
The key objective of the alliance should be to offer support to the Member States through this ongoing exchange .
The intention is that , by the end of the German Presidency , not only will the political starting signal have been fired , but also the first tangible steps will have been taken towards the realisation of this alliance .
In so doing , the idea is to utilise existing resources and to tie in with existing structures ; the European Demographic Forums launched by the Commission in its Communication will be particularly important reference points in this regard .
The European Commission has already set up a high-level group on demography and the family .
The alliance will complement the comprehensive initiatives at European level for the promotion of gender equality , particularly the European Pact for Gender Equality and the Commission 's Roadmap for equality between men and women 2006-10 .
Only an improvement in the reconciliation of family and career will enable men and women to decide to have more children without giving up their careers .
The Member States must work together with the social partners and individual companies on reducing pay inequality and on supporting parents in the early stages of bringing up their child .
After all , an improvement in the reconciliation of family and career is another chief objective of the European Pact for Youth , with a view to giving young people access to vocational and social integration .
( EL ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your reply .
However , I would like you to tell me , as far as the Youth Pact is concerned , which particular actions you are thinking of applying .
Given that the policy on the family is a national policy and that , consequently , every Member State has its own policy , what common measures can you foresee in order to apply this intention of yours of helping families ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) In the course of our debate a little while ago , we discussed the employment issue and the fact that different countries have different structures and developments .
There are overlaps , where we see the same trends in different Member States .
Here , too , it is primarily a matter of taking stock and of seeing what specific answers can be found .
In my answer just now , I mentioned several fields that we wish to develop in order to bring this issue into even sharper focus , several of which concern young people .
In the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the following questions arise . How do we ensure that young people find a vocational training place or job ?
What prejudices are there in society , for example against young people from migrant backgrounds ?
These are all issues we hope to discuss at various conferences this year .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , if we want to see a sensible demographic trend in Europe , we must at any rate stop clinging to our ideologically skewed , hypocritical blinkers and dreaming of a model of life that existed perhaps 200 years ago .
Children are brought to life not only within traditional families , but also within other models of life .
We have an example of favourable demographic trends here in the EU - in France - as childcare places there are sufficient and affordable .
I should be interested to hear what the President-in-Office is planning in this connection .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Leichtfried , many thanks for your supplementary question .
Here , too , we can pick up the thread of previous discussions at Spring Summits , where the generation of investment in the Member States to enable the reconciliation of family and career has been mentioned .
A number of aspects should certainly be considered in this regard .
A key point , however , is that people have been singling out France and other Member States that are enjoying certain successes .
I hail from one country where the situation is unsatisfactory , but where attempts are being made to find a solution .
It is important not to offer a centralised solution , but instead to be guided by the principle of looking at neighbours who are doing things successfully and seeing how we can implement these accordingly at home .
That is the way to finally achieve an outcome different from the one we are seeing now .
( DE ) My question concerns the common measures that could help us .
What does the President-in-Office think of the suggestion that the German Presidency - together with the European Commission , of course - select and recommend the best examples in Europe ?
He has mentioned France , but there are other good examples , too .
This would be of particular value to the new Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I shall gladly take up that suggestion again .
It is a valuable idea : rather than keeping quiet , as it were , about the positive developments in the EU , the things that have had positive results , we should find out whether they might also work in our own country on account of our similar structures .
I shall be happy to take this idea away with me and present it to my country 's Minister , Mrs von der Leyen , who is of course the current Council President responsible for family affairs , women , youth and senior citizens .
Minister , one problem is that evictions and segregation are often condoned or even instigated by local or regional government , and central governments have not been effective in challenging them .
Will the Presidency encourage all Member States to do so ?
Secondly , I am not really happy with your reference to subsidiarity .
Anti-discrimination legislation is not sufficient to tackle systemic discrimination .
There needs to be positive action and proactive measures .
In some Member States , public authorities have a positive duty to promote equality .
Surely you can encourage all Member States to do that through a process of peer review .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Baroness Ludford , on the subject of subsidiarity , Member States do indeed bear responsibility .
The large number of progress reports drawn up in the course of the accession of the Eastern European Member States included an examination of the minorities issue from many angles , particularly concerning all aspects of the situation of the Roma .
It is always important to bear that in mind .
On the other hand , there is also scope for establishing programmes to promote the integration of the Roma population , including with the involvement of the World Bank .
I believe that this is an issue that cannot be solved by the respective Member States alone , and that the integration of these sections of the population requires assistance from others .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , I have a question on this subject .
We agree that non-discrimination is a question of time .
In my home country , authorities operating not at national but at lower level are currently endeavouring to impose bans on begging , for example .
They believe that this will offer a solution to the occurrence of at least some phenomena .
In my view , this is the wrong approach .
What is the Council 's opinion ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) The EU emissions trading scheme is one of the most important policy instruments at the disposal of the European Community and its Member States for achieving their Kyoto objectives in the most cost-effective way .
As the honourable Member will be aware , Directive 2003 / 87 / EC obliges Member States to publish their national allocation plans .
They have to notify these to the Commission and to the other Member States at least 18 months before the beginning of the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol , namely 2008-2012 .
The Commission has evaluated the Member States ' national allocation plans .
The Presidency will continue reviewing this EU emissions trading scheme on the basis of the Commission Communication , which identifies the priority issues .
The Presidency will also follow up the proposal to bring aviation into this scheme .
The Presidency is working towards ensuring that the emissions trading scheme makes the expected contribution to the achievement of the Kyoto objectives , and is working to improve and extend this EU scheme with a view to establishing a global carbon market that leads to the emission reductions needed to tackle climate change .
No one doubts the Council 's determination on the question of the emissions trading scheme .
No one doubts the good news that we have heard recently .
The question that EU citizens are asking , though , is what is the incentive mechanism for really making this work ?
This is an enormous project , and what during the German Presidency would be the scope for further incentives to encourage Member States to hit the targets and indeed oblige them to meet these targets , now that European Union citizens truly believe that something is on the move here and there is something very positive ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Moraes , this instrument is in practical use , so to speak , and I agree with you that there is still room for improvement in the scheme 's efficiency and that incentives should perhaps also be used to manage it .
The Presidency will take care of this , too .
As the honourable Member is aware , however , this is always a long-term process - it will not be possible to solve this , either , at the flick of a switch .
The Presidency will see to this issue , however .
I have one brief question .
The Commission came up with its proposal on energy and climate change a few weeks ago .
In that proposal the level of carbon emissions for cars was increased from 120g / km to 130g / km .
Does the Presidency think that this helps or hinders the issue of emissions ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) As the honourable Member knows , there has been a Commission proposal .
This proposal is now being examined and discussed accordingly in the Member States , and responses will be presented . I am sure that , when the energy action plan is discussed in spring , an acceptable solution will be found that involves the various modes of transport and emitting sources concerned .
The emissions trading scheme is clearly good as far as it goes , and I was pleased to hear the President-in-Office 's commitment to try and expand it to include aviation .
However , does he accept that the climate - no pun intended - is now right for negotiating outside the European Union with countries such as the United States to make this a truly global trading scheme , which would of course have a much bigger impact on the environment ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) The Presidency would like to answer Mr Davis 's question with reference to its report on the implementation of its overall policy on transparency and the assessment of its impact on the effectiveness of the Council 's work - I am afraid it is a very long title - that the Presidency presented to the Council on 11 December 2006 .
In addition to a preliminary assessment of the impact of the rising number of public debates and deliberations on the effectiveness of the Council 's work , the report contains data on the number of visits to the new Council video streaming website and to the website providing access to Council documents relating to public deliberations or debates .
In the first four-and-a-half months of the new transparency measures alone , over 28 000 visits to these new features of the Council website were recorded .
These figures document the positive response of the public and the media to the new transparency measures .
The webcast and the online availability of documents relating to public sessions have thus considerably improved opportunities for following the debates and decision-making processes in the Council .
The Council is constantly striving to improve these features .
Concerning the impact of these transparency measures on the effectiveness of the Council 's work , it should be borne in mind that , at the time of the initial evaluation , which the European Council had called for in June 2006 , the new rules had been in operation for less than six months , including the month of August .
This means that it was , and still is , too early to issue a definitive evaluation .
deputising for the author . - Madam President , I too am delighted to be able to address you as such .
I am absolutely delighted to hear that there were 28 000 visits recorded and that people can follow debates on the net .
We talk a lot about democracy and plan D for dialogue and this is an opportunity for citizens to see it in action .
I believe this is a real gesture towards greater transparency .
But you did say that the Council is working hard to improve this and what I want to know is , are you satisfied it is working successfully ?
Do you have any plans to promote it or advertise it to a wider audience ?
And do you have any specific ideas on the improvements that you might make , even though it is only a short time in action ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) As I have already explained , this has been in operation for only a few months , which is not enough time to enable a final analysis at this stage .
I do believe , however , that the figures indicate the interest there has been .
We have talked a good deal about transparency and communicating European policy today , and also about taking decisions close to the citizen .
It remains the ongoing task of many actors in the EU to seek ways of making these policies more transparent .
After a while , when we have reliable data at our disposal , we shall consider where further improvements can be made , and how to attract a broader population of users .
I would appeal for a little patience until we have more reliable figures .
President-in-Office , as a former civil servant , having taken many notes in Council meetings , I know that those meetings are not necessarily the most exciting events in the world and , therefore , 28 000 viewers - hmm , I kind of understand !
I should like to make a practical proposal and test you on it .
Instead of sitting in a circle in the Council with the Permanent Representative next to you , why not sit in a hemicycle with no assistance whatsoever ?
Perhaps this would make the debate more interesting and you would get a few more hits on the internet site .
What do you think ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Posselt , my answer to your question is as follows .
Martti Ahtisaari 's endeavours have the unqualified support of the EU .
The strategic objective in this regard is still to achieve a lasting settlement for Kosovo quickly without endangering democracy in Serbia or the stability of the region as a whole .
The EU is currently working on plans for three projects .
These are the international civilian mission ( ICM ) , a rule of law mission and programmes for continuing the promotion of economic development and furthering Kosovo 's prospects of EU membership .
In all three cases , the plans are being made in close cooperation with the local authorities and other international actors , particularly the United States and NATO .
The team making preparations for the international civilian mission started work in Priština on 9 October 2006 .
It has the twofold task of planning the structure and staffing of the mission and determining its infrastructure requirements and , together with UNMIK and the competent Kosovo authorities , preparing the possible transfer of competences to both the ICM and the local authorities .
Since May 2006 , a Planning Team has been in Kosovo to prepare a possible rule of law mission within the framework of the European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) .
The planned mission is intended to have a general role in teaching , observing and advising in matters of the rule of law .
In addition , it would have executive powers in some fields relating to the police , the judiciary and customs .
The precise scope of its mandate will have to be established after the resolution of the status issue .
The mission , which would be introduced following the conclusion of the status process and a transitional period where it worked jointly with UNMIK , would be the largest civilian ESDP mission to date .
A successful conclusion of the status process , which is being led by Mr Ahtisaari , is essential not only to give the people of Kosovo clear prospects , but also for stability in the whole region .
The conclusion of this process represents the end point in the dissolution of the former Yugoslavia .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , many thanks for that very good , precise reply .
The longer the settlement of the status issue is delayed , the greater the risk of instability in Kosovo - and this , in turn , could be used to effect the partition of Kosovo after all , even through the back door .
My question is a specific one : could a more intensive international and EU presence - in terms of both civilian and military forces - perhaps be envisaged for , say , potential crisis regions such as Mitrovica ; one far exceeding the present dimensions and along the lines of what was seen in Vukovar ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) Mr Posselt , you speak of delays and the potential risks these entail .
It is very important that we have stated that a solution is needed - and the General Affairs and External Relations Council discussed this very intensively on Monday .
There is nothing in the Council Conclusions to indicate that things are being put off indefinitely .
On the contrary , we have used the opinions voiced - including on the occasion of the EU Troika meeting in Belgrade - as an opportunity to say that a new parliament is indeed emerging from the democratic forces , that a new government will also be formed ; and that we have to give these a while longer to enable the appointment of the new negotiating team so that it can join the negotiations .
The Council has been conscious that we cannot let the whole process start again from scratch , however , as the timing is indeed important if we are to avoid the instability you mention .
For this reason , I do not wish to speculate at this time on other things that may or may not happen .
Minister , you say that EU Foreign Ministers want to avoid indefinite delay , but there is some concern that the Ahtisaari status mission risks being somewhat drawn out .
Do not last Saturday 's regrettable deaths at a demonstration attended by , we understand , 3 000 people - and I would say ' only ' 3 000 people - call into question the expertise and competence of the policing of demonstrations and make rather urgent a better management of this situation so that things do not get out of control ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I should like to reiterate once more that we are currently at a very important stage of the status process .
Account must always be taken of developments in Serbia , too , however .
The tight deadline that has now been set is important to enable the process to continue .
As we know , it is not the EU alone that decides ; the Special Representative of the Secretary-General must of course present proposals to the United Nations to enable the necessary steps to be taken .
( NL ) Madam President , Mr Gloser , I think that the business of giving Kosovo de facto independence will prove to be one of the international community 's biggest challenges in the next couple of months , and one in which the European Union will need to play an important role .
You yourself talked about the international civil mission , the civil branch of the European defence and security policy .
The figures I hear being bandied around suggest that 71 officials will be attached to the international civil mission and some one thousand more to the European Union to work on European defence and security policy .
Have you any idea how much this translates into in budget terms ?
Has the Council put any arrangements in place in order to prepare for a possible budget change ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) The Council attaches very great importance to the annual audit and Statement of Assurance of the Court of Auditors and has repeatedly affirmed its unwavering support for sound financial management in the EU .
Following a detailed examination of the annual report of the European Court of Auditors by the appropriate Council bodies , the Council sends Parliament a recommendation on discharge pursuant to Article 276 ( 1 ) of the EC Treaty for each financial year .
This recommendation on discharge contains the extensive conclusions of the Council on the Court of Auditors ' annual report , in which the Council addresses , in detail , the observations of the Court of Auditors and the Commission 's opinions on these .
The conclusions also contain recommendations to the Commission and the Member States for eliminating any shortcomings or weaknesses discovered .
These Council conclusions are debated by Parliament at the same time as the Court of Auditors ' annual report as part of the discharge procedure .
It does not seem appropriate to introduce another Council report - which would of necessity have largely the same content - in addition to these detailed conclusions .
( DE ) Please allow me to ask a question .
The problem with the Statement of Assurance lies in its shared management .
A report such as this could be a solution enabling a positive Statement of Assurance for the shared management .
Why is the Council not prepared to introduce one ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I can give a fairly short answer to this . There is no majority support for such a change among the Member States .
Mr President-in-Office , do you agree that there does need to be an assumption of responsibility by Member States ?
Eighty percent of European Union spending is carried out on its behalf by national governments and it is there that most of the errors picked up every year by the Court of Auditors are found - fortunately neither fraud nor mismanagement - but it is there that they are found , and , until the Member States take their responsibility , we are likely to face the same problem year after year , doing enormous damage to the image of the European Union .
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) This issue is not a new one and is being addressed by many experts .
I should like to emphasise once more , however , that , where there is budgetary control , this is not necessarily a matter of a request by the Court of Auditors , but rather of the following question . How can we make the rules , including budgetary rules , more efficient , more transparent , more uniform , so that the necessary control can be achieved ?
There is not the necessary majority support for a change among the Member States .
( NL ) Madam President , Mr Gloser , you have said on two occasions that this regulation has been unable to achieve a majority vote in the Council .
Can you be frank enough to say which Member States are prepared to adopt a regulation of this kind and which are not ?
I think that this could make for considerable democratic pressure on the Member States that are not prepared to do this and do not wish to be called to account for the funds they spend .
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I do not actually know at the moment which Member States we are talking about .
I can assure the honourable Member , however , that it is the vast majority .
There is no point in cherry-picking at this time .
Other proposals have been put forward , however , including by the Commission , such as the creation of an integrated control framework .
The national declaration of assurance is also excluded here , however .
There are many other elements , including in the context of personal responsibility , that could help ensure that budgetary control is exercised properly at the end of the day .
In addition , irrespective of the question of political will , the EC Treaty does not provide for the field mentioned by the honourable Member . I do believe , however , that the other possibilities I have just mentioned for simplifying procedures represent key elements .
Thank you , President-in-Office .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.00 and resumed at 21.00 )

Situation in Darfur ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Darfur .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , we are confronted with a dramatic humanitarian , security and political problem in Darfur today .
The situation on the ground is deteriorating by the day .
The number of civilians affected by the conflict has risen to almost four million since 2003 .
Throughout 2006 we saw an increase in the number of violent deaths in Darfur .
Attacks on humanitarian aid agencies also significantly increased and this has prompted some organisations to evacuate .
Continued violations of the ceasefire by both the Sudanese Government and the rebel factions deepen insecurity and instability .
Most recently , on Monday , Sudanese military forces bombarded Cariari and Bahai , two villages in north Darfur close to the Chad-Sudan border .
The African Union Mission to Sudan - established in 2004 to help prevent further conflict - continues to face resource constraints .
Despite its best efforts , it had some difficulty in providing effective protection to civilians or carrying out additional duties associated with the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement .
Politically , the situation is complicated by splits and regrouping among the non-signatory rebel movements as well as the Government 's refusal to consider reopening the deadlocked Peace Agreement .
Darfur is not a simple issue .
The commitment of the European Union to alleviating such a dramatic situation has been reiterated on several occasions , most recently at the European Council last December , at the Council on 22 January and , just two days ago , through the General Affairs Council conclusions on Sudan of 12 February .
We must work to ensure the protection of non-combatants as well as of humanitarian aid workers .
We must seek the full implementation of the UN-AU three phase plan for Darfur , this being the most effective means at our disposal to support the African Union mission in Sudan and to protect civilians .
But our overriding objective in Darfur must be to achieve a durable peace through a political settlement agreed by all parties voluntarily and then implemented .
The strategy of Khartoum to negotiate individually with each rebel leader to buy their support will not create a cohesive and lasting peace .
The Council of the EU , in its latest conclusions on Sudan , has emphasised the need for an inclusive political process and confirmed its support for the joint initiative of the African Union and UN special envoys to start negotiations between the parties as soon as possible .
On several occasions and in various fora , the Commission has stressed the need for a political solution in Darfur based on the existing peace agreement and insisted that there is no military solution to the crisis .
In this context , the European Commission has strongly backed the African Union in the search for a political settlement in Darfur .
The Commission has been providing continued support to the African Union in political and financial terms .
With cofinancing from Belgium , the Commission stands behind any and all efforts to revive the peace agreement .
The European Commission has provided one and a half billion euros specifically for the Darfur crisis , covering security , humanitarian needs and peace efforts for Darfur .
The aim is to create the conditions to bring the non-signatory parties of the Darfur Peace Agreement back to the negotiating table and to start effective implementation of the Agreement .
Pending a lasting settlement , the Commission is also active in the political démarche intended to obtain the agreement of the Khartoum Government to a joint AU-UN force capable of providing effective protection of civilians .
In the margins of the African Union Summit on 28 January , Commissioner Michel met with the Sudanese President , Mr al-Bashir , as well as with the UN Secretary-General Mr Ban Ki-Moon .
The Commissioner was also in Ethiopia and in Eritrea where the Darfur issue was raised .
Just yesterday , the Darfur issue was discussed in Washington in a meeting between Commissioner Michel and the US Secretary of State , Condoleezza Rice .
This Parliament is right to debate the Darfur Peace Agreement and the critical situation in Darfur .
Yet we must not take the Comprehensive Peace Agreement for granted .
EU Heads of Mission in Khartoum report that this peace agreement , made in 2005 with the south , is in trouble .
After 20 years of civil war the comprehensive peace agreement may be the last chance for the Khartoum regime to show that the federal power-sharing form of government can work for this vast country .
If the Comprehensive Peace Agreement cannot work , then nor can the Darfur Peace Agreement .
It is important , I think , that the critical situation in Darfur does not divert our attention , or indeed the attention of the Sudanese regime , from the very real threat to the whole sub-region if both the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur Peace Agreement are not pursued with more vigour .
This is a message that the Commission will strive to communicate in the weeks ahead .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Council released its conclusions on Sudan on Monday , so it is appropriate that Parliament also speaks out strongly this week , further highlighting the humanitarian crisis and international scandal that is Darfur .
We are attempting to raise the political temperature on this issue to increase the pressure on those who can , if the will exists , make things happen on the ground to protect people .
We all know the figures and the scale of the humanitarian consequences of insufficient action by the international community .
It is estimated that up to 400 000 people have been killed and more than two and a half million people displaced or made homeless in the last three years due to conflict .
NGOs currently provide humanitarian relief for up to four million people .
That is half of Darfur 's entire population .
In recent months there have been repeated attacks on humanitarian convoys and twelve aid workers have been killed in Darfur in the last six months .
So NGOs are pulling their people out of Darfur while indiscriminate attacks continue on civilians .
So what can we do ?
The main thrust of this resolution is to call on the UN to set a clear date for deployment of the planned UN-supported peacekeeping force , or hybrid force , into Darfur , even in the absence of agreement with the Sudanese Government , in order to secure humanitarian aid corridors to an increasingly isolated population in the region .
We are calling for this in the context of the UN 's responsibility to protect , based on the failure of the Sudanese Government to protect its own population from war crimes and crimes against humanity , and a failure to provide humanitarian assistance to the population .
President al-Bashir continues to oppose Phase 3 of the present UN Plan which allows the AU mission to be bolstered by more than 20 000 UN peacekeeping troops .
The point is , diplomacy is failing .
People are dying in huge numbers and at some point the international community is obliged to act more firmly .
That is why the setting of a clear date for the deployment of troops will focus the attention on a tight timescale to find a diplomatic solution to get peacekeepers on the ground in Darfur .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Darfur has been suffering under a regime of terror for four years now .
Hundreds of thousands of people there have lost their lives , two million have lost their homes , and rape , murder and pillaging are daily occurrences there .
It is nearly impossible to really grasp the extent of this suffering .
Meanwhile , despite all the fine agreements , human rights violations get increasingly out of hand .
Over the past few months , the situation has hit an all-time low for both the people and aid workers .
Despite the Peace Agreement concluded in early January , large parts of North Darfur were deliberately bombarded recently by the Sudanese air force .
Even the aid workers are no longer safe from violence , aid organisations increasingly feel it .
Last month , 15 UN organisations , including UNICEF , reported that they were no longer able to keep on providing aid to the people in Darfur in an adequate manner .
Two weeks ago , the aid organisation Médicins du Monde was the first to withdraw , and Oxfam and CARE International are at risk of having to follow suit , even though three and a half million Darfuris rely on humanitarian aid .
The Council is not present today .
How long do we intend to perpetuate this untenable situation ?
The UN may be speaking with force in its resolution , but it has not done much in the way of action .
The peace force that was promised two months ago in Addis Ababa produced some 100 troops and very little else .
The UN Security Council authorised sanctions against four major perpetrators of atrocities , but nothing happened .
It is unacceptable for European Member States to be able to impose sanctions on war criminals in countries such as Belarus , Congo , Cote d 'Ivoire , North Korea , Burma and Zimbabwe and to fail to do so in Darfur , where the Council is neglecting its humanitarian duty .
The international community should no longer stand by helplessly while millions of innocent people are being driven away from their homes , murdered and raped .
Europe should take the lead and take urgent action in order to stop the humanitarian crisis in Darfur in its tracks .
The Sudanese Government will be prepared to conclude real peace agreements and adhere to them only if its own interests are affected , for the only language it understands is its own , that of the fist .
In southern Sudan , an oil boycott proved effective , and I would urge Members belonging to the other political parties to apply the same tactics if necessary .
I should like to ask the Council whether it is prepared , without delay , to declare sanctions against anyone who violates the ceasefire or who attacks citizens , peace keepers or aid workers .
Would it be prepared to do everything necessary to stop them getting away with it and , once and for all , to enforce and implement the sanctions agreed upon in the Security Council ?
Is it prepared to enforce the presence of the hybrid peace force of African Union soldiers and blue helmets ?
Would it , finally , be prepared to apply economic sanctions , including the introduction of an oil embargo ?
We did not intervene when the genocide in Rwanda took place , and watched helplessly as the men in Srebrenica met their fate , even though the UN was set up in 1945 in order to reinforce our promise of ' never again ' .
We should not leave the powerless to their fate .
I hope that Europe wants to make a difference .
I am , above all , addressing the Council , which is absent , and the Commissioner , whom I would like to urge to take action .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I speak on behalf of my colleague , Mr Morillon .

I must begin by highlighting the entirely surreal nature of our meeting this evening .
There are around ten of us Members present .
Commissioner , thank you for being here .
I know the reasons for the absence of Mr Michel , whom you are representing .
However , the most notable absentee is the Council , and in the meantime , I am afraid to say , people continue to die in Darfur .
I would remind you , as a numbers man , Mr Almunia , that fourteen or fifteen people die every hour in Darfur .
It was therefore high time we worried about a situation that no one believes is simple .
Yet , must we continue making fools of ourselves ?
This resolution will be the fifth that we have adopted over many months on Darfur : we can see the extent to which they undermine the officials , not least the Sudanese officials received this evening in Paris .
I believe that we could actually finally assume our responsibilities .
I must alert you , Commissioner , to paragraphs 2 and 3 of this resolution .
As my fellow Member , Mr Coveney , pointed out , paragraph 2 emphasises the need for a precise date to be set by the UN .
However , paragraph 3 , Commissioner , is an appeal launched at the European Union , with the aim of having it assume its responsibilities .
Its assuming its responsibilities will surely mean something in the future .
If not , one may wonder about the purpose of the European Union and of the values that we seek to uphold , faced with what is essentially an endless emergency humanitarian situation , something that no one denies .
My colleagues have nominated me as permanent rapporteur for humanitarian action .
But what should I report on ?
The systematic withdrawal of all the NGOs , which are no longer allowed to work , the fourteen people who have been killed and the deaths day in , day out of people who have been abandoned and who , in addition to having been displaced , have lost all hope .

Commissioner , please speak with the Commission on our behalf ; we will take care of the Council , politically , because , if we listened to them , we would have to wait a month before discussing this issue .
This message needs to be passed on : one day , the law , not to mention the duty to interfere , will be required , when it is clear that men and women are being abused to this extent .

Mr President , I too should like to highlight the discrepancy between the seriousness of the issue being dealt with and this practically deserted Chamber , and that is without mentioning the absence of the Council ; while the Commission is at least represented , our action in relation to this matter is certainly not , in any event , equal to the challenges .
As I was saying , the Council is absent , but when one reads its conclusions of 12 February , that is to say , those written exactly two days ago , its absence does not change a great deal anyway .
I shall read and quote what is written in these conclusions :
' The Council remains gravely concerned about the security situation in Darfur ' - to say the least - ' and condemns continued ceasefire violations by all parties . '
( FR ) That is the kind of particularly forceful sentence that the Council is capable of producing after months and months of resolutions , decisions and diplomatic meetings , when the situation is more disastrous now than it ever has been .
We therefore clearly believe that a change of level is required and , indeed , that more pressure must be exerted with regard to this unacceptable situation .
What about the punishments that were decided on for the Sudanese leaders , and for all these war criminals ?
What is the European Union doing with regard to these punishments ?
It seems to me , in any case , that the European Union has a number of options available to it to freeze financial resources so as to prevent all these people from moving freely about our territory .
Ways of exerting pressure do exist .
What are we doing with regard to United Nations Resolution 1706 , which has the backing of the European Union ?
What initiatives have been taken by the European Commission and the Council to put pressure on all those responsible for this situation ?
What credibility do we have today to issue a multitude of texts that , at least on the part of the Council , and even of the Commission , merely restate our grave concerns regarding this situation ?
Only a very short time ago , the Chinese President , Hu Jintao , visited several African countries and , more specifically , Sudan .
What is the Union 's position faced with this situation , with the new and emerging role of China 's leaders ? Faced , too , with the importance of access to raw materials , and to oil in particular ?
Thus , when one sees the inertia , the powerlessness , of the European institutions on this issue , what conclusions must be drawn ?
Does this mean that , if priority is to be given to accessing raw materials or oil , which in reality is gradually dwindling , and if it is to be given to the large markets represented by countries such as China , the values of human rights and the duty that we actually have to protect civilian populations need to be put on the back burner ?
Is that what this means ?
I believe that it would be absolutely tragic for the European Union to come to that .
The fact is that these issues are being raised on a daily basis , and we constantly find ourselves incapable and powerless in the face of this tragic situation .
It is therefore high time a formal sitting bringing together the Council , the Commission and Parliament was organised - and organised very soon - on this issue , in Brussels or Strasbourg , so that the necessary decisions can finally be taken .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can identify with this joint resolution about the international blot - and I should like to underline ' this international blot ' - being Darfur , despite a few of the comments that have been made .
I should like to single out a few elements if I may .
In recital C , it is stated that the conflict in Darfur is increasingly destabilising the Central African region .
Less than a week ago , an analysis was published in my home country , the Netherlands , about this very disruptive situation under the telling heading ' The black hole ' .
Indeed , there is a black hole at the heart of Africa , rudderless , violent and with a stream of refugees who are headed in all directions .
One immediate risk is that the conflict in Darfur , which is racist in that nomads of Arab origin are driving out and killing African farmers , will move to Chad and take the notorious and murderous Janjaweed militia with it .
Various paragraphs in the joint resolution urge the United Nations finally to face up to its responsibilities in Darfur .
Whilst I can fully endorse this parliamentary cry for help , I have to confess at the same time that I am extremely sceptical as to whether this distress signal will actually be heard in the UN Headquarters in New York .
Earlier this week , Jan Pronk , the former UN envoy to Sudan , gave a frank and honest interview to the Sudan Tribune .
He asserted , verbatim , that he accused New York of leaving its own mission in the lurch and , instead , of pandering to the elite in power in Khartoum .
It is awful - he said - if you send thousands of people to Sudan and then leave them to their own devices .
What we should , in any case , be doing is to ensure that Mr Pronk 's indictment does not fall on deaf ears , but reaches our governments , the European Council and the UN Security Council , and results in action .
I also deem as completely appropriate the appeal of this House to the People 's Republic of China to put its not insignificant political and economic weight into the balance in order to try to get the Sudanese leadership to actually enforce existing peace agreements on Khartoum .
Only a constructive international stance such as this one is in keeping with Peking 's adage of harmonious external relations .
Moreover , that is also what we can expect of a strategic partner as a responsible member of the UN Security Council .
After all , as rapporteur for EU / China relations , I constantly reminded my esteemed Chinese interlocutors of this elementary constructive international role .
Finally , I would like to back the only amendment to the joint resolution - that tabled by Mrs Gomes - and back it all the way .
Sanctions against this shameless Sudanese regime should definitely involve an oil embargo , as some sort of acid test to check whether the United Nations , given the long suffering of the people in Darfur , still abides by its own political principles .
( DE ) Mr President , the situation in Darfur remains shocking .
The response of the international community has been wholly inadequate .
The previous speakers have described the situation adequately : there is no improvement in sight for the people there .
Some necessary resolutions have been passed , such as United Nations Security Council Resolution 1706 , but their implementation ultimately fails on account of the Government in Khartoum , most of whose leaders are no doubt listed in the files of the International Criminal Court - which launched an investigation into crimes in Darfur as early as June 2005 .
We have a situation where the United Nations has to take action , in accordance with its responsibility for protecting human beings , since the Government of Sudan has not been protecting the people of Darfur against war crimes and crimes against humanity , nor has it lent them any assistance .
For this reason , Parliament calls on the United Nations to set a date for the deployment of a UN peacekeeping force pursuant to Article 7 of the Charter of the United Nations , even if this has not been approved by the Khartoum regime .
We call on the Council and the Commission to do everything in their power to put an end to this sustained humanitarian disaster .
Concrete action can be launched for the short term without great expense .
The EU should impose personal sanctions on representatives of the regime unilaterally rather than waiting for the rest of the international community .
I have always been in favour of this as a means of preventing family members going on shopping trips to Europe .
The Darfur regime has thus far been ignoring the no-fly zone imposed by Security Council Resolution 1591 , and is continuing to bomb villages in Darfur .
We call for the use of capabilities available in the region to enforce this no-fly zone .
After all , we know which Member States have aircraft based in the region - not to say the immediate vicinity .
Why are these not being used in the services of the UN ?
The EU must agree to this , at least .
We should also give those in power in Khartoum to understand that they should not rely overly on forces outside Africa .
The Sudanese Government is skating on very thin ice , and should not exhaust African solidarity .
Two warning shots have already been fired .
The ACP Summit in Khartoum was the summit attended by the fewest Heads of State or Government - a clear sign of displeasure .
The fact that the AU Summit opted for President Kufuor instead of the Sudanese President was a further clear indication of disapproval .
Mr President , as others have said , as General al-Bashir continues to prevaricate on the deployment of an AU-UN hybrid force in Darfur , we see the humanitarian crisis getting worse .
We see the number of internally displaced people increasing . The ceasefire has collapsed .
The international community has and is continuing to fail to fulfil its responsibility to protect innocent civilians in Darfur .
This means that the European Union must act urgently to impose its own targeted and phased smart sanctions .
We do not have to wait for the UN Security Council to agree on essential new measures - as others have suggested - on an arms embargo covering all of Sudan , on asset-freezing of the wealthy people of Sudan , on travel bans and on consideration of an oil embargo .
Clearly , revenue flows to the south would need to be protected if we impose an oil embargo , and consideration would perhaps need to be given to compensating the south Sudanese for lost oil revenue .
But the least we can do is to put a bar on investments , on technical equipment and on expertise .
I also believe that there should be serious consideration of sports sanctions against Sudan , especially consideration of excluding Sudan from the 2010 World Cup .
This means that Europe has to put pressure on FIFA .
The EU position , frankly , is weak and untenable .
There is too much emphasis on carrots and not enough on sticks .
The German Presidency must take a lead and insist on a unified position from Member States .
Commissioner , you have described the position , and in the Council we hear the fine words , but nothing happens .
The question is : how does Europe put pressure on Khartoum ?
There must be an urgent and detailed investigation of the personal finances of wealthy individuals in Sudan .
We have to prepare the arguments against those who claim that this would push Sudan closer towards Chinese business interests .
The truth is , frankly , that nothing is currently influencing Sudan .
It is virtually impossible to influence them , and so , if we remain supine , then we maintain the position where they can be as brutal as they like and Europe will continue to do nothing .
Millions of people in Darfur are paying for European broken promises and totally worthless commitments .
Khartoum knows that Europe is all bark and no bite and that is why today we are calling for new , strong , economic , legal and military measures .
Public condemnation is not enough .
We want solutions which reflect the tragedy .
Europe is shamefully weak and I have to say finally that if Darfur was , for example , Lebanon , then real sanctions would be getting a lot more discussion time in the Council , and President Barroso in the Commission and you , Commissioner , would put pressure on the Council to do more .
Mr President , the humanitarian crisis in Darfur is on a scale which is difficult to comprehend .
Two and a half million people have had to flee their homes .
That is the equivalent of the entire population of north-east England .
The death toll among these displaced people is high and it would be higher by far if it were not for the humanitarian efforts on the ground .
But even humanitarian workers cannot operate on a battlefield and unless there is a lessening of hostilities in Darfur it can be expected that more of them will be evacuated .
The entire fragile , overstretched humanitarian effort in Darfur could very easily collapse , precipitating hunger and disease in the camps and a rocketing death toll .
That is why the stabilising influence of an international peace force is so urgently required .
It is also necessary in order to provide calmer conditions in which a political process can get under way , involving all parties and including local low-key intercommunity dialogue as well as high-level , high-profile political negotiation .
( PT ) It is certainly significant and worrying that the German Presidency is not here today to represent the Council .
This says a great deal about levels of genuine interest and commitment in the new relationship with Africa and in working for development in Africa .
Three years ago , I was in Darfur with other MEPs who have spoken or who are about to speak . Since then , the situation has worsened , as Mr Almunia said .
The Al-Bashir Government is toying with the international community , with the Security Council , with the European Union and with the African Union , and the EU makes fine statements and does nothing .
The time has come for the EU to take action and to exercise its responsibility to protect people .
The time has come to impose a no-fly-zone from Chad .
The EU can do this , alongside African countries with which it enjoys good relations , and can have an effect on the ground .
The time has come , among other things , to impose smart , phased sanctions , travel bans , visa restrictions , and the freezing of assets in banks and elsewhere , and to stop treating Omar Al-Bashir and the members of his government as responsible , respectable leaders .
The time has come to impose an effective arms embargo .
The time has come to impose other kinds of trade embargo and in particular an oil embargo and on this issue , Mr President , the EU must speak frankly with China , because China as we know is very much responsible for the Al-Bashir Government 's attitude .
It is a pity that Europe waits for the United States , as Mr Almunia suggested , albeit in a roundabout way , because the EU should take action independently on this issue .
Let us take a look at what is happening not just in Darfur but throughout Sudan and the Horn of Africa .
The EU cannot be dependent on the worldview and disastrous policies of the US in respect of the Horn of Africa , as we have seen in Ethiopia , Eritrea and Somalia .
The time has come for the EU to take action and I align myself with those MEPs who are calling on the Council and the President of the Commission to ensure that the EU does not wait any longer , and exerts the influence it actually has in Khartoum and in Africa to change the situation and to protect the people dying in Darfur .
Otherwise , three years hence I along with other MEPs will be joining Mr Almunia or some other Commissioner in bemoaning the fact that the situation has become worse and worse .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission shares the main concerns that you have expressed in this debate tonight .
We find the initiative of this debate particularly useful , given the situation and in particular given the latest developments in the region .
In our view , even with this extremely difficult situation , a negotiated way out of the crisis in Darfur is the most desirable alternative and the option most likely to be successful .
That being said , the Council already stated last Monday that it is ready to consider further measures , notably in the UN framework .
A lasting peace is Darfur can only be political and will require all parties to support the Darfur Peace Agreement and renounce the military option .
The Commission remains strongly committed to alleviating the plight of the three million civilian people affected by this terrible crisis .
As you all know , the Commission , and in particular my colleague Louis Michel - who cannot be here today because he is in Washington , discussing , among other things , this particular issue - is following the situation very closely and the Commission will not hesitate to call on all parties to respect human rights and international law as well as to remove all obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid .
To wind up the debate , I have received six motions for resolutionspursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) We are proud that the very fact that , as Europeans , we are compelled to condemn manifest evil in whichever part of our world it may affect human beings .
What is happening in Darfur is a manifest evil .
Accordingly , we are bound to express our opposition to those who perpetrate such evils .
Is it enough for us to simply express views that stem from a moral imperative and then rest in the knowledge of a job well done ?
Obviously not .
We cannot rest as long as people continue to suffer .
We can only rest when we have put a stop to the evil .
Therefore , we are not entitled to rest simply because we have right on our side , but only when effective action has been taken .
We shall only be able to rest and be content when our words and actions have put a stop to the activities of those who kill , supply weapons and ideology , as well as those who permit , incite and inflict cruelty .
We will only be able to walk with our heads held high when our vision of a moral order becomes reality .
A person who did not commit a sin simply because he or she was not tempted to do so cannot be accused of sinning .
By the same token , one cannot praise a person who could have taken action to stem evil , but who was content to simply point it out .
We do not lack information about Darfur .
We do not lack experience or an ethical and political assessment of events .
What we are lack is effectiveness and , therefore , that is what we should focus on .
in writing . - ( FR ) Ever since the hostilities were launched in February 2003 , Darfur , one of the poorest regions in Sudan , has been the scene of an unprecedented humanitarian crisis .
There have been four years of conflict and suffering for the people of Darfur , and four resolutions by our Parliament to show our indignation , but the situation remains extremely worrying .
Today , our Parliament is reiterating its concerns within the context of a joint resolution on Darfur and is urging the United Nations , the Member States , the Council and the Commission to assume their responsibilities and to clearly set a date for the deployment of a peacekeeping force , under UN control , with the aim of immediately making the humanitarian corridors more secure and of thus easing the immense distress faced by the people of Darfur .
I welcome this new initiative , but faced with the urgency of the situation , Europe can no longer just reiterate old requests .
Our responsibility and our credibility require us to provide a satisfactory solution to the suffering of millions of human victims whom Europe can no longer merely observe , and to adopt a resolution that finally matches our indignation .
Darfur has been a running sore for far too long .
A situation partly driven by climate change - what does that bode for the future - whereby desertification has driven pastoralists into direct conflict with settled farming communities and then exploited by a heartless Government in Sudan has gone on for far too long .
Hundreds of thousands are living in misery and threatened with worse .
I have been critical of China 's reluctance to support UN action , it was claimed because of its oil interests in southern Sudan .
But now President Hu Jintao 's direct intervention appears to have persuaded Sudan 's President to agree a UN peacekeeping operation manned by troops from AU countries .
Whether Sudan 's Government can be trusted is not clear .
But now , if China is betrayed , Sudan will no longer be able to rely on their reluctance to act in the UN Secretary Council .
This may be good news for refugees in Darfur and neighbouring countries .
Illegal fishing ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Aubert , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the implementation of the EU action plan against illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , illegal fishing is a trend that is developing extensively today and seriously harming the activities of European fisheries , local fishing communities and fisheries in developing countries , not least in those with which the European Community has concluded fishing agreements .
It is also an activity that , I am afraid to say , is extremely lucrative .
I would cite the example of bluefin tuna , particularly in the Mediterranean , specimens of which are sold at absolutely astronomical prices .
We therefore find ourselves in a vicious circle , which leads to the gradual , though accelerated , depletion of fishery resources .
Legal fisheries - those that comply with the regulations - are , for their part , very heavily penalised by these illegal activities , which can , in fact , be defined in fairly broad terms .
We are talking about illegal , unregulated , undeclared fishing .
That therefore relates to many activities : pirate fishing , the use of unauthorised fishing gear , the catching of unauthorised species , unlicensed fishing and the policy of transferring cargo at sea from one boat to another .
The scope of the illegal activities is extremely broad .
What , then , is the purpose of this own-initiative report ?
In 2002 , the FAO launched an international action plan against illegal fishing , which was subsequently replaced by a European Union action plan , which was adopted by the Council in 2002 .
The plan was unfortunately implemented in a variety of ways , at different levels , by the Member States .
At this very moment , the European Commission is working on evaluating the Member States ' action plans on the fight against illegal fishing ahead of the meeting of the FAO - the FAO 's Committee on Fisheries - which will be held in the first week of March , in Rome , and which will be an opportunity to re-launch the international action plan against illegal fishing .
The European Union has a huge responsibility in this area .
Why ?
Firstly , because the European Union is ranked third in the world in terms of fishing activities , after China and Peru .
It has one of the world 's largest fleets .
Moreover , it largely resorts to using flags of convenience , which cause a huge number of problems , not only for fishing , but also for maritime transport .
Finally , the EU is also one of the world 's largest markets in fish .
The responsibilities are therefore many .
The Commission 's response to us is that this whole business is complex , many parties come into play , nothing can be done by working alone , it is expensive , one cannot ask some Member States to comply with a number of rules and not ask the others to do the same , and so on .
The pretexts and excuses for the lacklustre results are legion and , sadly , there have not been enough initiatives to fight effectively against this activity of illegal fishing which , once again , has developed at an extremely serious rate over the last few years .
The responsibilities are as much those of the port States , as they are called , as they are of the flag States or the States in which fishery products are marketed .
There are in fact many levels : that of the regional fisheries organisations , that of the Member States , the European level ; it is at all these levels that action must be taken , across the board , with the involvement of the Directorate-General for Fisheries and the Directorate-General for the Environment , the Directorate-General for Development and the Directorate-General for Trade .
Hard work is therefore what is required here , but only action on the part of all these administrations and these political officials will prove truly effective .
What are the key measures in my report , which , I might add , has been unanimously adopted within the Committee on Fisheries , showing that this is indeed a concern shared by all of our Member States ?
There is the traceability of fishery products and the introduction of blacklists , that is to say , of lists of boats that are not authorised to fish or that have already been punished for illegal fishing activities .
We should condemn today the lack of coordination and cooperation between the various sources of information regarding these boats , which are authorised or unauthorised to fish .
Among the important measures , I should also mention those that consist in preventing illegal fishing products from being landed and marketed on the European market , and then , finally , the actions to be carried out in the field of European and international law .
There are , in fact , legal vacuums today that prevent the crews of vessels carrying out illegal fishing activities from being challenged and punished .
To conclude , it is absolutely vital that we have a more integrated European policy , in terms both of control and monitoring and of penalties .
It is from this global perspective that the report outlines a number of initiatives and proposes a number of measures that we are discussing here , with a view to the FAO meeting , in March , within the context of which it is crucial for us to appear far more proactive and far more dynamic .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Aubert and all of the members of the Committee on Fisheries for their involvement in this truly exhaustive report on illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
This initiative from Parliament comes at a time when the Commission is committed to a public consultation on the review and strengthening of the current European Community policy on tackling this kind of fishing .
I am particularly pleased to note Parliament 's commitment on an issue which is of crucial importance to achieving the sustainable management of fisheries resources inside and outside of Community waters .
First of all , I am pleased that the report stresses that the fight against illegal fishing must begin in our waters and also involve our vessels .
Community waters are regulated , but that does not mean that illegal practices do not take place within them .
The report also acknowledges another extremely important aspect , namely how to prevent fisheries products from third countries that have been caught illegally from entering the Community .
As the main market and importer of fisheries products from all parts of the world , the Community has a special responsibility in terms of guaranteeing that products that end up on the tables of European consumers do not originate from illegal activities .
This means that a new approach must be taken with a view to properly controlling the legality of fisheries products imported into Community territory .
Another aspect that must be stressed is the need , indicated in the report , to create more synergies in order to improve the supervision , control and monitoring of fisheries activities .
Illegal operators usually employ clandestine and international methods in order to disguise their activities .
The success of investigation into these activities depends on cooperation amongst the different services involved in maritime monitoring at international level and also at Community level .
I cannot comment on all of the points of the report here , but I would like to stress , for example , the call for greater consistency in the sanctions imposed by the Member States for serious violations of fisheries laws , and the need to resolve the main problems caused by public fishing flags . These points demonstrate that Parliament and the Commission are on the same wavelength in terms of priorities for future actions .
The Commission has not been inactive over recent years .
The European Community has made considerable progress since the adoption in 2002 of its action plan against illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
This progress can essentially be seen in the Community 's activities , at international level , aimed at promoting measures to combat illegal fishing in all of the bodies competent in the field of fisheries and maritime law .
Nevertheless , the most significant progress in the fight against illegal , undeclared and unregulated fishing has related to the regional fisheries organisations , the majority of which , thanks to the Community 's efforts , have now adopted a wide range of measures against illegal fishing .
The Community has also improved the policy of assistance for coastal developing countries , which are the main victims of the kind of fishing we are debating today .
Strengthening those countries ' capacity to adequately control the fisheries activities in their waters has been funded from the European Union 's budget , thanks to an association agreement in the field of fisheries , both at national level and at regional level , on the model of the recently agreed regional plan for fisheries surveillance in the South-West Indian Ocean .
At Community level , the reform of the Common Fisheries Policy in 2002 also promoted the policy to combat illegal fishing through the adoption of provisions in the field of controlling compliance with Community rules and the creation of the Fisheries Control Agency .
However , despite the significant progress made in the fight against illegal fishing , it has still not been eradicated by any means , and it is still one of the most serious global threats to the sustainable management of fisheries resources and marine biodiversity .
Almost five years after the adoption of the 2002 action plan , therefore , the Commission believes that the time has come to draw up a new strategy to tackle this kind of fishing .
Within this context , the Commission has decided that this year illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing will be one of the main priorities of the common fisheries policy and of maritime policy .
The Commission will draw up proposals in this regard and present them to the Member States and to this Parliament during the second half of this year .
The report that we are debating today is a particularly timely contribution to the work on which the Commission will base its proposals .
Ladies and gentlemen , over recent years illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing has been the subject of numerous debates and discussions and the time has now come for us to act at European level .
The report by Mrs Aubert and the Committee on Fisheries represents an extremely significant and encouraging step in that direction .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Aubert for her report , which reminds us of the problem of piracy at sea and the poor record in terms of what has been done to combat it .
I would also like to thank her for supporting the amendments that I believe have clarified her report , establishing the boundaries between unrecorded and unregulated illegal fishing and violations of the common agricultural policy in Community waters . This is an important aspect because , although we need to put an end to both , completely different weapons are required for each .
One of the most important weapons is action by regional fisheries organisations , which are perhaps currently the only possible defence against illegal actions at sea in a battle which is , by definition , international and multilateral , and whose role has also been re-assessed as a result of the amendments presented .
At a time of such concern about the sustainability of the marine environment and when our own fishermen are gradually being denied access to resources , it is extremely worrying that we are even having to witness certain Member States taking steps backwards , including one that I know well .
And it is depressing that , last Tuesday , the Director for External Policies of the Directorate-General for Fisheries should have had to admit that the European Union had failed to slow down illegal fisheries .
And all at a time like this .
It was in Galicia last week that the fishing authorities of eighteen Member States began to debate the package of measures to combat illegal fishing , which will apparently not be presented to us before the middle of the year , according to the Commissioner .
With regard to this issue , the ball is more than ever in the Council 's court , because , without genuine political will on the part of the Member States , without their firm commitment to harmonising actions , making them obligatory and making them a priority , things will carry on the same next year and the year after .
I hope that that does not happen and that we will have an effective policy soon .
Thank you very much , Mr President , and allow me to protest once again about the fact that a fisheries debate is taking place at night and that even a new report being newly included on the agenda is being put before it .
I would like to make a serious protest on behalf of my group and on my own behalf about the way fisheries is treated in this Parliament .
Your protest will be recorded .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Aubert on this report and on the way in which she has dealt with the numerous amendments that we in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament tabled .
The FAO has calculated that up to 30 % of fish landed comes from illegal fishing . The EU has signed up to the FAO 's international action plan and in 2003 the Commission tabled proposals to transpose this action plan into the European acquis .
The Committee on Fisheries drew up this own-initiative report in preparation for the international forum on illegal fishing set to take place in Rome at the beginning of March , and in order that the Commission take account , in its new action plan , of Parliament 's opinion .
Numerous amendments tabled by my group will be included and I believe that thanks to those amendments , we have achieved a better definition of illegal fishing . Furthermore , we have included issues such as increased monitoring and the need for greater cooperation at international level .
Furthermore , although this is not so much a question of implementing tighter measures but rather of improving the implementation of existing measures , there is certainly a need for an effective control and inspection system within a common legal framework across the EU and if possible under the auspices of the Community Fisheries Control Agency based in Vigo .
Our amendments call for entry to European ports to be barred to vessels involved in illegal fishing , for Member States not to register such vessels , for Member States to discourage their nationals from flying flags of convenience , and for importers , transporters and other sectors concerned not to tranship or deal with fish caught by those vessels .

We also call for cooperation between the Member States to step up control of vessels .
We are aware that it is difficult to differentiate between legal and illegal catches , in particular when what is landed is not fresh fish but frozen or processed and where there are commercial networks with third countries and the fish has been processed before it reaches the European market .
Efforts are therefore required to identify the origin of fish , because millions of people around the world depend on fisheries resources and we must guarantee the availability of those resources for future generations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President .
I want to begin by complimenting Marie-Hélène Aubert on the quality of her report .
Her explanatory statement contains an excellent analysis of the problem and of the extent of progress made in relation to the EU Action Plan of 2002 .
It makes ten very clear recommendations for a new Action Plan to start in 2007 .
Five of these recommendations involve internal measures and five involve cooperation with other countries , both directly and through the medium of regional fisheries management organisations .
Central to the issue of combating IUU fishing are improvements in traceability , both of vessels and of the fish that they catch or transport .
This includes , amongst other things , insisting on the use of FAO identification standards for EU vessels and those entering EU ports , and on the development of proper catch documentation schemes .
But it also means better exchange of information between the parties concerned , so that blacklists of both fishing and fish transport vessels can be disseminated and the possibility of converting to a white list through reflagging can be avoided .
The establishment of blacklists is , however , only effective if there are serious consequences for the vessels concerned .
That is why we urge the Commission to take very seriously the recommendation in paragraph 18 of the resolution that consideration be given to extending the import controls relating to health and hygiene to cover the products of IUU fishing as well .
For this reason , the revival of the inter-services consultation group is particularly welcome .
Of course , there are many other steps that could be taken , which is why we are asking for the fight against illegal fishing to be one of the priorities of the annual work programme of the Community Fisheries Control Agency .
In this context too , we must be sure that our own house is fully in order , which is why we repeat Parliament 's previous requests for common minimum penalties for serious infringements to be made applicable across all the Member States .
Equal treatment is a major factor in encouraging compliance .
The importance of assisting developing countries to monitor fishing activities in their own waters must also be stressed .
There is an additional responsibility in this regard where we have concluded fisheries partnership agreements with them .
The inclusion of IUU fishing in the Commission 's work programme for this year is very welcome , but we need a clear timetable in this regard .
It is good to hear that the Commission will be presenting something to Parliament in the second half of the year , but we hope that it will be sooner rather than later , and comprehensive in its coverage .
Madam President , I too would like to thank Mrs Aubert and to commend her on her outstanding report , which I endorse .
Not only does illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing endanger biodiversity and the environment , leading to costs that in many cases may be impossible to recoup completely , but it also represents - as previous speakers have mentioned - a significant cost for many societies that currently live from fishing and that hope future generations can do likewise .
In this regard , I feel that the EU has a twofold responsibility .
First and foremost , it must set an example to the world and demonstrate by deed and in particular by willingness , that the fight against illegal fishing is one of its priorities .
Secondly , it must take the lead on the world stage in the fight against illegal fishing , which involves using existing EU mechanisms - be it via fishing agreements or via cooperation with third countries - and always to include some clauses leading to the prioritisation of this issue .
At the same time , however , given that one of the key problems in detecting and combating illegal fishing is - as previous speakers have also mentioned - the issues of traceability and of fisheries control is vital inasmuch as it is often impossible to know whether illegal fishing has taken place . Mechanisms must therefore be established to enhance traceability .
To this end , I also wish to say that in December , this Chamber adopted a resolution on eco-labelling .
Many of the proposals in this resolution would help the fight against illegal fishing by means of much-needed traceability mechanisms .
I too welcome the report 's call for the Commission to present its eco-labelling proposal by June .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) I too would like to congratulate Mrs Aubert on her report .
Large-scale illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing has significantly contributed to the difficulties with which the fisheries sector has to contend .
Large-scale illegal fishing damages marine ecosystems , increases the cost of fishing , and reduces the incomes of people who fish legally and who comply with the rules on preserving fisheries resources .
Large-scale illegal fishing , as the report says , undermines the incomes of communities who depend on fishing in different countries , and those least equipped to monitor their exclusive economic zones are the hardest hit .
Large-scale illegal fishing also contributes to the deterioration of on-board working conditions and hygiene , and undermines the labour rights of crews .
Accordingly , we feel that illegal fishing , which generates significant illicit profits for large-scale fleets working for the large economic and financial groups involved in fishing and even for organised crime networks , should not be confused with infringements of the common fisheries policy by parts of the small-scale traditional fleet , often committed because of the economic crisis that they face .
It is worrying that , despite the 2002 Food and Agriculture Organisation plan , which was rapidly transposed into the Community acquis and then implemented , large-scale illegal fishing continues to increase owing to loopholes or imprecision in the existing rules .
The fight against large-scale illegal fishing is hampered by the use of flags of convenience , by the lack of monitoring at sea , by transhipping on the high seas , by the lack of control at ports and by the lack of cooperation and coordination between the relevant authorities .
Given that illegal fishing has its biggest impact on those parts of the fleet operating on the high seas and on the continental shelf , especially in the least developed countries , cooperation among the Member States and among international fishing organisations is vital if this kind of fishing is to be combated .
To this end the necessary resources must be obtained , including financial resources for implementing the measures needed , such as the effective monitoring of fishing activities .
The strengthening of deterrents should be accompanied by enhanced traceability of fisheries products , as has been highlighted by previous speakers , with eco-labelling also worth mentioning in this regard .
Equally important , as the report states , is to intensify port state control of landings and transhipments from third country vessels .
We believe that the existing measures already cover the main issues and that what they lack is more rigorous and fairer implementation and greater international-level coordination .
This is not , therefore , simply a matter of creating more measures and more restrictive measures for the fisheries sector , especially if their impact or their unilateral nature has the perverse effect of benefiting the vessels operating illegally to an even greater extent .
Third country vessels operating in the exclusive economic zones of the Member States must be subject to the rules of the common fisheries policy and to existing national requirements .
Naturally , it is always possible to improve the rules in force and to plug any gaps .
In this regard , we feel that this report , which in spite of one or two reservations we generally support , makes a valuable contribution to the issue .
We feel , however , that it is , at the very least , premature to include combating illegal fishing in the framework of a future maritime policy for the Union , which we have only just begun to debate as part of the Green Paper put forward by the Commission .
We accept the idea of greater international and EU-level cooperation and coordination , but we must avoid situations that may lead to centralisation and must safeguard the Member States ' exclusive monitoring powers , as it is the Member States that best know each of their exclusive economic zones .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we need to protect all operators who carry out their activities within the context of sound fisheries management based on best practice and safeguarding the marine environment .
It is vitally important to clamp down on illegal fishing through surveillance and control measures , accompanied by sanctions for serious violations of Community legislation .
To combat illegal fishing , however , we cannot confine ourselves to repressive actions , but we must also promote strong preventive action through structural measures .
To this end , the report on which we are going to vote - for which I thank Mrs Aubert - very effectively identifies a number of strategic actions , from the promotion of commercial regulation measures that will make it possible to identify the origin of fish caught , to the proposal on eco-labelling , which would keep illegally caught fish off the European market , and to the study on tariffs and rules of origin .
These measures are essential to reduce , if not eliminate , illegal fishing by Community fishing boats in Community waters and to prevent the landing and marketing of fish caught illegally outside EU waters .
Equally significant is the call for a study on compliance with Community labour and health and safety legislation , on respect for the social rights of workers and on their living and working conditions on board .
Improving full traceability of fish all along the chain of custody , from net to plate , preventing the depletion of fish stocks and degradation of the environment , and enhancing the quality of life and work for the communities that depend on fishing for their livelihoods are forms of prevention and dissuasion that will make it possible to curb illegal fishing by structural means and make the Community fisheries sector the best in the world .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Morillon , of course we must all congratulate our rapporteur on her outstanding report .
We must also begin by noting that the situation as it stands is absolutely unacceptable .
It is unacceptable that the amount of illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing of bluefin tuna , which is the species that has been the subject of most analysis in this connection , is 50 % greater than the amount fished legally .
This has led to the total depletion of stocks , to the collapse of the value at which fish is sold and in turn to the ruin of the fishermen .
This is a situation that the Community cannot continue to tolerate .
Of all the measures put forward here as a means of addressing the problem , I should like to highlight traceability as a vital prerequisite to success .
This is the measure that we must ensure is adopted in the very short term and if it is tightly enforced I am sure that we will see a very different situation soon .
Madam President , first of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for this report , which continues the efforts of this Parliament to address the problem of illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
The European Union 's 2002 Action Plan to deal with illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing includes four actions to be implemented at Community level .
One of these is to define the responsibility of Member States to prevent their nationals from engaging in IUU fishing .
Indeed , the related Council Regulation of 2002 requires Member States to take action against nationals that infringe the common fisheries policy .
We seem to be very efficient in tracking and taking action against our own fishermen for any transgression of European law , while we seem at the same time to have been rather less efficient at dealing with the much bigger problem of illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
The problem of overfishing and illegal fishing is international .
It goes beyond the European Union waters , and yet the fishermen that I represent can with some justice complain that the Commission sometimes cannot see beyond our own waters .
There is clearly a lot still to be achieved to deal with this problem and I welcome the practical proposals such as the suggestion that vessels bringing fish into the European Union should be subject to the same documentation delivery requirement as vessels operating within the European Union .
Likewise I welcome the suggestion that the Commission should engage with developing countries to give them assistance in dealing with IUU fishing .
I understand that one of the vehicles for achieving this is through the various bilateral fisheries agreements with developing countries .
However , I would like to be sure that this represents a joined-up approach to the problem and that it is not merely ad hoc .
I note that some countries have not been cooperative .
Surely if we are making bilateral fisheries agreements with a country , we can force a higher degree of cooperation from them .
Otherwise cynics might suggest that we are more interested in getting the fish than stopping illegal fishing .
Madam President , many of our debates regarding fisheries have been centred around sustainability and the importance of finding the right equilibrium between the protection of the marine environment , the protection of fish stock and the viability of the activity .
Regulations have been set up and fishermen are obliged to abide by these regulations so that an optimum standard is achieved , a standard that would be beneficial to everyone .
These regulations have been based on specific statistics gathered from our seas and standards have been set on this information .
However , I feel that , unless we tackle illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing with an iron fist , we would be doing a disservice to honest fishermen and restricting their activity to the benefit of others acting illegally .
The line between legal and illicit fishing is sometimes very fine and we need to have a clear-cut definition in this regard in order to avoid misunderstanding .
We need an effective control system and a management programme that will be more coherent and specific so as to apply the existing regulations with more accuracy .
We must also try to negotiate with our neighbouring states in order to adopt the same policies so that we would have a one-sea , one-policy system , which undoubtedly would be beneficial to all .
In order to do this , we must be willing to share our technology with these countries and encourage new partnership agreements .
Further to this , cooperation between us , the Member States , has to be strengthened .
Proof of the legal origin of fish catches should be compulsory before any content is offloaded in the EU .
This should include documents that show that fish have been caught in accordance with RFMO rules .
This will be a very important stepping stone in ensuring that our fishermen get the right dues , and that , furthermore , our seas are protected from overfishing .
When stocks were plentiful , we would often turn a blind eye to unregulated activity .
Now , I think , is the time to act before it is too late .
No regulation and no law will ever be effective or have any meaning if overfishing renders our seas barren .
( SV ) Madam President , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I am responsible for the subject of cod fishing in the Baltic Sea .
In my work on this matter , I have been able to observe that , despite reduced fishing quotas , parts of the cod stock are close to the biologically critical limit .
The threats to cod are many , but , despite everything , the greatest threat is illegal fishing .
As a basis for my report , I tried to get hold of the Commission 's assessment of the extent of illegal fishing around the Baltic .
The information was kept secret , however , and it took me months to extract it .
Yesterday , I got hold of the report , however , and I now suddenly understand what all the secretiveness was about .
Illegal fishing in the Baltic is worse than we had all imagined .
I can only regret that Sweden is among the worst culprits .
The Commission states , however , that Poland is the worst culprit of all .
When the inspectors checked up on fishing in Poland , the actual figures were 48 % larger than the catches reported .
This means , then , that something approaching a third of Polish fishing proves to be illegal .
The second worst culprit was Sweden .
In Sweden , the actual figures found when the checks were carried out were as much as 21 % larger than the catches reported . That is quite incomprehensible , because Swedish fishermen do not even fulfil their quotas .
The conclusion that I draw from the report I read is that we must find a new strategy .
We cannot pin our hopes on endless negotiations about reductions in fishing quotas .
The environmental movement should get around to withdrawing its demands for an end to fishing .
All those of us who would safeguard fishing in seas such as the Baltic should instead unite in the fight to stop illegal fishing .
I should therefore like to demand four things from the Commission .
Firstly , instead of protecting the culprits and keeping their identities secret , you should expose them by publishing the names of those countries that do not put an end to illegal fishing .
Secondly , you should ensure that electronic logbooks are required without delay for all fishing boats in the Baltic , irrespective of their size .
Thirdly , you should take Poland to court for breaching the fishing regulations ; and fourthly you should immediately set up an inquiry into the possibility of introducing individual transferable fishing quotas that give individual professional fishermen an interest of their own in protecting fish stocks .
I would therefore ask today , in this House , if the Commission is prepared to do these things .
( EL ) Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Aubert , on her report on illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
The question we are debating here today is of particular interest if account is taken of the repercussions which it has both on the marine environment and on legal fishing .
Illegal fishing is one of the most fundamental reasons for the collapse of many fish stocks .
In reality it undermines all our efforts to exploit fishery resources rationally and to protect the marine environment .
Apart from the environmental impact , it also has adverse economic repercussions because it distorts competition between fishermen and affects the viability of those acting in accordance with the legislation enacted .
However , I shall also examine this issue from the point of view of the human factor : often illegal fishing has repercussions on the safety of crews , given that they only have minimal guarantees in respect of the terms of employment and safety of human life at sea .
Illegal fishing means illegal and uncontrolled employment .
As you know , this is not a new phenomenon .
However , the increased demand for fisheries products , in conjunction with a reduction in available resources has caused a burgeoning of this phenomenon , especially by vessels sailing under flags of convenience .
The report by Mrs Aubert covers the most important aspects of the problem which need to be examined , such as :
firstly , the responsibilities of the state under whose flag the vessel is sailing ;
secondly , the responsibilities of the state in which the fish are landed ;
thirdly , the responsibilities of the productive classes involved in transporting and marketing fisheries products until they reach the consumer .
I believe that more measures need to be taken to control and stamp out illegal fishing , both at European level and at the level of regional fisheries organisations .
We must act .
We must protect the environment , legal fishermen , consumers and the legal order .
We need to be decisive and strict .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Free movement of Roma within the EU borders ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the free movement of Roma within the EU borders .
Member of the Commission . ( ES ) Two weeks ago saw the start of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
Equal opportunities and the right to live without discrimination are among the key values on which the EU is based .
The Commission is well aware of the fact that the Roma are among the groups most at risk of discrimination and of being excluded from the labour market , from society , from involvement in drawing up policy and from cultural life .
Consequently , the Commission has undertaken to use all the instruments at its disposal to address the issue of the exclusion of the Roma minority .
I should like to mention two of these : firstly , the implementation of the 2000 Directive , which provides protection against discrimination on racial and ethnic grounds .
The Commission wishes to ensure that this Directive be incorporated into the legislation and to be implemented properly in all Member States .
Secondly , I wish to mention the use of financial instruments , specifically the Structural Funds and , most importantly , the European Social Fund .
The Commission has asked the Member States to incorporate the objective of including the Roma community when it draws up its operational plans for the financial perspective 2007-2013 .
Major effort is required to increase awareness among the Roma and among the population as a whole of the right to live without discrimination and to enjoy the benefits of diversity .
In this regard , the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All and the ongoing information campaign entitled ' For Diversity , Against Discrimination ' are , in our view , extremely useful instruments .
The Commission welcomes the achievements made so far during the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-2015 in which nine governments from Central and Eastern Europe and the Western Balkans , including five EU Member States , are currently taking part .
For the first time , the national governments of these countries made a commitment to learn from each other and to exchange strategies on how to improve life for the Roma minority in areas such as employment , education , housing and healthcare .
The Commission welcomes the fact that all of this is taking place in close cooperation with the Roma community .
We also need policies geared toward the future .
The high level group for the social and labour market integration of ethnic minorities set up by the Commission is paying special attention to issues relating to the Roma community .
The group will publish its recommendations at the end of the year , which we are sure will provide extremely valuable information for future European policy on the inclusion of ethnic minorities , including the Roma .
Lastly , Madam President , I should like to point out that the Commissioners ' Group on Fundamental Rights will deal with all of these issues in their meeting scheduled for July this year .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) We know that following enlargement in 2004 , many Roma tried to come to Europe - Western Europe .
We also know that the actual figures were not very high , but they did call attention to the terrible and hopeless situation in which the Roma find themselves .
We knew that the Roma were not desirable guests in Europe .
Unsure already how to deal with Roma migration , most host countries responded by tightening their procedures for requesting asylum , which compelled many Roma to return to their home countries .
Since they had sold all their possessions , they returned to much worse circumstances than those they had left behind .
We also know that because of the exaggerated , hysterical and untrue statements of the media , the situation gave rise to fundamental fears in Western European countries .
The situation even spurred many countries to try to prevent further enlargement .
We now also know that this atypical tendency to migration among European Roma is in fact caused by the segregation in schools , the enormous unemployment rate , very strong prejudice , and limited access to health care services which they suffer in their home countries .
We also know that the Roma would like to live and thrive in their home countries .
In spite of the enormous sums of PHARE money , the ghettoisation , segregation , exclusion and anti-Roma feeling has continued to grow since enlargement , and in Western Europe as well .
The European Union has a great responsibility and interest in promoting the integration of the Roma .
Beyond ensuring the financial framework , the task of the European Commission must include promotion and monitoring as well .
Every instrument for influencing Member States must be used , and a European strategy needs to be developed .
We would like to see a Green Paper , and sanctions against countries that do not follow the Directives aimed at ending segregation , and those concerning employment , equal opportunities , and the equality of opportunity .
This should be done so that Europe and the home countries may make the most of Roma prosperity , especially in light of the foreseeable European demographic indicators , at a time when we are talking about a greying Europe .
The Roma are basically seeking to thrive in these countries , and do not wish to leave their countries behind .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , such is the way this place is organised , somehow I have more speaking time than Mrs Járóka , which is hardly appropriate .
I agree with everything she has said and the reason for that is that the speakers here present feel united in asking the Commission exactly what free movement of the Roma within the EU borders actually means .
Our understanding is that such now is the level of discrimination - not only actual discrimination against the homogenous Roma population but also infringements on their ability to move , i.e. infringements on the ability of long-term-resident Roma in particular countries to move freely in reality .
This can be because of actual restrictions , for example through visas and actual practical restrictions , and it can also mean , as Mrs Járóka was implying , restrictions through discrimination : when Roma move traditionally through countries and from one country to another they face discrimination .
What I would like to hear from the Commission in its statement is exactly what is its understanding of these infringements and restrictions .
What study has it undertaken of what these infringements are and what does it think it can do to ease these restrictions for the Roma community ?
In addition , what is the Commission saying about the Year of Equal Opportunities 2007 ?
I have heard very little about the issue of the Roma within this context .
I have heard plenty on the issue of ageing , disability , race and religion .
But specifically on the issue of the Roma , what is the programme of the Commission ?
I know it is slightly unfair to ask you that , Mr Almunia .
It is not your area of expertise , so please do not think that I am getting at you .
However , please tell the Commissioners that we have not heard specifics .
Please take that message back .
What are you going to do this year ?
What is the High Level Experts Group doing in terms of free movement ?
What is in its pending tray on the Roma issue , i.e. actual discrimination issues , harassment issues ?
How is money being spent ?
Is it going to relieve poverty ?
Is it going to educational programmes ?
Those are all things that Mrs Járóka , Mrs Mohácsi and others have been struggling and fighting for for some time .
The PSE Group fully supports their approach in asking the Commission for answers , and I think this evening is a good time to get those answers .
If you cannot give them , Mr Almunia , please transmit this urgent message to your Commissioner colleagues , because it is about time we got some specific answers to these questions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) First of all , I would like to clarify the following : the background to my remarks is not the desire to question the right to free movement by Europeans , and hence of the Roma , nor do we or I wish to request any extra rights for these people , for this minority group .
My original aim was that the European Union should examine how it might document - something that my fellow Member Mr Moraes has also mentioned - the number of forced migrants , those people who are forced to leave their homes because they are subject to ongoing discrimination .
The Commissioner mentioned that it is not enough for a country to take action against discrimination , but the EU Member State in question must also ensure that there is integration .
I think we have not yet reached this stage , nor even the stage where we might be able to monitor discrimination in each and every Member State , or to take appropriate steps against it .
In April 2005 , Parliament adopted a resolution of which the first sentence states that there is discrimination against the Roma within the Member States of the European Union .
We do not know how many leave their homes because they are subject to ongoing discrimination and hope that their lives may be less troubled in a Western European country .
Next week , we will have the second opportunity , when the Hungarian court will hear the case involving children who have been placed in special schools without any justification .
Although they are of sound mind , they are compelled to attend educational institutions established for those with developmental handicaps .
I have personally taken on the cases of 12 such children because Hungarian special schools are generally full of Roma children , who make up at least 70 % of the special student population in Hungary , and unfortunately there are not very many Member States where these figures show any striking difference .
A few months ago , several hundred Hungarian Roma sought asylum from the Swedish state , which naturally - as far as I know - rejected their request .
I do not know how many of those families have children who suffer discrimination in a similar situation .
This much is certain , if something like this were to happen to my children , I would seek asylum in another country .
The struggle to eliminate discrimination and to guarantee human rights within the frontiers of our Member States is our common responsibility .
We have the ability to take steps against discrimination , and we must do so .
Since 2000 we have spent EUR 750 million within the territory of the EU on the integration of the Roma , yet the proportion who are unemployed and the proportion of children declared to be developmentally handicapped have increased .
The time has come now for the European Commission , taking seriously the work it has done to date , to develop a strategy which - as my colleague Mrs Járóka has also mentioned - will be able to put an end to discrimination and to call to account those countries that are lagging behind in terms of legislation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I will start with a question .
When will the EU finally take seriously the situation of its largest minority ?
Fifteen million people in Europe remain excluded from basic human rights , such as the right to education , employment or physical integrity , merely because they are Roma , or gypsies as most people still call them .
One month ago two more countries joined the EU .
The treatment given to Roma in these countries is far from fulfilling EU norms .
As we know from the latest report of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , the situation is not better in many of the old Member States .
If we talk about the migration of Roma , most of us call to mind pictures of poor , hunger-ridden people who come to disturb us in our comfortable existence , rather than remembering that they have rights .
In 1999 , under the Finnish Presidency , the EU adopted a recommendation to the Member States that specific attention should be given to the situation of minorities , in particular those who have no home country , meaning the Roma .
The Commission has spent tens of thousands of euros for the improvement of the situation of Roma without developing a clear strategy and targeted approach , following the model of other intergovernmental organisations .
Under these circumstances migration often becomes the last resort for Roma .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia recently gave us some worrying data that show that acts of racism and xenophobia against minorities are on the increase in Europe .
The Roma , who form the largest ethnic minority in the European Union , are particularly targeted .
A great deal of discrimination occurs in relation to work and the right to education , and the Roma often live in conditions of poverty , marginalised from society .
Sometimes discrimination comes from the very institutions that ought to safeguard people 's rights .
In a recent case in Slovenia , an entire group that had been living in that country for many years was removed from the area where it had been living for so long .
I believe that we need to encourage the Roma to take part in social and political life , but for that to happen the Member States must first recognise them as an ethnic and linguistic minority .
It would be necessary to get rid of the campsite system in favour of types of housing that would facilitate integration , thus eliminating any form of segregation .
The Roma have inherited a centuries-old culture , and I believe that we should have great respect for nomadic cultures .
We owe to them the birth of what we call Western civilisation , which arose in Mesopotamia , now Iraq and under military occupation , inappropriately stirring up a war of civilisations .
We are in debt to the Roma , even though , in my view , civilised Europe has often mistreated and discriminated against them .
We must therefore support their social inclusion and freedom of movement .
That is why I join my other fellow Members in calling on the Commission to take a more proactive stance - although I realise that Mr Almunia will probably not be able to give us any exhaustive answers since this is not his area of expertise - but we believe that the Commission ought to be moving faster on these issues .
Madam President , the EU Race Directive is insufficiently effective in combating the multiple discrimination faced by Roma people .
Speaking personally - and not reflecting necessarily the view of my group , which I have not consulted - I have come round to the view , like the Network of Independent Experts in Fundamental Rights , that we need a legislative instrument specifically aimed at protecting and promoting the equality of the Roma community .
I do not say that lightly , because normally I am not keen on specific measures , but my understanding is that the European Commission is not keen on this idea , and in the absence of such a focused and targeted instrument , I think all we will ever do is talk .
The European Roma Rights Centre and the European Network against Racism pointed out recently , in a joint paper , that forced evictions , housing in extremely substandard conditions , denial of basic social and economic rights and school segregation are often instigated or condoned by local or regional government , and central governments have been ineffective in challenging them .
Early this evening I had a question to the Council about the position of Roma people , and the response from the Presidency was essentially that , while anti-discrimination laws were an EU responsibility , social inclusion was a matter for national governments - a question of subsidiarity .
Faced with that attitude , how will the Commission promote an effective pan-European programme of inclusion and equality of opportunity ?
Madam President , I was hoping to get an answer from the Commissioner , but I see he is not scheduled to speak .
On the website he was scheduled to reply to the debate , but here he is not .
Are we getting a reply or not ?
The Commissioner has indicated that he does not wish to reply , but I am sure that , in the light of the strong statements that have been made tonight , he will take a message back to his colleagues .
The debate is closed .
Agenda for next part session : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting closed at 23.15 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Shareholders ' voting rights ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the exercise of voting rights by shareholders of companies - C6-0003 / 2006 -
( FR ) Before we begin this debate , I should just like to say that I know there are no rules governing the order in which MEPs speak .
That being said , I should like to draw the Chamber 's attention to a slightly odd situation whereby the rapporteur devoted all of his floor time to answer all of the speakers that had the floor , by way of a conclusion .
When the issue at hand is a legislative text , those speaking on behalf of groups do so , according to our well-established practice , in an order commensurate with the political weight of their group and not at the end of the debate .
It is for the Commission , which is well represented here , to respond .
I am astonished by what has gone on here today .
If this is a new , innovative practice , then it should be explained to us .
The agenda has been drawn up with the agreement of the political groups and we must respect it .
These are issues we can look at when we examine our work .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , due to the late addition of this item to the agenda , my colleague Mr McCreevy is unable to be here today and I shall present his considerations .
I wish to begin by thanking the Committee on Legal Affairs , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and , in particular , the two rapporteurs Mr Lehne and Mr Klinz for their excellent work on this file .
The compromise package that is now on the table contains very effective solutions to the problems that we have identified , without imposing excessive burdens .
These problems , which led the Commission to submit its proposal , were in principle very simple : at the moment shareholders do not receive information on general meetings in time , they face restrictions on trading their shares for a certain time period ahead of the meeting if they want to vote and they often have to go in person to general meetings , even if those meetings take place in another Member State , as there are no effective rules on representation and distant voting .
Together with Parliament and the Council , we managed to find simple solutions to these simple problems .
However , we cannot stop there .
In particular , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs pointed out , in its opinion of November 2006 , other issues that need to be addressed if we want to make the general meeting work efficiently and if we want to further improve the corporate governance of European companies .
We have already identified stock lending as something we should look at more closely in the context of the future Commission recommendation on shareholders ' rights .
We agree that another important issue here is to clarify the role and the duties of financial intermediaries .
In today 's financial world , investors depend heavily on intermediaries to provide them with information and voting services if they want to exercise their voting rights .
This point has also been stressed by delegations in the Council .
The Commission has already undertaken to examine this question thoroughly in the impact assessment to the future Commission recommendation .
I think all the parties involved agree that this issue is too important to address without having examined all available opinions and without having carried out a full assessment of the possible consequences .
You might ask why we are considering using only a recommendation in order to tackle these problems .
The reason is that the practical processes that are relevant in this context are constantly developing , also due to the constantly improving technology .
We do not want to set the current situation in stone , but wish to leave enough flexibility for adjustments .
The Commission recommendation will give us this flexibility .
My colleague Mr McCreevy therefore confirmed last month , in a letter to the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , our intention to address this issue , together with others , in the context of the work on the recommendation .
I hope you share our view that this is the right way to render the provisions of the draft directive even more effective in practice .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Almunia has already said , this is an extremely important project .
It is concerned with deepening the European internal market , and one aspect of this is giving owners the opportunity to exercise their rights across borders in this internal market .
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted this important project unanimously .
We have come to an agreement with the Council whereby , if this House follows the vote of the Committee on Legal Affairs in plenary , the Council will do likewise , and thus we shall be able to achieve a result here at a single reading pursuant to the Interinstitutional Agreement of December 2003 .
The first crucial issue with which this Directive is concerned is that of the representation of shareholders at general meetings ; that is , the exercise of voting rights not by the shareholders themselves but by intermediaries - representatives - or by means of proxy voting .
There are widely differing rules for this in the EU , some of them highly restrictive .
The compromise reached in the end makes representation possible in principle , but subject to a transparent procedure , and also gives the Member States the opportunity of prohibiting representation by national law in the event of conflicts of interest .
A second important area is the issue of the right to ask questions .
The problem here is that the traditions and , in particular , related legal consequences , rights of challenge and similar points vary greatly between Member States .
The scale ranges from Member States where questions can be asked but do not need to be answered , to Member States where questions have to be answered correctly and , if they are not , resolutions adopted at general meetings can be declared null and void .
A compromise has been reached on this that lays down the right of shareholders - owners - to ask questions in principle , but does enable Member States to make sensible adjustments and also limited restrictions to the right to ask questions in accordance with their own legal traditions , without calling this right into question in principle .
As Commissioner Almunia mentioned , a number of issues could not be resolved definitively with this Directive .
This is partly owing to legal systems . An example is the legal relationship between shareholder and representative .
Indeed , this has no place in a Directive concerned with company law , as matters such as this belong in contract law , which is why the Council and Parliament subsequently agreed to deal with it in a separate recommendation , a separate legal act .
The same goes for the subject of the languages used .
In this regard , the co-rapporteur Mr Klinz from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs had made the - undoubtedly constructive - suggestion of providing for similar rules to those in the Transparency Directive .
Here , too , however , we later decided - following the negotiations - that , in systematic terms , it would be better to regulate this within the framework of a recommendation than in this specific text . Consequently , this issue , too , will have to be resolved in the separate legal act .
All in all , I should say that , from my point of view , we have managed to solve the multitude of problems that existed when we started dealing with this Directive .
It is true that they have not all been solved one hundred per cent satisfactorily , there is no question about that - this is normal when one has to reach compromises .
Ultimately , however , they have been solved in a way that enabled the solution to obtain unanimous support in both the Council and the Committee on Legal Affairs .



I should like to express the warmest of thanks to my co-rapporteur , Mr Klinz , to the shadow rapporteurs from the two committees concerned - but particularly to Mr Medina from the Committee on Legal Affairs , with whom I enjoyed close cooperation - to the two Chairs , Mr Gargani and Mrs Berès , to the Austrian , Finnish and German Presidencies , which contributed significantly to the success of this project , and last but not least to the European Commission , whose help with overcoming the problems was very useful .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , cross-border share ownership is on the increase , but attendance at general meetings across borders remains unsatisfactory .
That is what this Directive sets out to change and improve .
The objective is welcomed and shared by all parties , and so I had reckoned with relatively simple , short negotiations as rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - but reality taught me otherwise .
Thanks to the peculiarities of the bodies of company and civil law of the 27 Member States , and also cultural differences - some of them major - the negotiations between the Commission , Parliament and the Council were protracted and difficult and ultimately produced only minimum harmonisation .
Nevertheless , there has been some very tangible progress , as Mr Lehne has already said .
Share blocking is to be abolished , cross-border proxy voting liberalised and electronic means permitted .
These measures will undoubtedly make it easier in future for those with cross-border share ownership to cast their vote at general meetings .
Agreement has yet to be reached on a solution to some key problems , however , which the Commissioner has also mentioned .
I particularly regret the removal from the Directive of the definition of the shareholder and the role of intermediaries in cross-border depository chains .
The issues of stock lending , the language to be used and the special position of investment funds have also been left out .
These are fields where minimum harmonisation is particularly necessary if we are to really establish a genuine European share culture .
Nevertheless , I am pleased that the Commission intends to address and take up this subject specifically in the form of a recommendation .
The provisions agreed give the Member States broad scope for action , and so we shall probably have to live with different rules - some of them substantially so - in the individual Member States for many years to come .
I hope that the approach of minimum harmonisation that has been chosen does not risk diluting the whole project .
Only experience over the next few years will show whether attendance at general meetings actually increases perceptibly and thus the main objective of the Directive can be achieved .
That would certainly be of great benefit in terms of corporate governance .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would firstly like to say that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is going to vote in favour of the proposal by Mr Lehne , as amended in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Secondly , while I am pleased that Commissioner Almunia is with us , I believe that this would have been a good opportunity to hold a personal exchange of views with Commissioner McCreevy , because , as has been highlighted in previous speeches , there are questions about the limitations of this proposal for a directive .
It is a minimal proposal for a directive , about which there are a series of question marks .
For example , with regard to the issue of financial intermediaries , the legitimate rights of shareholders and the use of proxy , that is , the right to vote by means of a representative .

The text that Mr Almunia has read to us on behalf of Mr McCreevy talks about a future Commission recommendation .
The problem with recommendations is that they raise difficulties from the point of view of Community law .
Mr Lehne has said that we are talking about provisions of the Treaties , but at the moment we in the European Parliament are concerned about the over-use of the systems of so-called ' soft ' law by the Community institutions , which raises questions about the reliability of the Law .
I have the feeling that this issue will have to be discussed .
I hope that , at meetings with the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Commissioner McCreevy will clarify his ideas a little so that we can ascertain what we can do in order to reassure ourselves that progress is going to be made in a particular direction .
We Socialists are rather concerned about the protection of the rights of shareholders .
We are concerned about the possibility that , in a great European Union market , financial operators will act with total impunity and freedom , and I have the sense that this is an important issue for everybody , for investors and for savers , which should be subject to full consideration and discussion between Parliament and the Commission .
We will therefore vote in favour , but I would say once again that I hope Mr McCreevy can discuss the methods for making future changes in the legal field with us .

( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Lehne for all his work on a matter that is so important for the future of European integration and the growth of the single internal market .
At present , citizens of several Member States of the European Union who hold shares in companies quoted on the stock exchange , and whose registered office is located in another Member State , experience significant difficulties in exercising their voting rights .
As the process of European integration gathers momentum and the internal market grows , the amount of cross-border capital investment is increasing , which is a good sign .
It suggests that integrated financial markets are becoming established in Europe .
This process should be encouraged , which is why the Commission recommendation on the directive deserves our support today .
The document under debate contains many important proposals devised to make it easier for shareholders to exercise their rights .
I should perhaps mention the need to ensure that sufficient notice is given when convening all general meetings .
It is also important to ensure that interested parties have easy access to information announcing meetings and the results of votes taken in them .
Providing for proxy voting is another important issue , along with measures to make it easier for intermediaries to act for shareholders .
These are the kinds of solutions that will make it possible to restrict certain types of share blocking .
Madam President , my congratulations to the rapporteur for his report .
There are many essential elements concerning this report which we can all get behind , particularly in protecting the rights of shareholders and making the process transparent .
It is nice to hear the transparency directive mentioned - which I worked on before .
However , from a legal point of view its treatment is slightly different from the approach of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , where strong opinion found in favour of certain key issues , in particular necessary distinctions required in dealing with intermediaries and stock lending when , in particular , shares were repatriated in order to allow for owners to vote .
The timing is vital and we are surprised , therefore , that Amendment 26 to Article 7 does nothing but confuse the situation .
What happens to these shares - are they to be deposited ?
Transferred ?
Registered ?
What ?
There seems to be nothing there which allows for specific requirements .
There are no specific requirements or references to them concerning the sale of transferred shares .
Might this not lead to certain further confusion ?
There are also amendments from the ECON Committee which I have to say have been subject to what I deem the ' recital effect ' by the Committee on Legal Affairs and to the ' letter effect ' by Commissioner McCreevy , who suggested that later developments on these issues should be expected .
Let us be frank .
Nobody likes to be told that their amendments are reducible or that they can be ignored .
The ECON Committee is an equal player and its remit allows it to be so .
I can only say that the process has been unsatisfactory in that regard , which is partly the reason for this debate today .
I hope we can come back to these issues in the ECON Committee with the Commissioner to repair some of these problems mentioned in our ECON opinion .
Madam President , it is clear that our political group and particularly the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs are pretty critical about the procedure .
I will not repeat what others have already said on this , but what I would like to stress here is that if as a parliament we have codecision rights on a dossier , we should take every opportunity to really assess what comes out of informal negotiations with the Council and Commission in a codecision procedure which is likely to go to a first reading agreement .
This is why we were a little upset that this dossier is already being dealt with in this sitting rather than in March as had been planned .
We would then have been able to discuss an oral question with Commissioner McCreevy about ' one share , one vote ' .
I hope that we will still have this opportunity and that the Committee on Legal Affairs will also support us in having this further debate with Commissioner McCreevy .
On the content , the essential difference between a recommendation and a legislative text is precisely this codecision .
A letter from Commissioner McCreevy to Mr Gargani , the chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , announces that some of the issues we were concerned about will be dealt with in a recommendation .
The last line says , ' You will be informed about this one as a parliament ' .
This is the exact point we are making .
We would like to be co-legislators on that type of issue as well .
This is the reason why we are not really happy that some of these issues could not be taken up in the agreement with the Council .
Maybe if we had had more time we could have also convinced the Council that this kind of issue , which is of major concern , could have been included in the first reading , second reading or conciliation agreements .
These are my comments on what happened today .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Commission 's initiative was what we were looking for , but the way in which the Commission set its objectives needed correction .
I believe that the work which we began in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and which , following many discussions , culminated in the agreement before us today , was worthwhile on two counts , first and foremost on the definition of the term shareholder , which , in the form proposed by the Commission , was too broad .
This led us to embark on a definition of securities law that was very close to the practice in force on the other side of the Atlantic , which does not correspond to our traditional notion of what is a shareholder .
I feel that a narrower , tighter definition , such as we are proposing today , is the right way forward .
The second point on which we have been led to amend the Commission 's proposal is the issue of the process of reattaching voting mandates .
On this issue , too , I feel that , thanks to the work undertaken in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs with our rapporteur , whom I wish to thank , we were able to emphasise the existence of compulsory instructions in the event of a mandate : an obligation to observe and retain these instructions .
To this end , I feel that in addition to the question of cross-border rights for shareholders in this report , the Commission would be better off looking equally closely at what is important in terms of employee share ownership or the stability of shareholders in certain industrial situations regarding which , from a European perspective , we would favour a coherent strategy .
I should like , if I may , to take this opportunity to ask you again , Commissioner , about the Commission 's position on the Hague Convention .
This issue forms an integral part of this debate .
Parliament asked you to withdraw the Commission 's signature under the Convention , and the debates in the Council have clearly not moved on very far .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner , to talk to Mr McCreevy again and to tell him that this House wants the Commission to rethink its position on this issue and to withdraw the European Union 's signature from this Convention .
( DE ) Madam President , I should like to thank everyone who has contributed to and supported this very difficult project .
Not everything has been resolved one hundred per cent satisfactorily , but that is inevitable with such a difficult compromise .
Nevertheless , we have taken a significant step towards making it easier for European shareholders to exercise their ownership rights .
In Europe , there are no large strides towards our ultimate goal , but only accumulations of small steps - and the issue of shareholders ' rights is no exception .
I wish to conclude on this note , express my thanks and forgo the remainder of my speaking time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

1 .
Shareholders ' voting rights ( vote )
2 .
Budget aid for developing countries ( vote )
3 .
Illegal fishing ( vote )
4 .
Country Strategy Papers - Malaysia , Brazil and Pakistan ( vote )
5 .
EC-Russia Short-stay Visa Agreement ( vote )
6 .
EC-Russia Readmission Agreement ( vote )
7 .
Member States ' employment policies ( vote )
- After the vote on the motion for a resolution :
( NL ) Mr President , you were actually going a little fast for me .
I would like to find out from the Commission whether it accepts the amendment that has been tabled .
As an exception , the Commission may take the floor again .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I think that the Commission is prepared to do all it can to consult throughout 2007 / 2008 year on the new guidelines for 2008 and 2010 .
Whether this necessarily requires a minimum of five months or not , given Parliament 's internal procedures , is not for the Commission to say .
( NL ) Mr President , since it now transpires that the Commission is still uncertain as to how much time it is prepared to give Parliament , I would , given that we have not yet reached the final vote , like to ask you to refer the report back to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , which will make some more consultation with the Commission possible .
It is usually up to the rapporteur to make such a request .
What is his position on this ?
rapporteur . - ( SV ) No , I shall not arrange for the proposal to be referred back .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten should know that the economic guidelines cannot be adopted by the Council until Parliament has expressed its opinion .
That is the actual rule .
The Commission , and above all the Council , must take account of Parliament 's points of view .
That is the case where the employment policy guidelines are concerned .
The economic guidelines are more of a problem because there is no such regulation in this area .
( The request for referral back to committee was rejected )
8 .
Common organisation of the market in wine ( vote )
9 .
External dimension of the fight against terrorism ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , we are going to vote on a report on the external dimension of the fight against international terrorism on the day on which the trial relating to the biggest attack in the history of Europe begins in Madrid .
Four direct victims of that attack are with us today in the gallery , Mr President .
Jesús Ramírez Castanedo , who was seriously wounded in the attack ; Jesús Abril Escusa , who lost his 19-year-old son ; Isabel Casanova Ortega , who lost her 22-year-old son together with her father ; and Euclides Antonio Río Grajales , who was seriously wounded in the attack .
For this two-fold reason , I would be grateful if this House could acknowledge them .
( The House rose and applauded the victims )
We should like to express our deepest sympathy with the victims , and we shall do everything possible within the rule of law to ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice .
We stand in solidarity with the victims and their families .
We remember with profound compassion those who lost their lives .
( Applause )
- Before the vote on Amendment 19 :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I propose that after Amendment 19 we insert the text of this oral amendment , which I believe also has the agreement of the rapporteur : ' in view of the recent discoveries of extremely dangerous terrorist organisations in Italy and France ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
10 .
Economic policy guidelines for 2007 ( vote )
11 .
Situation in Darfur ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 6 , Amendment 1 :
( PT ) Mr President , this is just to inform you that we are proposing an oral amendment to our Amendment 1 .
We wish to insert just three words : ' the threat of ' . As such , the final sentence will read :
' Underlines that sanctions on Sudan should also include the threat of an oil embargo ; '
( The oral amendment was accepted )
12 .
EIB Annual Report 2005 ( vote )
13 .
Increase in energy prices ( vote )
That concludes voting time .
Mr President , on a point of order , at the beginning of voting time we voted on two Esteves reports : the first on readmission , without a roll-call vote , and the second on short-stay visas , with a roll-call vote .
However , you announced the same title both times : ' the report on readmission ' .
As a result , there was some confusion in the vote by the Verts / ALE Group .
I would like to ask the Secretariat and the President to check our vote .
Our group 's position was in favour of the report on short-stay visas and against the report on readmission .
I am afraid that the whole group has voted otherwise because of the mistake made in the announcement of the title of the report .
Please take this into account .
If this was the case , Mrs Ždanoka , it will be noted .
We shall look into it and make the appropriate note in the Minutes .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Colleagues , you always insist that we start the vote on time , but it is in your hands !
Please settle down and take your seats .
Explanations of vote
I should like to take the opportunity of the vote on this report on the voting rights of shareholders , which is unfortunately taking place without prior debate , to draw the Chamber 's attention to the Eurotunnel scandal , the utter daylight robbery backed by French governments , be they socialist or liberal , that has been going on for years .
800 000 small shareholders , still accounting for some 90 % of the company 's capital , believed the promises of the tunnel 's designers , of the public authorities , the bankers and the manufacturers and invested some EUR 4.5 billion in the company .
They are now ruined , and will be damaged even further by a ' rescue ' plan , which consists of selling the company to non-European shareholders at basement rates and reimbursing its creditors , which have already earned EUR 8.5 billion in interest .
This plan was drawn up without consulting the shareholders and has been imposed on them by the Paris Tribunal De Commerce ( Court of Arbitration in Business Matters ) .
The only choice open to them is to respond or not to a takeover bid , which will keep them forever sidelined when it comes to capital and , by extension , to business decisions , at the very moment when the business is becoming extremely profitable .
This is a shameful episode , and the silence of the French authorities is scandalous .
All of this serves to dissuade people from investing in the economy , thereby leaving it to the mercy of the large , stateless , financial groups .
in writing .
I voted for this report as budget support is a great tool for partnership with developing countries , allowing them to take ownership of the use of development funds .
But funds must be used in the right way and there is a need to guard against misuse of funds and I am glad that this report suggests clearly identified criteria .
in writing . - ( FR ) Fifty years !
Almost fifty years during which several European countries have made great efforts in the area of development aid and north-south cooperation .
Half a century , with mixed results .
Why ?
For several reasons .
One reason is the lack of appropriate development strategies on the part of the countries receiving aid .
This is why I voted in favour of the report on budgetary aid for developing countries , that is to say , aid directly managed by the government of the benefiting country .
In this way , it is that government that will assume responsibility for its own development , following dialogue with the Union and the drafting of a strategy .

I am well aware that this instrument is a controversial one , especially when it is to be used in fragile countries with unstable economies , and of course when the countries concerned are undemocratic or corrupt .
It cannot therefore be used everywhere .
The success of budgetary support , however , is about breaking the vicious circle .
The conditions leave no room for doubt : no budgetary support without observing standards of governance and without fighting corruption ; no budgetary support without measures aimed at cleaning up the economy .
The more points a government scores for good governance , the more aid it receives .
This is about creating a virtuous circle .

( ES ) I would like to refer to the Community plan to eradicate illegal fishing , which , at international level , takes place above all in the waters of developing countries , which are too poor and lack the resources required to control fishing activities in the areas under their jurisdiction .
The fact that this illegal fishing cannot be prevented leads to losses and poverty for their coastal populations that depend on fishing for a living and for a secure source of food .
At the same time , these illegal practices lead to direct losses for legitimate fisheries operators as well .
In this regard , I would like to stress once again that one of the virtues of the association agreements in the fisheries sector between the European Union and other countries is that Community deep-sea fishing fleets have accepted the code of conduct for responsible fishing , promoted by the United Nations , and that their presence in those waters also means that other illegal vessels do not act with such impunity .
Therefore , being in favour of renewing all the fisheries agreements with third countries , since they offer significant mutual benefits for both parties , I have voted in favour of the plan to eradicate illegal fishing , because it poses a serious threat to the biological balance of the oceans , and that represents a great environmental risk that we cannot afford .
I voted in favour of the action plan against illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing , as this is a major problem around the world , causing considerable environmental degradation , contributing to the depletion of commercial and non-commercial fish stocks and other species and resulting in difficulties for communities dependent on fishing for their livelihoods in both developing and developed countries .
Furthermore , it constitutes unfair competition for those fishers and commercial players who abide by the rules laid down in law .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report , which recommends several measures to tackle illegal fishing , such as urging the Commission to help developing countries , above all those with which it has fishing agreements , to comply fully with the commitments of the above international plan of action designed to prevent illegal fishing .
In particular I support the call for the Commission to carry out and submit a study on compliance with Community labour , health and safety legislation and on respect for the social rights of workers on this type of vessel , and on their living and working conditions on board .
The EU has on several occasions declared its willingness to develop and deepen relations with its neighbours .
One of the essential prerequisites for improving bilateral relations is to facilitate the legal movement of people .
At this point , I should like to point out that the Russian Federation proposed to the EU the bilateral lifting of visa requirements .
Following the rejection of that offer , an agreement was reached in complicated negotiations covering short-stay visas for citizens of the Russian Federation and the Community , except for citizens of three of the EU Member States .
This is something of a pilot agreement because negotiations are ongoing on a similar agreement with the Balkan countries , Ukraine , Morocco and China .
The agreement contains a number of positive points , such as visas to be provided free of charge for holders of diplomatic passports , multiple visas , timeframes for issuing visas and fees for visas .
Naturally , this agreement is a long way short of visa-free relations , and the quick and problem-free issuance of visas free of charge .
Some comments made in the debate in this Chamber indicate that there are a number of MEPs with vested interests in the issue .
Attempts are being made , on the one hand , to revive the corpse of the European Constitution and , on the other hand , to use the agreement to interfere in Russia 's internal affairs .
These attempts were mostly repelled and were not included in the visa agreement .
We therefore support it in the belief that this is the first step on the road to visa-free relations with one of the EU 's key partners .
in writing . The GUE / NGL Group welcomes all Agreements that promote bilateral travel arrangements between the EU and the Russian Federation .
These facilitate the travelling of Russian citizens to the EU and vice versa .
Moreover , such arrangements are considered to be an important step forward , aiming at establishing better communication ties and creating political dialogue on a cultural , economical and political level .
However the GUE / NGL Group is very much concerned about the EC-Russia Short-stay Visa Agreement because of its close political link to the EC-Russia readmission agreement , which seriously undermines the protection and rights of refugees and immigrants , as well as their fundamental rights .
The GUE / NGL Group is also strongly opposed to Article 11 of the joint declaration to the agreement which defines " biometric identifiers " in diplomatic passports as a priority for ensuring a high level of document security .
GUE / NGL is also opposed to the fact that certain provisions of the Agreement apply exclusively to certain categories or groups of people .
This is considered discriminatory and the GUE / NGL Group stresses that the facilitation procedure for access visas should apply and be guaranteed equally to all citizens of the EU Member States and citizens of the Russian Federation .
in writing . - ( PT ) We naturally welcome the bilateral agreements between the EU and the Russian Federation aimed at facilitating and promoting the movement of Russian citizens to the various countries of the EU and vice versa .
These agreements represent a stepping stone towards establishing closer cultural , social and economic ties , which would meet the legitimate aspirations of thousands and thousands of people for procedures that would effectively facilitate contact between family members living in the Russian Federation and in EU Member States .
That being said , this agreement contains obligations that we find unacceptable , for example Article 11 of the Joint Declaration , which states that the requirement of ' biometric identifiers ' on diplomatic passports is a priority in order to ensure high levels of security .
We also object to the fact that some provisions in the agreement apply exclusively to certain ' categories ' or ' groups ' of people , as we feel that the process of facilitating the issuance of visas should apply and should be guaranteed to all citizens of EU countries and the Russian Federation .
The readmission agreement with Russia is one of the important documents through which the Commission is attempting to regulate immigration .
It actually forms part of the debate on the issues of democracy , equal rights , minority rights and the protection of cultural identity .
The issue goes beyond relations with Russia and the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States .
The key issue for EU Member States is mass immigration from Africa , Turkey , countries of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation ( SAARC ) , Indochina , China and Latin America .
The agreement with Russia should be a kind of model agreement , on the basis of which the Commission will clarify progress in the European economic area , and at the same time will gauge the extent to which it can interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring countries .
Russia is a large and powerful partner on which the EU is dependent up to a point , and because of this the agreement avoids making criticisms under the heading of ' respect for the basic rights of the persons involved ' .
It is only through the issues raised in the explanatory statement from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs that we see an attempt to use the readmission agreement to interfere in Russia 's internal affairs .
This trend is so disturbing that there is no way that I can support the agreement .
It runs counter to the security and humanitarian aspects of the agreement .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs is mostly interested , oddly enough , in ' the absence of a regulatory framework for implementing the agreement ' .
I welcome the call for the Commission to help Russian institutions implement the agreement .
On the other hand , I object to the obfuscation of the concept of safe third countries .
I share the view that the agreement on the facilitation of the issuance of short-stay visas and the readmission agreement between the European Community and Russia should help strengthen mutual relations and create a joint European area based on shared values and common interests .
I should like to remind the House that Russia was the first subject of the so-called joint strategy presented to the European Council in 1999 .
Even at that time it was clearly stated that Russia should be firmly anchored in Europe and that Russia must not be viewed merely as a threat or as an inferior or troublesome partner .
Taking account of both this overview and of current events in Europe and around the world , I cannot accept the idea put forward in the report on the readmission agreement that relations between the EU and Russia are going through a critical phase and that the new partnership and cooperation agreement after 2007 will depend on the perceived human rights situation in Russia .
Russia is not a superpower which wages wars and tramples human rights underfoot across every continent .
Those who criticise human rights abuses wherever they occur , and not only in Russia , should first ensure that they themselves strictly uphold human rights .
The fact that this is not the case is evidenced by the situation of the Russian non-citizens living in the Baltic States .
in writing . - ( FR ) This resolution adopts the Commission 's proposal concerning the Council 's decision , which heaps praise on the Lisbon Strategy and asserts that unemployment has gone down in Europe .
The Lisbon Strategy , even in its revamped form , will remain a symbol of shallow populism and inefficiency , given that the Member States subject to the Brussels guidelines are having difficulty in toeing the pro-European line and fail on growth , employment and modernising their social security systems .
This reduction in unemployment , according to the Commission 's positive assessment , is a delusion masking the reality of the figures .
This is very much a case of a ' Potemkin Village ' , because , in France alone , many poor people and people in insecure employment , not to mention the unemployed on training courses and many members of the active workforce who have been given early retirement , have been skilfully excluded from the statistics .
Lastly , the procedural amendment proposed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , wisely calling for Parliament to be given the necessary time to fulfil its consultative role on these social issues , demonstrates our institution 's powerlessness in the face of pro-European absolutism .
The Employment Guidelines in the European Union , which were jointly drafted and decided both by the New Democracy government and the previous PASOK government within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , inextricably link employment policy to the core objective of maximising the plutocracy 's profits , the necessary prerequisite to which is huge intensification of the exploitation of the working classes .
The pronouncements by the ΕU about allegedly reducing unemployment and so forth are aimed at deceiving the workers , given that it itself admits the failure of its policies , finding that the overall rate of employment was 63 % in 2003 , which is much lower than the agreed objective of 70 % , despite the apportionment of unemployment with temporary and flexible forms of employment , which accounted for 60 % of new jobs between 2000 and 2005 .
The future being prepared by the ΕU for the workers on the basis of the axes of its policy is a future of ' de-employment ' in which , even from preschool age , they will acquire fragmentary , opportunistic skills and training , drift from one form of semi-employment to another , with half or no employment , social , insurance or pension rights , travelling the length and breadth of their country and the EU in search of work , being constantly retrained to the requirements of capital with disposable knowledge , working into old age or until death producing incredible wealth which will be reaped and appropriated by the plutocracy .
in writing . - ( SK ) I have voted for this very important - though not legally binding - report by Katerina Batzeli , which is both consistent and well-balanced , presenting numerous essential suggestions from MEPs deeply knowledgeable of local traditions and customs in their regions .
Following the uproar caused by the Commission communication on a sustainable European wine industry , and in particular the decision to eradicate 400 000 ha of vineyards , it was necessary for the European Parliament to present its views of future reform of the wine sector in this report .
What is vital , in my opinion , is to preserve the budget of the Community , and not to shift any funds from the first to the second pillar of the common agricultural policy , which is devoted to rural development , as this might lead to resources being lost to the wine industry .
On the other hand , it is necessary to support the market position of wine and the wine industry by establishing a realistic advertising , communications and marketing policy based on joint organisation of the market .
I firmly believe that the Commission can devise efficient draft legislation only by making proper provision for the proposals from the European Parliament aimed at preserving the leading position worldwide of quality wines produced by the European wine industry , which is still a significant source of employment and prosperity in quite a few European regions , including Slovakia .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on reforming the common market organisation for wine , because I believe it contains many positive proposals .
As this report was worked on in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , it was very obvious that the committee was divided into two camps .
One comprised of the countries of northern and central Europe , and the other included southern European countries .
Nonetheless , I am sure everyone agrees that action must be taken to balance the situation on the market .
I also believe that the possibility of using sugar beet to enrich wine in wine-growing region A must be retained .
Failure to do so would amount to discrimination against the countries located in parts of the Union where the climate makes wine growing more difficult .
Those regions have never produced surpluses and should be exempt from the ban on certain plantings , which is aimed at limiting production .
In addition , I feel that the resources allocated to the emergency distillation of wine surpluses should be limited .
The additional wine alcohol produced in this way distorts the market in ethyl alcohol and is a burden on the Union 's budget .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have voted against the report on the common organisation of the market in wine .
The report is characterised by a high degree of protectionism that might hamper economic development in both the EU and developing countries .
The report also contains a number of wordings to the effect that the wine sector should be encouraged with the help of subsidies for the production and marketing of wine .
For us , supporting this is unthinkable in terms both of public health and of the consequences it would have for the EU 's budget .
A number of amendments deleting certain wordings in the report have been tabled by the xenophobic Integrity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group .
We Social Democrats have chosen to vote against the ITS Group 's amendments .
We think it unacceptable to support this group .
We believe that we have rejected the report by voting against it in its entirety .
Wine , for those who have been making it for centuries , is not just a beverage like any other to be marketed solely with a view to profit : it is a choice based on history , culture , respect and a quest for quality - often a quest for excellence .
Italy , the number one wine exporter in the world , has made high quality its banner , together with respect for consumers and the traditions of wine-making .

This report is schizophrenic : on the one hand it talks about promoting quality , while on the other it comes down in favour of enrichment with sugar ; on the one hand it talks about protecting geographical designations , while on the other it opens the door to new wine-making practices , such as wine with shavings .
The European Commission has , in any case , often taken a similar line ; for years it has preferred brutal liberalisation and large-scale distribution , at the expense of quality , tradition and the protection of consumers and producers .
Just to give an example , I would like to point to Regulation ( EC ) No 316 / 2004 which liberalised 17 traditional designations , in reality opening up the market to wine-making piracy .
For all these reasons , while I voted in favour of the report , I would like to express great concern for the future of the high quality of the wine-making sector , particularly the Italian sector .
in writing . - ( FR ) I must congratulate Mrs Batzeli on her work in this field , of which the economic , social , environmental , territorial and cultural ramifications are enormous .
I feel that her own-initiative report is a well-balanced and ambitious one , which will enable Parliament to influence the major guidelines of the reform of the common organisation of the market in wine drawn up by the Commission .
The European winemaking sector is in a difficult situation , facing fierce competition from wine from the New World .
It should be highlighted , however , that the EU remains the biggest producer , the biggest consumer and the biggest exporter of wine in the world .
I strongly object to the Commission 's first proposals , which would place production in the hands of a few major winemaking operations and would lead to a standardisation of wine and to crises in numerous European regions .
Permanent grubbing up would lead to the abandonment of production in the areas most cut off and in most difficulty , where there is no alternative form of production , and would serve to speed up the process of desertification .
We must respect the European winemaking tradition , the quality and authenticity of European wines and their ties with the soil .
It is not by adopting the corrective oenological practices used in other continents that we will become more competitive , but by favouring commercial investment and improving the promotion of our products .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report has gone completely against the Commission 's proposals on the reform of the common organisation of the market in wine and has made that organisation more respectful of the European wine tradition .
Speaking as a Socialist MEP , I feel that this report has struck the right balance in terms of the need to reform the sector and the interests of European winemakers .
Firstly , I welcome the implementation of structural measures aimed at restoring the balance of the market .
From now on , the cleaning up of the market will entail the gradual elimination of distillation arrangements and a targeted approach to grubbing up according to qualitative , geographical and environmental criteria .
Secondly , I welcome the implementation of regulatory measures on oenological practices , labelling - in order to meet the demand for transparency for the consumers - and the promotion of European wine in order to penetrate new markets around the world .
Lastly , as I am keen to protect traditional wine production in the face of wine subject to very little regulation , I welcome the ban on must imports .
I voted in favour of this report as I feel that reform of the winemaking sector must safeguard the specific characteristics of European wines , including Portuguese wines , the quality of which should be appreciated .
Given that the EU is the world 's biggest producer and consumer of wine and that the sector accounts for 60 % of the EU 's exports , I feel that there should be far-reaching reform of the current common organisation of the market in wine , which would help consolidate traditional markets and develop expanding markets .
The EU wine sector needs policies that lead to the strengthening , improvement and promotion of the competitiveness of European wine on an increasingly demanding international stage .
I come from a country , Portugal , and more specifically from a region , Madeira , in which the wine sector plays a highly significant economic role .
Although I acknowledge the need for far-reaching and ambitious reform of the common organisation of the market in wine , in order to modernise it and to adapt it to the development of the Community market and to the pressure of international competition , some of the solutions put forward by the Commission in its Communication of 22 June 2006 - especially that of permanent abandonment - do not resolve the problem of surplus production and do not address the challenge of competitiveness that European winemaking faces on the world market .
Rather , they threaten European ( quality ) winemaking potential , hamper the sustainability of the Community winemaking sector and damage the stability of winemakers .
As Mrs Batzeli , whom I congratulate , says in her report , ' the issue of permanent abandonment of wine-growing must not be the centrepiece of the CMO reform ' . The report contains a sensible analysis of the Commission 's proposals and presents a range of most timely suggestions .
I therefore voted in favour .
We are very disappointed that the various proposals that we tabled were rejected .
This led us to vote against the final report , although we agree with , and voted for , a number of the rapporteur 's proposals .
We are dismayed that the main measure proposed in the Commission communication for regulating supply and demand in the winemaking sector is the grubbing up of 400 000 hectares of vine , which will reduce production and jobs will be lost .
This will in turn serve to exacerbate the desertification of vast areas , as has already happened in Portugal , and to place the wine and alcohol sector into the hands of a few major producers and large companies .
These are measures aimed at reducing the EU 's vineyards , which would affect primarily the least developed regions , family holdings and farmers on low incomes , but they will have little impact on the rise in imports and the declining role of winemaking in the EU Member States .
We shall continue to defend our proposals and to combat the Commission 's proposal to liberalise the sector . What we are proposing is a different type of reform of the common organisation of the market in wine that values sustainable winemaking , the traditional characteristics of winemaking , small and medium-sized farming and family farming , the sector 's social and cultural role , and its important contribution towards regional and national development .
in writing . - ( FR ) I wish to ask the Commission the following questions :
Assuming that there has been surplus wine production since the 1970s , following 20 years of under-production , which at world level is unclear , why , then , import 12 million hectolitres every year from countries such as Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and Argentina ?
If , on the pretext of surplus production , my region of Languedoc-Roussillon has to carry out a programme of grubbing up , why import 12 million hectolitres - the exact equivalent of 15 million hectolitres produced in Languedoc-Roussillon - from countries outside the EU ?
If there is surplus production , why does Brussels want to authorise must imports from third countries , in order to make flat-pack ' Ikea wines ' ?
If there is surplus production , why seek to authorise the US practice of adding 7 % of water to wine ?
Why seek to grub up vineyards on our territory when Chile , Australia and the vineyards of the 33rd parallel are planting ?
' When China has drunk too much ' , who will give it wine to drink if we grub up vineyards ?
Of the 400 000 hectares , or 4 billion m2 , that have been grubbed up , does the Commission not envisage planting 4 million villas with a real estate value of EUR 100 billion ?
The Commission proposal on the CMO for wine jeopardises the protection of European wine production .
The provision that it makes for the grubbing-up of vines is liable to affect entire areas devoted to this production and also to irremediably damage the growing of indigenous vines which , while not very widespread , nonetheless represent centuries-old history and traditions .
The constant increase in wine production and quality in the so-called ' New World ' countries ( South Africa , Australia and South America , where vines are , by contrast , being planted ) , the increasing presence of these wines on the European market and the fact that worldwide demand for wine is on the increase make the idea of grubbing-up all the more incomprehensible .
Europe needs to be able to compete with its competitors on equal terms .
With a view to optimising European wine production and wine-making , I have tabled an amendment on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group that underlines the need to maintain the ban in Europe on using the new wine-making practices for ageing wine ( such as the use of oak shavings instead of the traditional period spent in the barrel ) .
in writing . This report , whilst it had many good points , could have potentially affected UK wine production in the south-east in a disastrous manner .
The ' fructose ' practice , whereby sugar is added to UK and other northern European wines , would have been banned if amendments urging this would have been passed and accepted by the House and the Commission .
This is a blatant attack from inside the wine-producing industry and should be forever rejected for future reports in this area .
in writing . ( SV ) The present report addresses a very important and topical issue , but its approach is quite wrong .
The European Parliament is again trying to boost its own importance , this time using the increase in terrorism and its victims as arguments .
The report is full of wordings involving small but nonetheless worrying steps in the direction of an EU state with a common foreign and security policy .
It also encroaches on countries ' internal affairs , in certain cases in opposition to the Member States ' fundamental laws .
We also note that it has the audacity to refer to a Constitution that has been rejected in referendums in Europe .
One of the most serious wordings concerns the desire to abolish the unanimity rule in as important an issue as police cooperation and cooperation on criminal law .
That is completely unacceptable .
We have consequently voted against the report , including most of the amendments tabled , and this in accordance with the mandate we have from our voters .
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports the majority of this report , particularly in underlining the vital role of respect for human rights and rule of law , the importance of upholding internationally-agreed values , the need to strengthen coordination of intelligence between Member States and the importance of examining the conditions that feed terrorism .
However , it is premature to link ESDP operations with counter terrorism , and the cost of any such ESDP operation would have to come from the CFSP budget not the EU budget , as stated .
In addition , abrogation of unanimity on police and judicial cooperation is not appropriate for this report as it is a much wider issue and is part of the broader ' Passerelle ' argument .
in writing . I voted for this report as respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms must be the basis of the fight against terrorism .
I support a multiple approach , from prevention through the building of an alliance of civilizations , to joint police operations .
in writing . Among the reasons I cannot support this report are :
the reference to the use of combat units ( battle groups ) and enhanced cooperation with NATO ;
the vague use of the term ' radicalisation ' as an indicator for ' non-democratic actions ' ;
the promotion of cooperation between security and intelligence services and police , judicial and customs authorities of the Member States and third countries , raising the issue of data protection and constituting a deterioration of civil liberties and respect for human rights ;
the mixing of police , security and intelligence forces , which could lead to abuse of powers against the citizens , as has been seen recently in Ireland ;
the interlinking of internal policies with terrorism results in the elimination of the inter-pillar structure , bringing forward the logic of the draft EU Constitution .
There is no mention of state terrorism .
Some of the root causes of violence ( occupation , injustice , social and economic causes ) are barely mentioned .
The report points the finger at Islam , fostering discrimination and undermining respect for different religions and cultures .
in writing . - ( EL ) Even before the ink of the European Parliament 's supposed protest about the riot of CIA activities has dried on the resolutions by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and so forth , the report by the ' socialist ' MEP Mr Garcia escalating the EU 's terrorist policy over the entire planet is being approved .
With what is now the familiar plea of protection of human rights , the report proposes the application of measures in a more reactionary direction , such as :
• stepping up militarisation and ' preventive ' repression inside and outside the ΕU by strengthening and increasing resources for rapid intervention forces - battlegroups - and other repressive ΕU mechanisms such as Europol and Frontex ;
• even greater ' cooperation ' with imperialist forces , such as the USA and Israel , and with organisations such as ΝΑΤΟ , the OSCE and so forth in the military sector and in the exchange of information sector ;
• unprovoked intervention in the internal affairs of third countries with sanctions and coercive measures and the cutting of trade relations and the subsidies provided for in the various EU guiding financing mechanisms ;
• abolishing the right of veto in the sectors of policing and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
Conclusion for the peoples : the more the ΕU cites democratic rights , the more aggressive it becomes .
The more it appears to distance itself from the USA , the more closely it cooperates in order to strike countries and grassroots movements .
Time has told us in Europe that 11 September was not an isolated act and that the United States was not the only target of terrorism .
The fact that we have understood this , albeit as a result of tragic events , is a sign that we understand the world around us .
What needs to be done in external policy in order to enhance our security in the face of the terrorist threat is to promote not only peace but also economic development .
That alone is not enough , however .
The key issue is combating radicalism .
After all , it is not our freedom , economic development , modernity or the mere existence of Western culture that feeds terrorism ; it is radicalism .
We must not let the ' white man 's burden ' obscure reality .
Radicalism must be combated by promoting women 's rights , by increasing trade and economic relations , by developing the economy and by fostering democracy ; in a nutshell , by promoting the presence around us of more liberal societies .
It is also necessary , at the same time , to invest immediately in security , including efficient intelligence services that are equipped to face the new realities , and to be prepared to use military means when this is useful , necessary and legitimate .
in writing . Conservatives strongly support robust counter-terrorism measures and the protection of genuine human rights , which should not be abused , as a first line of defence for terrorists .
The report contains some useful elements , calling for closer cooperation between EU Member States and external allies like the US , Japan and Australia , an investigation into charities linked to money laundering and terrorist financing , and universal ratification of the 16 UN instruments on combating terrorism .
However , too much of the report is devoted to extending the role and competences of the EU .
It not only refers to the draft European constitution but encourages the EU to implement more treaty provisions relating to the European Security and Defence Policy , which is seriously flawed .
We oppose proposals to remove the national veto in areas of police and judicial cooperation , a violation of national sovereignty that would leave the UK even less able to control its borders and defend its integrity .
The report makes only one mention of NATO , seemingly as an afterthought .
For all these reasons Conservatives abstained on this report .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe 's economy is experiencing a period of growth .
This has led to lower unemployment , improved public finances and a reduction in the average budget deficit .
It should be emphasised that labour productivity has risen , and this has made us more competitive .
I believe it is appropriate to point out to the House that these positive economic trends emerged following the enlargement of the European Union .
Low economic development was a feature of all of the 10 new countries which joined the Union in May 2004 .
A more detailed study reveals that economic growth was significantly higher in the countries which liberalised their labour market and opened it up to the flow of workers from the new countries .
It may therefore confidently be stated that enlargement of the Union benefited both the old Fifteen and the new Ten .
It is to be hoped that the accession of Bulgaria and Romania will prove a further positive stimulus to the Union 's economic growth .
The purpose of the report before us is to square the circle - to tackle the economic and social problems faced by the Union whilst developing the existing economic policies and instruments that lie at the root of those problems .
The report does acknowledge that over the past six years , since the introduction of the euro and the Lisbon Strategy , there has been weak economic growth , stagnation and even recession in some Member States , including Portugal .
It recognises that economic recovery cannot be taken for granted , that unemployment remains high ( 17 million in the EU ) and that poverty has gone up 2 percentage points . It also considers it unacceptable that there are almost 80 million poor people in the EU .
Moreover , it acknowledges weak internal demand and the need for greater investment .
It contradicts itself , however , when it says that the euro and the internal market have been crucial victories for European progress , and promotes monetary policy ( wage moderation ) , the deregulation of the labour market ( flexicurity ) and the Stability and Growth Pact .
Reading between the lines , we can see its true purpose - to create a climate that is most favourable to entrepreneurial activity .
The current economic and social policy guidelines pursued by the EU have been championed again and the contradictions of the social democrats and their role in liberal capitalism have been laid bare .
in writing . ( SV ) This report contains no analysis of what may need to be harmonised at EU level .
It is based on assumptions the truth of which needs to be demonstrated .
The objective is all but total control of economic policy at EU level .
It is asserted without a shred of evidence that EMU has strengthened the European economy .
Experience suggests , rather , that the single currency has been downright damaging in relation to stabilising the economy and has had few positive structural effects .
The rapporteur demands more money from the Community budget for the Lisbon Strategy .
That is absurd .
What is required is that the Member States in fact behave in accordance with what they properly understand to be their own interests .
There is no reason for trying to get other countries to fund them out of common budget resources .
The report shows no understanding at all of the value of the Member States having so far avoided control from above and therefore being able to look for new directions in economic policy .
At the same time , the rapporteur continually points out that certain countries succeed much better than others in various areas .
The fact that he can indicate these differences and draw conclusions about what is obviously best practice is due to the fact that we have not implemented the standardisation and extreme control from the top for which he appeals .
The report indicates a very dangerous route for economic policy in Europe .
We have therefore voted against it .
in writing . ( PL ) This report has been carefully prepared .
It provides an overview of the state of the European economy based on a good deal of statistical data .
It makes it possible to identify trends in the development of the Europe of 27 Member States and trends in the new countries .
There is also a commentary explaining the relevant reasons . I would emphasise the significance of internal demand and export for economic growth .
The report contains many important elements for assessing the impact of external factors , such as the economic situation in the United States , the price of oil and the euro-dollar exchange rate .
Another strong argument in favour of the report is the large measure of agreement on its content within the committee .
Credit for this is due to the rapporteur .
in writing . ( SV ) With its focus on traditional growth policy , the report is old-fashioned and behind the times .
It makes a casually optimistic assessment of the euro and is unbalanced in the way that it sings the praises of the internal market .
At the same time , parts of the report are critical of the EU and recognise increasing wage differences , greater poverty and the advantages of the Scandinavian model .
The report contains continued demands for forced liberalisation of the energy market , yet at the same time sets out demands for investment and a tax policy that favour renewable energy .
There are , then , both positive and negative aspects to the report .
I am therefore abstaining in the final vote .
I voted in favour of this outstanding report on a most important , relevant and topical issue .
Measures to reverse the current trend of Europe 's increasing dependency on imported energy supply must be taken , for example by encouraging investment in renewable energy sources , enabling us to meet the objectives of the Kyoto Protocol .
As a matter of urgency , a global strategy must be drawn up leading to reduced energy consumption , in particular in the transport sector , which is responsible for 56 % of oil consumption in Europe .
Higher oil prices , which have hit almost USD 80 per barrel , appear to be a structural phenomenon that is here to stay .
Unlike the oil crises of the 1970s , which were caused by a breakdown in supplies , the current ' crisis ' has arisen , on the one hand , from increased demand on the part of developing countries such as China and India , and of the biggest consumer in the world , the United States , and , on the other , from predictions that this ' finite ' resource will be in short supply in the medium term .
Living with higher oil prices worsens recession and balance of payments difficulties , results in higher production costs , inflation and interest rates , penalises families on low incomes and causes wars over control of the oil supply , as in Iraq .
If technological solutions can contribute towards increasing energy efficiency , and towards finding new forms of fuel and energy , it is vital that we change the capitalist mode of production , which causes waste and inefficiency .
The answer lies in reducing GDP energy intensity , in promoting high-quality public rail transport and in promoting production for local markets .
Whilst the rapporteur has put forward some welcome proposals , we cannot accept the creation of an internal market for energy and the liberalisation that goes with that .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that rising energy prices are best adjusted to at national level .
We are therefore sceptical about this opinion-soliciting resolution from the European Parliament .
For example , paragraph 20 of the draft report regrets the lack of an energy regulator in the EU .
Bureaucratisation and control from the top are , as always , the only way proposed by Parliament .
We believe that the Member States should exercise the regulatory function themselves as long as there is no question of cross-border risks of the type associated with nuclear power .
If such risks do exist , the regulatory body should , however , be the United Nations ' International Atomic Energy Agency .
The EU countries should agree on certain energy targets .
How these are achieved should be left up to the individual Member States .
Otherwise , the report contains both helpful and unhelpful wordings .
We have chosen to vote against the report in the final vote , since it does not form part of any legislative process and carries little weight and because , in our view , it makes no difference to the debate in the Member States on these issues .
Although the report stresses the impact of oil price increase on the transport sector , which is responsible for 56 % of total oil consumption , it is a great pity that it makes no reference to other sectors , such as fisheries .
Fuel prices have hit the fisheries sector particularly badly . Its operating margins and economic viability have been significantly affected , thus exacerbating the socio-economic crisis in the sector .
Between 2004 and 2006 alone , the price of fuel went up by around 100 % , and in some parts of the sector fuel accounts for some 50 % of total operating costs .
Fishermen have seen their incomes go down , which is particularly serious as the sector is mainly concentrated in regions with fragile economies .
Various studies warn of the risk of thousands of fishing businesses and thousands of jobs disappearing on account of fuel price rises .
Urgent , extraordinary measures must therefore be taken to support the sector , for example the creation of a guarantee fund , with Community participation , in order to stabilise fuel prices .
Until such time as that fund is put in place , the fishing businesses affected must be granted some form of temporary compensation .
in writing .
( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr dos Santos because I agree with the principles , the analysis and the proposals it contains . I also voted in favour because the broader debate engendered by this report , both inside and outside Parliament , has helped to clarify the issues for the general public and to ensure that experts and politicians are better informed .
I was able to use this report in a paper on geopolitics and energy that I gave in Ankara at the EU / Turkey Parliamentary Committee .
Furthermore , I had the honour of taking part in a seminar in Lisbon organised by Mr dos Santos , where I chaired two panels . At the conference , the report was discussed in great detail with high-level personalities , experts and interested members of the public .
The debate on energy issues must go on and must go further .
Mr dos Santos 's report is a positive contribution to that debate .
in writing . The high cost of oil has significant adverse effects on businesses and families in Scotland , where there is still substantial dependence upon road transportation of goods and passengers , due to a lack of realistic alternatives in large areas of rural Scotland , and due to the distances involved in transporting goods to mainland European markets .
The situation in Scotland is worsened by the fact that the UK Government imposes very high taxation levels on road fuels , further disadvantaging Scots traders and travellers .
I supported the Dos Santos report , which rightly identifies the need to prioritise development of renewable energy sources and improving energy efficiency .
Scotland has considerable potential to contribute to such developments .
We also have in Scotland a significant offshore oil and gas resources , and it is essential that we maintain a set of economic circumstances which will encourage exploration and full extraction of that resource .
My belief is that an independent Scottish government would ensure that all of Scotland 's energy resource potential can be maximised .
in writing .
( MT ) The economic impact of the increase in oil prices is considerably greater in situations such as that of Malta , which is a country wholly dependent on oil as its energy source .
This is a problem that has never been addressed with the urgency it deserves , despite the fact that a country of Malta 's size lends itself more easily to the development of creative alternatives .
If our limited space does not allow us to build large alternative energy plants , then fiscal incentives must be made available to those businesses and families that want to invest in cleaner energy technology .
Due to a lack of planning in the area of oil purchasing , Maltese and Gozitan families and businesses now have to pay a surcharge on their electricity bills , which currently stands at 45 % .
This surcharge on services that are so essential is proving to be a financial burden on families , especially those in the lower income bracket , and is giving rise to extra costs for companies - a development that in turn is putting pressure on the cost of living .
Worse , this continuous fluctuation in prices makes it difficult for individuals to plan ahead , and this leads to uncertainty .
What is even worse is that , while people are asked to pay extra for indispensable services , there is an unjustified waste of public resources .
The European Parliament 's recommendations indicate long-term solutions to the problem .
However , governments too should plan ahead in order to be able to cope with problems such as these and not expect their mistakes to be paid for by workers , families and small businesses .
The impact of the current increase in oil prices is highly significant for a European economy showing only weak signs of recovery .
Its effect in lowering GDP growth , employment levels and investment , as well as the different energy dependency levels in the EU Member States make our task all the more difficult .
The social consequences are thus easy to predict , given that accommodation and transport are the top two items of expenditure for European families : inequality in purchasing power will inevitably increase .
It is clear , therefore , how important it is to complete the internal market in energy , to increase competitiveness and to boost investment in alternative energy sources .
It is necessary to guarantee that freedom of movement remains a pillar of European growth , and it is therefore vital to ensure that European mobility is not affected , and that social exclusion and the impoverishment of the most vulnerable members of society do not result .
The European energy supply crisis can only be mitigated effectively by means of a global EU strategy aimed at the gradual reduction in oil dependency , the development and production of alternative fuels , including looking into the nuclear option , and innovative solutions to managing transport systems as a whole .
in writing . On behalf of the EPLP we support the broad principles and thrust of this report given that it deals with a very urgent problem facing the European Union .
The problem is oil price shocks caused by major disruptions to oil supply , whilst at the same time demand grows across the world for this increasingly scarce resource .
However , we would disagree that there is a need for tax harmonisation on this issue .
Whilst many of the recommendations from the rapporteur are completely acceptable and while the UK may practise the essential elements of the tax regime proposed already , we do not believe it is the role of the EU to set a rate of taxes in Member States .
That concludes voting time .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Dialogue between the Chinese government and Envoys of the Dalai Lama ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the dialogue between the Chinese Government and the Envoys of the Dalai Lama .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is no good thing that the world at large should have accepted for so long China 's conception of Tibet as an integral part of itself .
The Tibetans embody their own culture in inhospitable living conditions , isolated and high up in the mountains .
For a long time , China has been unable to resist the temptation to consider that region as a fall-back that can absorb sections of its own very large population .
This is a problem not only for the people of Tibet , but also for those of the neighbouring and more readily accessible region of Xinjiang , home to the Uighurs , who are related to the Turkic-speaking peoples , such as the Kazaks , Kyrgyzs and Uzbeks .
They fear becoming minorities in their own countries and losing everything that is dear to them .
Moreover , we should certainly not idealise the traditional living conditions of Tibetans and Uighurs .
Although sweeping changes are called for , these changes should not be imposed from outside or , what is more , serve outside interests .
Since China is the world 's most populated country and an up-and-coming economic power , it is extremely unlikely that Tibet will be given the opportunity to develop into an independent state .
This makes it all the more important that , 50 years after the major conflict , there should be a reconciliation in which , within China , the Tibetans are allowed to retain the most valuable traits of their individuality and they no longer run the risk of becoming the victim of state violence .
These days , the progress ideology that has dominated China for nearly 60 years is mainly focused on economic growth .
Although this has drawbacks , it does offer more scope for tolerance and recognition of diversity than was the case for a long time .
A dialogue or cultural individuality and self-governance within China should pay off .
My group is in favour of anything that can contribute to this dialogue and to peaceful solutions .

author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe simply to join in the request , directed primarily towards the Chinese regime , to resume dialogue - and let us not forget that this request is also addressed to our European institutions .
As the European Parliament , in the past we have made the proposal that a special representative be appointed to deal with the issue of Tibet , but we know that the proposal has so far not been implemented .
In my view , this would be a useful and tangible contribution .
There are also other instruments , such as a declaration by the Presidency of the European Union .
I hope that the discussion and the debate will not be restricted to a mere invitation to the Chinese regime , since this request is also of direct concern , at the highest levels , to the institutions of the European Union .
We should not be afraid of this .
This Parliament has shown that it is not naively utopian in urging the importance of political and commercial relations with the Chinese regime .
In this Chamber , nobody wishes to deny the real significance of such relations ; nor is there any need , however , to commit the opposite error , and that is to ' poison ' a line of action that is clearly highly popular , not within the institutions but with the people .
The Tibet issue and support for dialogue are matters which enjoy the support of the people of Europe .
For that reason , excessive timidity deriving from other motivations should not be allowed to influence the current debate , attention to human rights or the resumption of dialogue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank all of you for attending this debate on Tibet - particularly now that we have reached an important point , with solutions to a problem that has been smouldering away for decades within reach .
This is only the case , however , if the Chinese Government , too , stops deliberately raising certain issues as stumbling blocks .
For example , it is unacceptable to put the spotlight on the history issue ; that is , to ask whether or not Tibet was ever part of China .
This is completely the wrong question to ask .
Instead we must look to the future .
We have to keep repeating that the Dalai Lama and the Tibetans themselves are striving for autonomy - and not just on paper - allowing them cultural and religious freedom and access to education .
They are not questioning the ' one China ' policy .
This must be emphasised time and again , even if the solicitations from the Chinese Embassy that many of my fellow Members have no doubt received in recent days tell a quite different story .
I can tell you that we know how things stand .
We need dialogue , and we want this dialogue .
Europe must support it - I fully agree with the previous speaker on this .
Europe must bring this dialogue into much sharper focus and also conduct it at official level .
author . - Mr President , the dialogue between the Government of China and the representatives of the Dalai Lama is to be warmly welcomed and should continue to receive our approval and support .
Only through forward-looking dialogue will pragmatic solutions be found that will meet the aspirations of the Tibetan people and fully respect China 's sovereignty and territorial integrity .
Let us always keep in mind that the ' one China ' policy is a long-standing EU position .
Our support is undeniable , but we should also ensure that this support becomes practical .
Such practical support should be offered in the context of the new partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Union and China .
Personally , I do not support the idea of a special representative for Tibet because we already have enough means in our hands to facilitate such a dialogue .
China has an enormously positive role to play in world affairs .
Just one example : China made a vital contribution to the success of the six-party talks on North Korea just yesterday .
We can use this as an example and as a lesson .
If China can make a positive contribution through structured dialogue to regional peace and stability , then we can also engage China in a dialogue which will help to create a climate of confidence that will allow for a pragmatic solution to the Tibet issue .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , on 26 October 2006 the European Parliament adopted a resolution condemning the shooting of unarmed women and children in the Nangpa-la pass .
We also called for those responsible for this crime to be punished .
The incident caused an outcry the world over , but to no avail , as the situation in the region remains unchanged .
It is true that no reports of further brutal murders have reached us recently , but this does not mean that the situation has improved .
It seems to me that little has changed in this age-old conflict during the three months that have elapsed since our last debate .
We must be consistent , however , and bear the rights of the 6 million people affected by the problems in the region uppermost in our minds .
This is a region where human rights are still constantly violated , even in the 21st century .
In my view , this problem should be a priority for the new President of the European Parliament and therefore , ladies and gentlemen , for us all .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , what good are bilateral talks if they do not produce any tangible results ?
Do they mask an inability to act , or do they at least contribute to confidence-building ?
Parliament is rightly calling for the resumption of the dialogue , last conducted one year ago , between the representatives of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government .
Items on the agenda should include the elimination of reprisals , an end to human rights violations , and tangible measures to guarantee the Tibetan population cultural and religious autonomy .
The dialogue was launched in September 2002 .
China has been blocking it for 12 months .
The grounds are always the same : preconditions are to be met ; the Dalai Lama is not interested in improving relations , and is striving for Tibetan independence .
This is simply not true .
For years , His Holiness has been interested not in an independent state , but in Tibetan autonomy .
There are good examples of this kind of legal status even in the EU .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats stands by four positions , as do almost all other groupings in this House . Firstly , an EU Special Representative for Tibet must be appointed .
It is insufficient that this issue be relegated to the fringe of EU-China dialogue .
Secondly , we want the Commission to make Tibet an integral part of the EU-China Partnership and Cooperation Framework Agreement .
We ask that the Commission inform Parliament of progress and retrogression .
Thirdly , the Council should include in its annual report information on current developments with regard to the China-Tibet dialogue .
Fourthly , the EU should draw up joint strategies with its partners in the world , particularly the USA .
It is my fervent hope that the representatives of the People 's Republic of China understand the desire of the international community - as just expressed by my fellow Members - for China to resume this dialogue with the Tibetans at long last .
After all , China 's representatives are most preoccupied with good press in the run-up to the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing .
I believe that today 's debates on the dialogue between the Chinese Government and the Dalai Lama 's representatives are particularly important for a number of reasons , but above all , because on 17 January this year negotiations officially started in Beijing toward a new agreement on the basics of partnership and cooperation between the European Union and China .
More than once we have expressed support for the commitment of the Government of the PRC and His Holiness the Dalai Lama to resolve the issue of Tibet by means of dialogue .
I think the European Parliament , which in the past has adopted more than one resolution on Tibet , on the human rights situation in the People 's Republic of China and likewise on dialogue between the PRC and the Dalai Lama 's representatives , must urge the European Council , the Commission and European Union member countries to actively support the intensifying of this dialogue and to seek a result .
While no tangible results have yet been obtained in the resolution of these basic questions , Parliament should - in consultation with both parties - evaluate what further role the EU can play in seeking to facilitate a solution of the Tibet issue by means of negotiation , and it should appoint a special European Union envoy to Tibet .
I support the position of the resolution we are considering that the Senior Commissioner and the Council 's Secretary-General be encouraged to include information about progress on the dialogue between the PRC and representatives of His Holiness the Dalai Lama in 2007 and also in later years in the Annual Report to Parliament on General International and Security Policy .
I think the country currently presiding over the Council - Germany - could initiate and accept a declaration that would show how the European Union might assist in achieving a peaceful resolution of the Tibet question through negotiation .
In conclusion , I would like to thank Mr Thomas Mann and other colleagues who initiated the resolution being considered today .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the question of Tibet 's status is raised in the European Parliament several times a year .
So far , however , the resolutions we have adopted have not led to any tangible results .
The same is unfortunately also true of the consultations that have been taking place between the Tibetans and the Chinese Government since 2002 .
The problem of Tibet remains unresolved .
In the meantime , over 1 200 000 of the six million Tibetans have lost their lives under the Chinese occupation that began in 1951 .
Every year , some 3 000 inhabitants of Tibet flee their country . These are mainly children and young people , who can only obtain a Tibetan education abroad .
The Tibetan people are discriminated against in every area of social life , from education through to social care , work , living conditions and religion .
We must act in solidarity and exert pressure on the Chinese Government , so that the dialogue is resumed as soon as possible and the status of Tibet regulated .
The European Commission should raise the matter of discussions with the Dalai Lama during negotiations on the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between China and the Union .
For its part , the Council should define the Union 's role in resolving the Tibet issue , as the outcome of the negotiations between China and Tibet should be reflected in the Council 's annual report to Parliament on the implementation of the European Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the problem of Tibet has been with us for many years and , as has already been mentioned , this House has dealt with different aspects relating to this problem many times in the past .
In essence , the core issue of dispute between the people of Tibet and China has been the wish of the Tibetans for self-determination , as opposed to the Chinese Government 's fear of a possible domino effect leading to the break-up of China .
In fact , such a problem has been the commonest cause of disputes worldwide .
However , history has shown that by far the best and most effective way to solve such problems is through peaceful and open negotiations with a prerequisite determination on the part of all concerned to find a lasting solution .
The alternative way - that of endless confrontation and bloodshed - usually leads nowhere and is , in most cases , to the detriment of both sides .
With this in mind , we would warmly welcome a commitment by both the Government of China , in particular , and the Dalai Lama to resolve the Tibet question through a process of dialogue , and wholeheartedly hope that such a process , if brought about , will lead to a successful resolution of the Tibetan problem .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Despite the fact that since 2002 there have been five rounds of dialogue between the Government of the People 's Republic of China and representatives of the Dalai Lama , it is abundantly clear that there are fundamental differences standing in the way of reaching a definitive agreement that clarifies the situation of Tibet in a way that is satisfactory to all of the parties , while at the same time being fair and proper , particularly for the people of Tibet .
Nevertheless , I am one of those who believe that the responsibility of each of the two parties for the fact that an agreement has not been reached cannot be compared .
The Dalai Lama , as the spiritual leader of the Tibetan people , has demonstrated his desire for dialogue and agreement on more than one occasion , and he has even given up his demand for complete independence in favour of a genuine autonomy that guarantees respect for the ethnic , linguistic , cultural and religious identity of Tibet .
In this regard , I believe that it is the Chinese Government that should show greater signs of willingness and at least accept a resumption of dialogue with a view to reaching a good final agreement .
I would therefore urge the European Commission , the Council and the Member States to take every possible opportunity to support a new round of dialogue between China and Tibet .
In particular , as others have said , it is essential that we take advantage of the negotiations of a framework agreement on European Union-China cooperation , which began on 17 January , to express the Community 's commitment to dialogue and a fair and lasting solution to the issue of Tibet .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is often the case that different standards are applied to China , where human rights are concerned , than to countries where lucrative contracts are unlikely to materialise .
It is very unfortunate that the rule in these situations seems to be that of Erst das Fressen und dann die Moral .
When reading the relevant resolutions , which reflect not only the positions of the different groups in connection with this dialogue , but also the stance of official Europe , I , as a Fleming , do have some reservations .
Politicians who , yesterday and the day before that , while discussing the Fava report , brandished international law and insisted on human rights - which they were right to do - are now suddenly talking about the need to respect China 's sovereignty , whilst not breathing a word about the illegal occupation and subsequent annexation of Tibet , about the mass human rights violations , the ever increasing exclusion of the Tibetans from their local government , or the Namdrang Rangdrik programme , launched in 2005 , whereby Tibetans are forced to demolish their houses and subsequently rebuild them according to strict official guidelines .
The sanctimonious line is that a mutually acceptable solution must be found for Tibet 's future .
To say that is to make victim and executioner equal partners in dialogue .
It became once again evident on whose side the EU is when in November 2005 , the Chinese President , Hu Jintao , was received with much pomp and circumstance across Europe , yet it had , in fact , been he who perpetrated serious human rights violations when he was Secretary of Tibet 's Communist Party between December 1988 and March 1992 .
The Tibet issue once again demonstrates that European rhetoric all too often amounts to nothing but moral wrapping paper and that in reality , only economic interests matter .
We must continue to have the courage to denounce the cowardice and sanctimoniousness of this Europe , of this mercantile Europe that chooses to side with the oppressors to the detriment of innocent peoples .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , thank you for your very strong commitment to human rights .
I trust the honourable Members have noticed the same strong focus on fundamental human rights and universal values in the recent Commission communication and in the Council conclusions on China .
This reflects the fact that it is and will remain an important priority for the European Union with regard to our overall relations with that country .
We share the concern expressed in the joint resolution regarding the human rights situation in Tibet and , in particular , the preservation of the cultural , religious and linguistic identity of the Tibetan people .
This issue has been regularly addressed by the European Union in the framework of bilateral dialogue on human rights , as well as at the highest political level , such as our bilateral summits and senior officials ' meetings .
Former European Parliament President , Mr Borrell , also raised the matter when he officially visited China last year .
With regard to the recent shooting mentioned by Mr Czarnecki , I would like to inform you that this matter was formally taken up by the European Union during the last session of the EU-China Dialogue on human rights held in Beijing in October 2006 and via the subsequent follow-up démarche in December 2006 .
On both occasions , the EU urged the Chinese authorities to undertake a thorough investigation of this incident and refuted the Chinese claim that the shooting had been done in self-defence .
We will follow this serious matter closely .
I agree with Mr Matsakis that bloodshed leads nowhere .
The Commission has regularly kept this Chamber informed regarding its overall policy vis-à-vis Tibet and will continue to do so .
As Commissioner Fischer Boel underlined in this Chamber in October 2006 , the EU has consistently taken the view that establishing a direct dialogue between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities is the only realistic way to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the question of Tibet , which will hopefully lead to the recognition of a genuine autonomy of the Tibetan region .
We have therefore followed very closely and welcomed the five rounds of talks which have taken place up to now between the Special Envoys of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government .
In this respect , EU officials have regular contacts with the two Special Envoys , the last being in November 2006 .
Even in this Chamber there are differing opinions on the question of the appointment of a special EU envoy .
We have our doubts about the value of such an appointment , because such an envoy would probably be prevented from having a real impact on the ground or from playing a significant role in this dialogue .
We need the two sides to continue and deepen the dialogue .
We agree with the honourable Members that this dialogue should be regular and substantive , and that the respective parties should refrain from taking any step that would compromise the establishment of a climate of confidence .
We take note that the Tibetan side is ready for a rapid resumption of the dialogue and hope that the Chinese side is willing to do the same .
The European Union will spare no efforts in stressing the importance of this dialogue to both parties on all possible occasions .
I also want to express my gratitude for your attention and focus on this matter and your support , especially now via this resolution , because such support is helpful in the process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , first I wish to express my thanks for this motion for a joint resolution .
I believe that it is sound , impartial and relevant .
Constructive solutions need to be found for this age-old issue of Tibet .
The motion for a resolution is geared towards finding a solution to the Tibet question which is compatible with China 's right to self-determination and which respects the rights of the people of Tibet , and this , I think , is the right approach .
We need a constructive , peaceful process that recognises that Tibetan nationals have a right to their own culture and religion .
As citizens of Europe and of the world , we have to ensure that people 's fundamental rights can be implemented around the world .
In this respect it is to be hoped that people 's cultural and religious rights will not be restricted in Tibet either .
We would hope that proper dialogue can be established between Tibet and China , leading to a solution that is satisfactory to both sides .
I hope that we will find practical solutions which also show respect for China 's regional inviolability but which at the same time fulfil the wishes of the Tibetan people .
I do not know if this is too much to hope for , but we in the European Union must work hard to establish such a peaceful coexistence .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
As we have often complained about the Council 's absence from our Thursday afternoon debates on human rights , I would like to point out that , today , the German Presidency is represented , and in the person of its spokesman on human rights Mr Nooke , who was at one time a civil rights activist in the former German Democratic Republic .
This is something of a sensation .
It is one that gives us pleasure , and I would be very happy if , during the trilogue , we could bring pressure to bear to ensure that this becomes something of a dependable tradition , that is to say , that the presence of the Council - Mr Nooke is here as an observer today - becomes a fixture in these Thursday afternoon human rights debates in future .
In any event , Mr Nooke , many thanks for joining us here today .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr Posselt 's contribution was not a point of order , but we agree entirely with him .
2 .
Humanitarian situation of refugees from Iraq ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the humanitarian situation of refugees from Iraq .

author . - ( DE ) Mr President , although this resolution on the situation of refugees from and in Iraq is a very sound one , it is silent on the central issue , namely the reasons why there are refugees in and from Iraq .
The primary reason is the occupation of Iraq by troops from the US , the UK and other EU Member States , and , above all , the nature of that occupation .
If you pursue a policy of occupation of this nature , you should not be surprised when it generates refugees .
Despite Germany 's restrictive asylum policy , people from Iraq now form the largest group of asylum-seekers in that country .
According to figures from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) , there are 1.7 million refugees within Iraq and a further 2 million in neighbouring countries .
These people are fleeing because Iraq is in a state of war .
The Bloomberg School of Public Health and the Johns Hopkins University have presented a study , published in the New York Times and the Washington Post , which estimated the number of Iraqis over and above the normal mortality rate who died as a result of the invasion and its consequences between March 2003 and July 2006 to be 650 000 .
Of these , the estimates count 600 000 people who have died as a direct result of violence and 50 000 who have died as a result of disease and other causes .
The study goes on to say that , after the end of the invasion , 31 % of the victims were believed to have been killed by coalition troops or air raids .
According to the Johns Hopkins University , the risk of dying a violent death is 58 times higher than before the invasion .
What I want to say to this House is that these figures show that the occupation of Iraq is wrong and must finally be brought to an end .
The collective support of this war by a number of EU Member States , including Germany , must cease .
If that happened , there would not , in fact , be as many people who have to flee as there are at present , as has been quite properly stated in the resolution .
author . - Mr President , my thanks to colleagues for initiating this important debate .
I cannot agree with the point made by the previous speaker , which was not discussed when we framed this report .
May I say that what we can do in the European Commission , the European Council and the European Parliament is something different .
There are huge numbers of Iraqi refugees in Jordan , in Syria and in other neighbouring states , yet in almost every one of those countries these refugees are not allowed to work .
Their children are prevented from going to school .
Their parents and children are not allowed access to healthcare .
They are in a desperate plight and there is no state support for them , as there would be were they in European Union Member States as refugees .
Inside the country there are huge numbers of IDPs - internally displaced people - equally without work , without food , far from their homes .
They have been displaced mainly through religious and ethnic cleansing , one of the most miserable of wars to fight internally , as we know so well from our past history in Europe .
The Shia are fleeing the Sunni , the Sunni are fleeing the Shia and many others are fleeing because of the various different insurgencies that are going on .
I would suggest , therefore , that the European Commission , which has worked mightily on this problem , should declare Iraq an emergency .
I would ask the Council of Ministers , which has also worked incredibly hard with the Government of Iraq , to discuss this with the Commission and with other G8 donors , for example .
Iraq has in a sense been put on one side .
People have been unclear as to what to do , but today , now , the Iraqi people are back in the sort of crisis they were in under the prolonged dictatorship of Saddam Hussein , under whom many more fled and under whom many more were killed .
But here we are .
They need our help .
I strongly request that the Commission and the Council of Ministers declare Iraq to be in an emergency state , to mobilise donor funding and spend it accordingly : housing inside , aid outside .
There is a lot that we can do , but we have to look at the situation differently .
author . - Mr President , this unhappy debate takes note of the oh-so-predictable humanitarian disaster which has afflicted the people of Iraq since the coalition invaded illegally .
It also demonstrates the double standards of our own Member State governments , particularly , I am afraid , my own in London , rather than Edinburgh , where I would rather it were .
Chancellor Gordon Brown was asked how much funding was to be allocated to the military action and his answer was ' as much as it takes ' .
I am afraid the financial allocation to the humanitarian support measures is shameful .
As we have heard , the United Nations estimates that 1.8 million people have been forcibly displaced within Iraq and 2 million have fled that unhappy country .
That is more than the population of a number of our Member States .
Prime Minister Blair worries about international terrorism - he talks about it often enough .
Well he might !
The direct result of his policies has created the best possible recruiting ground al-Qa 'ida could ever have asked for .
So , what to do ?
As we , of course , go through airport security this evening flying home from this place , let us think that that is Prime Minister Blair 's legacy to Europe and to global politics .
We , as we have heard , can do better : by sticking to our principles and by digging deep into our budgets .
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Red Cross efforts are severely underfunded .
The countries neighbouring Iraq are in desperate straits and in dire need of support .
This motion has a number of points in it which I commend to the House .
We did not create this disaster , but we are in a position to ameliorate its effects .
By doing so , I hope we can lead by example where so many of our Member State governments have so comprehensively failed .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , the text that we are submitting today for Parliament 's approval very much reflects the fact that this situation can only be described as a human tragedy of massive proportions .
I should like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , Mr António Guterres , for drawing attention to this disaster , which took place on 7 February .
I should also like to give a special word of commendation to the Swedish authorities for their exceptional European-level response to the human disaster .
I should particularly like to commend the Egyptian authorities , which is the non-bordering country that has done by far the most to welcome these refugees , and I should like to make a heartfelt plea to the Egyptian authorities not to prevent these refugees from arriving or to suspend the conditions for hosting them when they arrive .
Most of all , however , I wish to call on the Commission and the Council - as Mr Posselt , who is here today , so aptly reminded us - to open their eyes , to go to Iraq and to see what is happening there .
A disaster of this nature would never be possible unless it were organised from somewhere , as was the case previously in Rwanda and in the Balkans .
We can no longer turn a blind eye ; we must go to Iraq and understand what is happening .
In this connection , I should like to say that I am proud that I was there recently .
I have drawn up a report and invite all my fellow Members to have a look at it on the Internet .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I do not wish to speak about politics .
Mr Casaca has just recalled the political context of the invasion of Iraq and its consequences .
He may well be right .
I would prefer to focus on issues that may not be as important for journalists or for politicians like ourselves , but which are probably far more important for those who are currently going through hard times in Iraq , namely the refugees .
In my view , the underlying reasons for events in the world of politics are of secondary importance .
What is really important is what we can actually do .
I am firmly convinced that we are currently being perceived as helpless by the rest of the world .
I am also firmly convinced that the European Union is not in a position to provide real help to these people .
This is even truer of the United States , and is really tragic .
There seem to be two aspects to the situation in Iraq .
There are the victims of attacks , in the form of the hundreds and thousands of people we see on our television screens .
They make up the news we are bombarded with .
We hear very little , however , about the other aspect of the situation in Iraq , namely the tens of thousands of refugees .
The European Union must certainly not appear helpless in this regard , and I agree with the previous speakers who referred to initiatives by the Scandinavian countries and to Egypt 's role .
All that is true .
We must make a clear and determined statement to the effect that we are interested not only in that first aspect , namely the victims of the attacks we see on television .
We must let it be known that , as Europeans , as European politicians , we are equally concerned about refugees .
The refugee problem is probably one of the greatest embarrassments for those who started this war and for those who are pursuing it , even if they are acting with the best of intentions .
A reaction is therefore necessary , and that is what the European Parliament is currently engaged in .
I am grateful for the wise words contributed by other speakers today .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , behind the Iraqi refugee problem is a set of circumstances the like of which it is predicted will only become more common in various future conflicts .
The situation has reached a state of civil war .
The Christian minority in particular have become a scapegoat , and many Christians have been killed .
Iraqi security forces have been unable to protect Christians , no matter what the Government 's attitude is .
For example , Turkey , Jordan and Lebanon have taken it upon themselves to place refugees temporarily .
In these countries , the United Nations refugee agency has not been able to confer refugee status on incoming Iraqis during the current conflict because the situation does not meet the criteria of the Geneva Convention .
The present Government in Iraq is not persecuting Christians , but the problem is that sects inside the country are , and the Government cannot do anything about it .
International agreements therefore do not grant refugee status to Iraqi Christians , although there is no doubt that they are in need of temporary protection .
To protect the asylum seekers , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has not made a negative decision with regard to them either , since otherwise the host country could return them to Iraq , a situation which the UNHCR wants to avoid .
Accordingly , it is vitally important that the international community responds to the agency 's appeal for more international support .
To aid the refugees , international assistance is required so that Iraq 's neighbouring countries , which are struggling with huge numbers of refugees , will not close their borders to Iraqis .
The latest news that the United States of America is accepting more refugees is a step in the right direction , and is vital , because earlier the United States had been shirking its responsibilities in this area .
We need more news like this .
Of the EU countries , Sweden deserves special mention .
The Iraqi refugee situation is absolutely desperate .
There is a shortage of everything : food , medicines , health care and fuel .
I heard of actual examples of this when the human rights organisation I head met a group of Iraqi Christian refugees in Turkey last autumn .
Crucial , however , to the assistance of Iraqis is to establish comprehensive reforms to promote justice and the law throughout Iraq .
Similarly , the Iraqi Government must do all it can to bring those guilty of crimes and breaches of human rights to justice .
This is essential if the unrest and violence against minorities is to cease .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I endorse this resolution , not least because , at least in some of its subsidiary clauses , it vigorously champions the rights of the persecuted and imperilled Christians of Iraq .
We must bear in mind that the Christian communities in today 's Iraq are probably some of the most ancient in the world .
They have survived for 1 300 years as a minority in a Muslim-dominated part of the world , something for which those Muslims also deserve credit , yet today , in a time of massive Western presence in Iraq , they are under threat .
This has to do with the fact that Iraq was put together as an artificial state after the First World War , that that state is now on the point of breaking up and that its constituent parts are attempting to make themselves homogenous units through a process of nationalistic self-discovery which , of course , poses a particular threat to the minorities .
There is one laudable exception , and that is the Kurdish sector . This is something worth highlighting .
I do , however , call on Shias and Sunnis to follow in the great tolerant tradition of their forefathers and once again afford the Christian communities in Iraq the protection that they have enjoyed in that part of the world for over a thousand years .
I call , above all , on the Commission to go into bat strongly for the rights of Christians , because who else will do this if we do not ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , on 8 January , the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) issued an urgent call for funding to the donor states for a new USD 60 million aid programme .
The object is to help hundreds of thousands of people displaced by the conflict in Iraq , irrespective of their faith .
Such massive movements of fleeing people are the results of a war that was begun against the will of the international community , yet it is the international community that now has to bear , and pay for , the terrible consequences .
We are currently witnessing the largest long-term exodus since the displacement of the Palestinians in 1948 .
One in eight Iraqis is a refugee .
In 2006 alone , half a million Iraqis fled their country . Every month , another 50 000 join them .
There may now be 1.7 million deracinated Iraqis in Iraq . By the end of 2007 , the UNHCR estimates this number could be 2.3 million .
The longer the conflict goes on , the worse will be the plight of these displaced persons and the communities that help them and that want to help them .
We call on the Member States and the Commission to support the UNHCR , politically and financially , in its work protecting the refugees , irrespective of their faith .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the figures given are more or less in agreement : we are now approaching 4 million refugees , around half of whom are ' external ' and the other half ' internal ' within Iraq .
To all intents and purposes this is a humanitarian catastrophe almost without precedent , and for this reason the opportunity offered by the Geneva Conference on 17 April 2007 should not be wasted : the European Union must prepare itself and arrive in force , with a political presence at the highest levels , having already decided on an appropriate amount of funds to put on the table .
If this is not done , we risk total failure .
This is a point on which we all need to be united , regardless of the political reasons for the conflict : thus the greatest possible unity is needed to resolve an issue which is liable to explode in our faces , with disastrous consequences .
With regard to its causes , I believe that perhaps - obviously this is not the subject of our resolution ; I am just mentioning it to the representatives of the Council and the Commission - it would be useful to take into consideration the possibility , faced with the daily carnage in Iraq , of referring the matter to the International Criminal Court , since these are crimes against humanity , committed systematically and on a daily basis .
Perhaps this could also be helpful with regard to the causes of this humanitarian catastrophe .
Mr President , I too want to focus on the Assyrian Christians who are now seeking refuge mainly in Syria and Jordan .
Iraq 's Christian communities are amongst the world 's most ancient , speaking Aramaic , the language of Christ .
They suffered terribly during the 1915 Armenian genocide , and then again under the Iraqi Hashemite monarchy for cooperating with the British during the First World War .
Then they suffered again during Saddam Hussein 's days when he had the war with the Kurds .
Today there are only about 6 000 to 8 000 who remain , mainly living in the Nineveh Plain .
As many as 60 000 Assyrian Christians , or perhaps even more , have fled since the beginning of the insurgency that followed the US-led invasion in 2003 .
Their exodus was accelerated in August 2004 after the start of the terrorist bombing campaign against Christian churches by Islamists , who accused them of collaborating with the allies solely by virtue of their practising the Christian faith .
Last April the European Parliament voted for the Assyrians to be allowed to establish , on the basis of Section 5 of the Iraqi Constitution , a federal region where they can practise their own unique way of life , free and safe from outside interference .
I call again on this House , on the Commission and on the Human Rights Special Observer from the German Presidency , for this solution to be considered as a possibility .
( LT ) Every day we hear about bloody explosions in Iraq , and the victim count is growing steadily .
We do not get enough information though about another tragedy - the painful fate of becoming a refugee has affected 4 million Iraqis .
Almost one in six of the inhabitants of that country has been forced to leave his or her home , the number of refugees is increasing , and their situation is terrible .
The United Nations Organisation is trying to help , but unsuccessfully , because the international community has still not grasped the seriousness of the situation .
The initiative of Sweden , which has agreed to grant refugee status to 9 000 Iraqis , is to be commended .
Not many EU countries so far , especially the new ones , have had the resolve to follow this example .
However , particular responsibility falls on the United States , which , willy-nilly , created the current situation , in which Iraq is wading ever deeper into the quagmire of a nation beset by divisive internal and external conflicts .
( Applause )

Mr President , the emergence of Saddam Hussein in the post-colonial troubled era in Iraq brought a rule of intimidation , persecution and murder of citizens .
The illegal military invasion and occupation of Iraq undertaken in 2003 by Mr Bush and his British bulldog , Mr Blair , have brought an unprecedented calamity to the people of Iraq .
The Bush-Blair duo has succeeded in accomplishing in the space of three years what the likes of Saddam Hussein did not succeed in doing for thirty years , i.e. to bring the country completely to its knees , with hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians killed , with utter lawlessness , with comprehensive destruction of the country 's infrastructure and with millions of internal and external refugees .
The USA and Britain could together spend over one thousand billion dollars a year supporting their war machines in Iraq , which largely caused the problem in the first place , but now expect the international community to deal with the enormous humanitarian problem of the Iraq refugees .
Instead of the USA and Britain taking care of the Iraqi refugees and all the necessary costs involved , they expect neighbouring and European countries to do so .
Fair enough : we must not deviate from the rule that those who cause a catastrophe very seldom pay for it .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by congratulating the German Presidency , and warmly welcoming the presence of its representative at today 's debate .
I am delighted the German Ombudsman is with us today .
According to UN data , almost two million people have left Iraq in recent years because of the danger to their lives , the chaos and the difficult economic conditions .
We are witnessing a major tragedy of refugees fleeing from Iraq to neighbouring countries .
There are a million of them in Syria , some 750 000 in Jordan , over 100 000 in Egypt , 40 000 in Lebanon and many more scattered throughout other countries .
Those Palestinians inside Iraq are in a particularly difficult position .
In its statement on 2 February 2007 , Human Rights Watch called on Syria to immediately open its borders to the Palestinians who are currently in danger in Iraq .
The UN is calling for a contribution of USD 60 million to a fund to help refugees from Iraq .
The world cannot remain indifferent to their fate .
Today 's decision by the United States to grant asylum in the United States to 7 000 Iraqis next year is a step in the right direction , as is the decision by the United States to contribute USD 18 million to the programme to assist refugees from Iraq .
These are still only drops in the ocean of need , however .
The European Union must play a leading role in the forthcoming conference to be held in Geneva on 17 April 2007 .
It must provide financial support to alleviate the plight of the refugees and help resolve this crisis .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I wish to express my gratitude to the authors of this resolution and to the groups and individuals who have presented their opinions .
There was a strong focus on the eminent need for solidarity with the people in great need .
The Commission is also extremely concerned about the humanitarian situation in Iraq and the scale of human suffering caused by the ongoing violence in that country , the high level of displacement inside and outside Iraq and the impact this is having on the whole region .
Over the past few months the Commission has kept monitoring the situation , keeping in close contact with other key international players , notably with the Red Cross and the United Nations .
As you have mentioned , we have the same figures from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees : 1.8 million people are now internally displaced and 2 million Iraqis have already fled to neighbouring countries .
As Mr Smith said , that is nearly 4 million people .
However , an exact assessment of the needs inside Iraq has so far been made impossible by the difficulties of gaining access to the affected populations as a result of the security situation .
The conference the United Nations is holding in Geneva in April , which has also been mentioned here , is expected to provide more clarity regarding the situation of internal and external displacements , the impact and the needs .
The Commission will take an active part in that Conference .
I am certain that Mr Cappato expressed an important invitation be united there with the Council and the Member States .
In the meantime , based on the information received from partner international humanitarian agencies , the Commission , through its Directorate-General for Humanitarian Aid ( ECHO ) , has decided to allocate EUR 10.2 million for humanitarian aid to the victims of the Iraqi crisis .
As announced this morning by my colleague Mr Michel , an initial funding package of EUR 6.2 million , focusing on the most vulnerable groups , will be proposed for meeting the humanitarian needs of refugees who have fled to countries such as Syria , Lebanon and Jordan .
The aid will consist of basic healthcare and education , as well as targeted distributions of food and essential household items .
Protection activities are also envisaged , in particular support for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ' refugee registration system , which is important in identifying the most vulnerable groups and assessing their specific needs .
Another initial funding package of EUR 4 million is in the process of being drawn up for people suffering inside Iraq , based on a careful assessment of priority needs and aid delivery arrangements in what is a highly volatile security environment , as you can imagine .
Humanitarian aid will be provided impartially and without discrimination , with a focus on those most at risk .
The Commission will consider further funding decisions when new needs emerge or when access to groups requiring help , and who are currently out of reach , becomes possible .
The Commission will also continue monitoring the situation closely and to raise specific matters through its regular discussions with third countries and the Government of Iraq , including the Ministry of Displacement and Migration .
If the situation deteriorates further in the coming months , the Commission will examine the situation in the light of the criteria of the Temporary Protection Directive , in order to decide whether to submit to the Council a request to activate the temporary protection mechanism for the Iraqi asylum seekers .
This may offer them immediate protection while , at the same time , providing financial support for their actual reception as well as making arrangements for an eventual redistribution of asylum seekers amongst Member States .
The Commission will also explore , in close cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , the possibility for a coordinated effort by EU Member States to resettle refugees from the region .
Such a resettlement effort could target particularly vulnerable categories of people , such as women-at-risk and unaccompanied minors .
I want to thank the honourable Members for their resolution and support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
Guinea ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Guinea .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , when in 1958 , France agreed to self-determination for its West African colonies , Guinea was the only one to decide in favour of immediate and complete independence .
In the 11 other colonially governed areas , the elite chose , often disregarding the will of their own people , to perpetuate close administrative , military and economic ties with France .
Guinea , on the other hand , followed the example of the former British colony Ghana , which had gained independence one year earlier , and which wanted to develop an African model of socialism with strong participation of the own population .
The leaders Sekou Touré and Kwame Nkrumah inspired many Africans in their battle for a better future , in which colonialism and poverty were set to be replaced by equality and development .
Unfortunately , a military coup in both countries stopped this development in its tracks .
In Guinea , Conté has wielded dictatorial power since 1984 .
Most parties did not take part in the elections that were organised under his control , and the official opposition that was represented in parliament was forced to leave it .
The trade union confederations CNTG and USTG are now the main force in the fight for democracy .
The presidential security force , led by the dictator 's son , responded to their protest rally on 22 January by killing 59 people and wounding 150 others .
The dictator increasingly treats the country as his own private property .
Like many other countries that are run by dictators , Guinea is also becoming the victim of the fight over natural resources among factions that want to get their hands on the revenues from them .
In this case , the resources in question are gold , iron and bauxite .
This resolution stands up for the demands of the democratic opposition , and it enjoys my group 's support .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner and the representative of the Council for being here today .
The time has come for the Union to take action , as the situation in Guinea is sliding downhill .
Guinea has for too long been deliberately kept in a state of underdevelopment by the dictatorial regime and is becoming mired in a tragic deadlock for lack of transparency and democracy .
The people of Guinea have had enough of poverty , destitution and social injustice ; they have not enjoyed the benefits of Guinea 's riches - the country has an abundance of natural resources - which are monopolised and mismanaged by the President and his cronies , who are as guilty as he is .
President Conté , who has been in power since 1984 , is ill , and is clinging to life as he is clinging to power .
If he survives , no one will begrudge him his health .
If , on the other hand , he remains in power and re-establishes a state of emergency . We will neither understand nor accept this .
After decades of undiluted power , one has no choice but to condemn such an attitude when wisdom , or a modicum of compassion for his people , would surely have led the President to prepare for the smooth transfer of power to his successor and for the transition to a genuinely democratic regime .
Instead of that , a state of siege has been declared , the right to assembly and freedom of movement have been curtailed , and the military have violently broken up peaceful demonstrations and killed people .
This is unacceptable .
We have no choice but to condemn this brutality , this lack of respect for the most basic human rights of the people of Guinea and the shameful behaviour of a leader who is at the end of his reign but whose capacity for causing suffering is sadly not at an end .
We must demand that a committee of inquiry be set up to look into the events in Guinea in order to ascertain the full extent of the repression and the level of the hierarchy at which decisions have been taken and by whom .
Furthermore , will the EU demand political dialogue , as laid down in Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement ?
We must keep a very close eye on the situation , because , if it were to continue to worsen , not only would the people of Guinea suffer but so too could the whole of that region of Africa , as the deepening internal conflict would spread to neighbouring countries .
The past is sadly all too full of such examples .
author . - Mr President , you might be surprised to know that Guinea has a long history of association with Europe .
It first became known to Europeans during the Portuguese discoveries that started the slave trade in the 15th century .
In 1890 , present-day Guinea was created as a French colony and remained so until 1958 .
From 1958 until 1984 the country was governed by a dictator , Ahmed Sékou Touré , who was supported by the Soviet Union .
Following Touré 's death in 1984 , a new totalitarian regime took over , headed by another dictator , Lansana Conté , who some claim was supported largely by the West .
Conté 's rule has certainly been better than Touré 's , but is still very far from being democratic .
The heavy-handed approach to political opponents and the events in February which led to the killing of 23 demonstrators is proof of that .
Guinea represents a country used and sometimes abused by Europe in the past and is now struggling to survive in extreme poverty and political instability .
Guinea 's mineral wealth makes it , potentially at least , one of Africa 's richest countries .
We , as Europeans , have a duty to assist its people - honestly and effectively this time - in finding and following the road to true democracy , freedom , justice and prosperity .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , in Guinea , since 17 January , an old senile dictator has been massacring his people with complete impunity in order to protect his regime , his corrupt friends and his waning power .
Guinea is in complete decline .
Despite its status as the leading exporter of bauxite and despite its deposits of gold , diamonds and iron , its people are among the poorest in the world .
Its wealth is consumed by corruption , and bad governance does the rest .
Repression beats down on a people who no longer accept it .
President Conté 's only response to the January strikes was to have the crowd fired on , to imprison the trade unionists , then , having pretended to negotiate on 27 January , to go back on his commitment to appoint a consensus prime minister and to declare a state of emergency .
There have now been more than one hundred deaths , and the massacre goes on .
Europe cannot remain silent and do nothing .
We cannot wait for Guinea to descend into chaos with unforeseeable consequences for the region .
Europe has a responsibility to fulfil .
We call on the Commission to implement the provisions of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , applicable in the event of violation of human rights and democratic principles .
We must now support the people of Guinea and demand that the authorities end the massacres immediately , release those arrested during the demonstrations , restore civil liberties , lift the state of siege , open negotiations with the trade unions and civil society , and , in cooperation with the opposition parties , appoint a consensus prime minister and government .
Furthermore , I believe that the European Union must call for elections to be convened under international supervision , with missions sent by the European Union and the United Nations .
That is what is currently being done in Mauritania , involving our fellow Member , Mrs Isler Béguin , to whom I pay tribute in this House , and it was what was done in the Democratic Republic of Congo , with results that have been extremely effective and significant .
Finally , we must indeed support the proposal for an independent committee of inquiry , led by the United Nations , into the violence of recent months .
After twenty-three years of dictatorship , enough is enough ; the European people must stand alongside the people of Guinea in their fight for freedom and dignity .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , as has been said already , Guinea 's fishing , farming and raw material resources make it , potentially , a very prosperous country .
The fact that , despite this , the country is languishing in miserable poverty is a result of the terrible mismanagement , the dictatorship and the abysmal administration by the state that have obtained there for decades and I am most grateful to Mr Matsakis for having pointed out that Sékou Touré , to whom Mr Meijer referred , was one of worst dictators ever to rule over it .

Today too , unfortunately , the prevailing state of affairs is anything but acceptable , for which reason we must call on the current transitional president - for he cannot be any more than this - to use the short period that remains to him to bring about an ordered transition to democracy and the rule of law .
He can only do this , however , if he does not name a puppet as prime minister , as he now has , but only if he truly commits to the demands of the trade unions and the democracy movement and constitutes a broad-based transitional government , including the forces of opposition , which then does nothing other than set about creating public order and preparing free elections so that the past terror and dictatorship can finally give place to democracy and prosperity .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , like many other African countries , Guinea is rich in mineral resources but at the same time is extremely poor .
A large proportion of its people live in abject poverty .
This was the reason for the strikes and demonstrations that took place in 2005 and also at the start of this year , protesting against the corrupt rule of Lasana Conté who has been in power for 23 years .
The strikes are an expression of discontent regarding inflation , unemployment , energy and water shortages and the high price of basic goods .
In recent times , the strikes have also led to the interruption of the export of aluminium ore , which is Guinea 's most precious asset . Tremendous losses were incurred , reaching a level of USD one million a day .
The leaders of the January strike and the trade unions did suspend the protest , however , following the signing of an agreement demanding a change of Prime Minister .
The promises contained in the agreement between the trade unions , the Parliament of Guinea and its Supreme Court were not kept , and once again a member of the ruling party was appointed Prime Minister .
This does not bode well in terms of improving the situation , as demanded by the protestors .
Events in Guinea are similar to those that took place in my home country some time ago .
In Guinea , the current regime is also firing on fellow citizens fighting for change , better living conditions and respect for fundamental human rights .
We demand respect for the principles of democracy and reforms in a country whose inhabitants wish to live in dignity , supported by their own natural wealth which is currently being exploited by rich companies and siphoned off by corruption .
Thousands of Guineans are dying of hunger and poverty .
Over a hundred were killed during the demonstration .
These are the victims of a fledgling democracy and of the struggle for human rights .
They are also a stain on the consciences of those who value aluminium ore , bauxite , gold and diamonds more than human lives .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , not only has the country had a very difficult history and legacy , but it faces a very difficult current situation .
However , together we can help to bring more hope to Guinea .
The Commission is fully aware of the situation in that country .
In a press release of 22 January , the European Commission condemned the violent interventions by the security forces and called for restraint and civic responsibility during these demonstrations .
Commissioner Michel regretted the loss of human lives and encouraged the different stakeholders to pursue a constructive dialogue in order to implement the necessary political reforms important for that country .
The German Presidency , on behalf of the Union , issued a declaration on 9 February regretting the loss of life during the demonstrations and asking the Government of Guinea for an explanation of the circumstances of those deaths and of the judicial steps being taken against those responsible .
The inquiry commission appointed in Guinea is led by public prosecutors , but victims and relatives are invited to submit their cases either to the courts , which have limited means , or to the police , an institution heavily involved in the repression .
Given this situation , the Guinean Bar has refused to participate in the inquiry commission and has called for an international commission instead .
The Bar also wishes to present a case to the International Criminal Court .
The Commission 's delegation in Conakry and Member States ' embassies have repeatedly stressed to the Government of Guinea the need to carry out a full inquiry into the events .
This was also stressed by Commissioner Michel to Foreign Minister Condé .
The delegation and other diplomats have also stressed to the new Prime Minister that the behaviour of security forces observed during the previous strike should simply stop .
The ninth European Development Fund cooperation strategy with Guinea , signed on 21 December 2006 , includes governance as a focal factor , as a priority .
Actions foreseen are aimed at promoting effectiveness and transparency in public management , reinforcing the rule of law and promoting a democratic society .
A reinforced political dialogue with the country is ongoing as a follow-up to the Article 96 ( Cotonou Agreement ) consultations , which ended in April 2005 .
The Commission has stressed to the Guinean authorities that the new situation would be taken into account in this context .
I should like to thank you for the resolution , and express the firm belief that the European Union should support the country in seeking a better future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Dialogue between the Chinese government and Envoys of the Dalai Lama ( vote )
2 .
Humanitarian situation of refugees from Iraq ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment No 5 :
Mr President