Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament suspended on Thursday 23 October 2008 .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , today and yesterday , the EuroMedScola completed its programme here in Strasbourg .
It was a great pleasure for us to welcome more than 250 young people aged between 16 and 18 from all over the Euro-Mediterranean area , in other words the Mediterranean Union , including the 27 EU Member States and our partner countries in the region , making a total of 37 countries .
The participants have now taken their seats up in the gallery .
Over the last two days , they have discussed a wide range of topics , including the environment , immigration , equality , the role of citizens , education and many other issues .
This is an expression of the cooperation between the European Union and the countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean .
School pupils from Israel , Palestine , the Arab states and every country of the European Union have also been here , and I would very much like to welcome our young friends to the gallery .
It has been a fantastic event , and I am delighted to have had the opportunity to meet you .
Once again , a very warm welcome to the European Parliament .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigenda ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Request for urgent procedure : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this part-session as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 13 November 2008 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
It has been requested that this draft be amended as follows .
Wednesday :
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that Council and Commission statements on the situation in the car industry be inserted in tomorrow 's agenda .
It should be pointed out that , if this point is inserted , the oral question on the review of the Recommendation providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspection in the Member States will need to be moved to Thursday 's agenda .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am sure that everybody in this House is aware that the car industry in the European Union is now in a very difficult position , in part due to the crisis in the car industry in the United States .
I therefore think it would make perfect sense for the Commission to make a statement on how it views this crisis , on what possible solutions it can see , including , for example , State aid , what competition rules need to be complied with , and so on .
This is , in my view , an important issue .
I would , however , just like to add that we have no intention of weakening or postponing the environmental objectives for the car industry .
We will still insist on these environmental objectives being implemented and pushed through , but at the same time we should also have the opportunity here to discuss the car industry 's economic difficulties with a representative of the Commission .
That is one of our concerns , and I hope that we will gain wide support for it .
( NL ) Mr President , by way of point of order in accordance with Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure , I should like to deplore the fact that the Lehne report , which should normally speaking have been the subject of discussion this evening and which deals with the immunity of my colleague Mr Frank Vanhecke , was taken off the agenda this evening .
There is , therefore , no debate , contrary to what the original agenda stipulates .
Secondly , I should like to protest against the fact that Mr Lehne , following discussion of the report in committee , refused to send this report to the person in question , stating that this would be made available to him following discussion in the plenary meeting .
This very topic was , however , given plenty of air time on the Belgian TV channel VRT that evening , so it seems that it had been leaked .
I should therefore like you to find out how this confidential report , which the person involved was not allowed to peruse , could be discussed on Belgian television that same evening and appeared not to be so confidential after all .
We will take note of that .
I cannot , and will not try to , reassure you , but what I can tell you is that even letters written by me and dealt with absolutely confidentially by my staff sometimes end up being published .
It is a situation that does not apply only to you , but it is regrettable in all cases .
We have taken note of it , and will look into it .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , on 4 and 5 December 2008 the European Parliament will discuss a set of proposals to modify Directive 2003 / 87 / EC concerning the emissions trading scheme for greenhouse gas emissions for the period 2013-2020 .
The proposal foresees a huge increase in auctioning as early as 2013 .
While today 90 % of pollution allowances are handed out to industrial installations for free , the new directive states that full auctioning should be the rule from 2013 onwards .
In the case of Romania , this will have extremely severe consequences on the whole economy , and the industry will be seriously affected .
Many industrial companies would have to relocate to third countries with less climate protection , which will raise prices and slow down Romania 's development project on infrastructure .
This is why I ask that industries in Romania should receive all their allowances for CO2 certificates for free for the entire period .
( ES ) Mr President , last night , in a joint and extremely smooth operation on French territory , security forces from France and Spain arrested one of the main and perhaps most bloodthirsty leaders of ETA , Txeroki , whom they have been pursuing for more than six years for various murders and attacks .
While exercising the caution that is always needed in such cases , I believe that this is very good news and I am sure that the House will share our satisfaction , which makes up for our disgust on other occasions when we have had to speak about the crimes of this organisation .
This is a very severe blow for the terrorist organisation and we should congratulate the security forces , governments and people of France and Spain on the success of the operation .
We should also congratulate ourselves on the example set by international cooperation as an essential instrument of anti-terrorist resistance .
Lastly , Mr President , I must say that the terrorists should know that this will be their fate : being arrested and handed over to the courts and paying for their crimes , or at least those which can be proven , with years in jail .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , it has been almost 10 months since the European Parliament adopted a resolution requesting that the European Commission formulate a strategy on the Roma .
Apart from one staff working document , the Commission has not brought out anything new even for the EU-Roma summit , which was referred to as a historic one .
Meanwhile , in Kosovo , the Roma are still living in life-threatening settlements tainted by lead pollution , and in Hungary attacks with Molotov cocktails or firearms have been perpetrated in nine settlements against the houses of Roma families .
The most recent and terribly sad site of such attacks was Nagycsécs , where two Roma trying to flee the burning house were cruelly shot to death with pellet guns .
During the same period , according to reports by civil organisations , close to 30 000 Roma fled Italy in recent months because of police brutality and anti-Roma sentiment .
On top of this situation , there is the current economic crisis , which - let there be no doubt - will most harshly affect the excluded and destitute social classes and the Roma .
I would like to remind every responsible politician that this is another reason why we need to create a European Roma strategy . Thank you very much .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to raise the issue of the by-pass around the town of Augustów in Poland .
The lengthening wait for a judgment of the European Court of Justice in the matter means further fatal road accidents involving pedestrians .
Each year some two million goods vehicles pass through the centre of the town .
In view of the many projects for reserves in the Podlasie region , the freezing of all road investments in the region by the European Commission , deprives it of the opportunity of future development .
The European Commission 's decision means the area is turning into a skansen , which on the model of some Western countries will make it a scenic tourist facility .
But not having the Augustów by-pass on grounds of protecting the environment at any cost , while ignoring human needs , is depriving the residents of north-eastern Poland of the opportunity of development and a dignified life .
The European Commission must take this into account .
Nature needs protection , but not at the cost of human life .
( HU ) Mr President , ' I desire mercy and not sacrifice ' : the words of Jesus echo in our souls when we encounter rampant violence and cruelty in the world .
Terror and force are even more painful when committed in the name of fundamentalist religiosity or religious exclusivism .
That is why we must protest against the brutal execution of the 13-year-old South Somalian girl , who after having been raped by three men , was stoned to death upon the verdict of an Islamic court .
And we must protest against the persecution of Iraq 's Christian minority , who have been forced to flee their homes in Mosul and its surrounding region in the thousands by militant Shiites .
In the spirit of our European Christian tradition , religious tolerance and ecumenical brotherhood , the European Union should raise its voice and take action to protect the victims of religious violence and persecution .
( PT ) In Portugal , workers are fighting for their rights in a wide range of sectors .
We wish to express our solidarity with all those who are fighting .
We particularly support the courageous fight of teachers and the impressive demonstration that brought together , in Lisbon , on 8 November , 120 000 teachers from all corners of the country .
This second large-scale demonstration in six months involved nearly 80 % of this professional class .
It has been followed by other events aimed at showing that teachers are determined to continue defending state schooling and fighting for their dignity and respect for their work which is essential for training the young generations and for ensuring development and progress in Portugal which has some of the worst school achievement levels in the European Union .
We also support the fight of workers from Pirites Alentejanas , in Aljustrel , against the halt in mining activity which the multinational decided to suspend six months after it was resumed , sending more than 600 people into unemployment .
Measures must be urgently taken to prevent unemployment from worsening in such a deprived area and to prevent the country becoming poorer .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to inform Parliament that over the last three days , from 14 to 16 November , a country which is a candidate for accession to the European Union has had a naval presence occupying the Greek continental shelf .
I do not intend here to advocate in favour of Greece .
The Greek continental shelf is also part of the European continental shelf and I see no concern on the part of Europe in protecting its sovereign rights in the area .
I wonder how a country which behaves in such a way , with such a blatant presence and with such intentions , can join Europe and how we plan to accept this Asian country into Europe when it behaves in such a way .
- ( SK ) In October last year I made a written declaration warning about the emergence of an extreme right-wing organisation called the Hungarian Guard .
Sadly , the inactivity of the Hungarian authorities , coupled with our indifference at a European level , have borne fruit .
This fascism has now been exported to Slovakia .
Let us not stand idly by in the face of the provocations that have taken place over the past two weeks .
On 8 November , in the Slovak town of Kráľovsky Chlmec , 28 members of the Hungarian organisation marched in replica fascist uniforms and laid a wreath to the victims of wars with the provocative inscription I believe in a Hungary reborn .
I am appalled that the act of intervention by the Slovak authorities remained unnoticed in Europe .
How is it possible that just at the time when Europe is commemorating the 70th anniversary of Kristallnacht , a Member State can tolerate on its own territory the existence of organisations such as the ' Nyilas ' , the Hungarian Guard , Jobbik or Hnutie 64 ?
Can we really be indifferent to the fact that this amounts to a display of contempt for the millions of victims of the Second World War or to the fact that fascists are able to march through the towns of one of our Member States ?
- ( SK ) On the day when we are commemorating the 19th anniversary of the Velvet Revolution in the former Czech-Slovak Republic , allow me to express my unease over the policy of the current Slovak government , particularly in the area of the economy , which has outlines very similar to those from the period prior to November 1989 .
The attempts at complete political management of the private sector and the regulatory interference of the state to the extent carried out by this government are unacceptable in a healthy market system .
Through amendments to the law on prices and criminal law the way has been opened to a new regulation of prices in connection with the transfer to the Euro , involving punishments of up to three years in prison for small traders and service providers .
In addition to the measures relating to increases in energy prices the government has come up with a range of populist pronouncements and threats , with an attempt to expropriate a number of private companies in the energy sector and a proposal for hard , open-ended and superficial regulatory measures targeted against private entities in the so-called general economic interest .
Under the pretext of solving the financial crisis and the economic recession , the above-mentioned measures will prevent further essential liberalisation , deform the market environment and scare off potential investors .
( PL ) Mr President , on 14 November in Poznań , as every year , a march for equality was held .
A group of my young colleagues , members of the Federation of Young Social Democrats , took part in the march .
Their slogan was diversity yes , intolerance no .
This is part of a larger campaign being held by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament throughout Europe on the issue of tolerance , and which has been underway for many months now .
When the demonstration was over , the group was attacked by about a dozen thugs who beat them up and snatched banners with the logo of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
One of the victims was hospitalised .
I expect those responsible for this incident to be tracked down and punished by the authorities in Poland .
I expect political thuggery , which aims to replace dialogue , to be universally condemned by those involved in politics .
( PL ) Mr President , on Friday the EU-Russia Summit in Nice , hastily called in order to enable attendance at the G20 meeting , ended .
The European Union in effect decided to renew negotiations with Russia on the partnership system , and in doing so went against its own decision , made on 1 September this year , that there would be no negotiations with Russia if Russian troops do not withdraw from the occupied territories of Georgia .
The European Union is behaving in this matter like an old man , who remembers exactly what he did 50 years ago , when the Treaties of Rome came into being , and forgets what he did two months ago , when the EU gave itself and Europe its assurances on this important issue .
It is now retreating from its own undertakings , and what was jointly agreed on 1 September has now been tossed aside .
In this context the question arises as to whether human rights , which we in the European Parliament often champion all over the world , should also apply to European countries such as Georgia and Russia , when the European Union is simply behaving like Pontius Pilate on this issue .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps you too have heard that there are no longer refuse crises in Campania .
Well , that is not the case : a few days ago in Chiaiano , which was to have been one of the sites for Berlusconi 's infamous dumps , 12 000 tonnes of asbestos and toxic waste was discovered .
Where it came from no one really knows .
At present in Italy there is a decree in force that clearly goes against all European legislation concerning , above all , the protection of health as well as impact assessments .
What is more , the situation is being treated as a state secret , since these areas have been declared out of bounds and it is impossible to gain any access to information on what is happening there .
We have called on the Commission to intervene ; we believe it has a duty to do so because to have 10 000 tonnes of asbestos and toxic waste out there in the open air is a danger to everyone .
We hope that Commissioner Dimas will take action and will do so publicly .
( HU ) Mr President , it is unacceptable that Slovak-Hungarian relations should unfold according to the intentions of extremist forces .
We firmly condemn those who would spoil relations between these two peoples , for we know who the culprits are .
In Slovakia , the government party , the Slovak National Party , is stirring up tensions with its hate speech against minorities , its outbursts that revile the nation and its anti-Hungarian slurs .
In Hungary , by contrast , it is not the government authorities but extra-parliamentary extremist groups who are keen to over-react against these attacks .
This is a fundamental difference .
Both phenomena are to be condemned .
One of the reasons for the poisoning of relations between the two peoples is that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament turned a blind eye to the policies of the Slovak SMER party coalition , thereby fuelling extreme , explicitly anti-minority policies .
Therefore the Socialist Group 's decision to readmit the SMER into its ranks was a bad one , one that gives free rein to extremist anti-Hungarian expressions .
Unfortunately , the coalition government in Bratislava does not provide an opportunity for the improvement of Slovak-Hungarian relations . Thank you .

( DE ) Mr President , I do not want to go into the details now , but I think that Mr Duka-Zólyomi - with whom I am good friends - is well aware that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is highly critical of the coalition , and in particular of Mr Slota 's party .

It is now time , however , particularly following the very welcome meeting between the two prime ministers , Mr Fico and Mr Gyurcsány , to arrange matters so that the two countries can resolve their problems together in peace , and not give radicals a platform .
On that we agree : the radicals must not be allowed to continue spreading poison .
That certainly applies to Mr Slota 's verbal radicalism , but it also applies particularly to the Hungarian Guard .
I call on both countries and both prime ministers , and all parties in this House , to make every effort to silence the radicals , to stop them blockading borders and to ensure that peacefully minded people who want to protect and assist minorities have their voices heard .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , It is my great pleasure to welcome to the gallery a group of former members of the first freely elected parliament of the GDR .
This Parliament entered the history books when it resolved to reunify Germany , and then dissolved itself shortly afterwards .
The delegation is headed by the President of the Volkskammer at that time , Dr Sabine Bergmann-Pohl .
A very warm welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance ( continuation )
Mr President , the eCall system in motor vehicles is a major advance in assisting emergency services to get to the scene of an accident as quickly as possible .
The device identifies the exact location of the accident so that the medical , police and fire services are able to get to the scene as quickly as possible .
This is particularly important in rural and isolated areas and particularly in the case of single car accidents .
eCall is now standard equipment in all new cars in many EU countries .
Unfortunately , it is not available in my own country , Ireland , where we still have an unacceptably high level of fatal accidents .
I believe that the system should be mandatory in all Member States .
This is about saving lives , and this device certainly saves lives .
That is the reason I am calling on the Commission to insist that all Member States insist that this device be available in all new motor vehicles .
- ( SK ) According to research from the Institute of Sociology at the Slovak Academy of Sciences , Slovak inhabitants of Hungarian origin are proud to be citizens of the Slovak Republic .
This view is held by more than 70 % of people , which is the highest percentage in the history of the Slovak Republic .
This result sends a clear message , countering the claims of some politicians who are trying to convince Europe that the Hungarian minority in Slovakia is discriminated against .
On the floor of the European Parliament some of my colleagues , instead of sitting down at the negotiating table , have for two years preferred a method of communication which radicalises the domestic political scene even more .
I would like to invite those who care about the friendly co-existence of Hungary and Slovakia to support the efforts of both premiers , who met on Saturday in order to coordinate the fight against extremism and to lead both countries in the direction of good neighbourly relations .
I appreciate the fact that , two days after the talks , the Hungarian premier adopted measures which will lead to changes in the laws against extremism .
This will be the most effective weapon against those who today threaten democracy in this region and yet go unpunished .
Mr President , one of the key elements of the EU White Paper on Sport is the elimination of racism , particularly at football matches .
Unfortunately racism has raised its ugly head at the Scottish Football League and we all very much regret that .
Some players who have declared to play for Ireland have been subjected to racial abuse and also to the singing of the ' Famine Song ' , which is a huge insult , not only to the players , but to the Irish people .
I welcome the fact that the Scottish FA , and also the former British Home Secretary John Reid , are taking action on this .
But racism cannot be tolerated no matter where it raises its ugly head , and I believe we all have to stand up and say that this is completely unacceptable and that it cannot happen no matter where it takes place .
( DE ) Mr President , at the EU-Russia summit in Nice last Friday , it was resolved that the negotiations on a new partnership agreement with Russia would be continued on 2 December , despite the fact that some Member States expressed concerns and that certain issues , such as further action in Georgia and the Caucasus , remained unresolved .
I have been watching developments in Russia with considerable concern .
Quite mysteriously , the Duma has now voted to extend the president 's term of office to six years .
Human rights continue to be trampled underfoot , as demonstrated by the case of Svetlana Bakhmina , a former employee of Mikhail Khodorkovsky , the businessman imprisoned for five years : the authorities continue to refuse to permit her early release from a Siberian prison camp , even though she is heavily pregnant .
In the negotiations , the European Union must not give in to Russia 's blackmail attempts with regard to energy and must clearly address abuses of human rights .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the most important rights of European citizens is the right to free movement .
One year ago , when we opened the Schengen borders , strange obstacles appeared at certain borders of the new Member States , such as those between Austria and the Czech Republic , between Hungary and Slovakia as well as between Hungary and Austria .
Near my home town , the Austrian authorities placed a ' No Entry by Car ' sign on a road that is otherwise freely accessible to cars .
Consequently , since in our opinion this annoying obstacle is limiting one of the most important rights of European citizens , the right to free movement , my colleagues Othmar Karas , Lívia Járóka and I covered up the sign symbolically with the EU flag as a protest against this obstacle , which causes local people a great deal of irritation .
Today we no longer have to fight against the Iron Curtain , honourable Members - I have on several occasions already brought in this piece of the real Iron Curtain from near my hometown - but only against a few ' No Entry ' signs , yet I think we should see to it that in the spirit of Europe , these too should be removed .
As to the Hungarian-Slovak conflict , I wish to say only that those protesting against extremists would have credibility only if they had done likewise when Ján Slota , a member of the coalition party , was making declarations against Hungarians and calling for the expulsion of Hungarians from Slovakia .
Mr President , this year we commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Kristallnacht pogroms .
It seems that the collective memory is becoming weaker and weaker , since we face rising extremism associated with racism , xenophobia , anti-Semitism and aggressive nationalism worldwide , including in European democracies .
Looking ahead to the 2009 European elections , the PSE Group is convinced that political representatives can play a positive role in the overall promotion of mutual respect and understanding .
The PSE Group is committed to raising awareness of the value of cultural and religious diversity as a source of mutual enrichment of societies .
We always underline the necessity that public personalities should refrain from statements that encourage the stigmatisation of groups of people .
May I express my confusion that the EPP has chosen - and still keeps - as its main partner in Bulgaria a party whose leader appreciates the statesmanship of Stalin , Hitler and Mao ; who believes that the way forward to integration is to impose a list of Bulgarian names on every new-born child of non-Bulgarian ethnic origin ; a man who says that there are Bulgarian citizens in Bulgaria , Turkish in Turkey , and if somebody is a Turk they should go to Turkey .
I wonder if you , Mr President , or the EPP support the same approach for the ethnic Turks in Germany .
I underline how important the role of the European parties is in carefully selecting its partners , because when you exchange quality for quantity , the first victims are the EPP 's credibility , the stability of the national political systems and , of course , the beliefs of the ordinary right-wing voters .
Mr Vigenin , as you addressed me personally , I will take the liberty of pointing out that , in Brussels last Monday , the European Parliament held a very moving commemoration of Kristallnacht .
As far as my party membership is concerned , I am acting here in my capacity as President , and not as a member of a party , although I do of course feel attached to my party .
You will have to ask those responsible directly , though , as it is not a question that can be addressed to the President .
( RO ) We welcome , first of all , the action plan adopted at the recent G20 meeting , as well as the particular contributions made by Mr Barroso and President Sarkozy .
The final decisions made reflect the strategy discussed and adopted by the European Union 's Member States .
We should also welcome the commitment of all the participants to work together to combat the current crisis in the financial sector .
At the moment , people are not interested in disputes , only in real solutions .
Interdependency generates two-way channels which allow the crisis to spread , but they can allow the solutions for economic recovery to spread too .
In Romania 's case , unemployment in any country of the European Union accelerates the rate of unemployment in our emerging economy at double the speed .
This is happening firstly as a result of people working abroad being sent back home and then due to the reduction in the number of jobs being offered by foreign companies , which are scaling down their activities .
At present , unemployment needs to be analysed at pan-European Union level , but the solutions need to be implemented and financed at both ends of these channels .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw your attention to the pressures on the maize market which are especially rife in Central Europe .
Bumper crops , unfavourable international market conditions and the fluctuating yields that are customary in Central Europe have driven prices well below the intervention level in certain regions within Hungary .
We must take steps on behalf of producers and in the interests of market stability .
Under the present circumstances , Hungary itself is not able to buy up the surplus ; nevertheless , there are other ways to stabilise the market .
In the first place , the intervention quantity has to be raised for States that do not have seaports .
The system must play the role of a safety net in this regard , as originally intended .
Secondly , for the benefit of countries without seaports , calls for tender must be issued for the purpose of exports to third countries .
Lastly , the special private storage facilities must also be opened .
Instituting these measures would greatly contribute to preventing the situation from deteriorating , and would help our growers to adapt to exceptional circumstances . Thank you for your attention .
That concludes this item .
EMU10 : The first 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union and future challenges ( debate )
We will now proceed with the debate on the first ten years of economic and monetary union and future challenges . In that connection , I would like to wish the Prime Minister and Finance Minister of Luxembourg and President of the Eurogroup , Mr Jean-Claude Juncker , a very warm welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
It is , of course , also my pleasure to welcome the competent Commissioner , Joaquín Almunia .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the Eurogroup , Commissioner , I believe that this is an important moment , and the theme that we are going to debate today greatly affects Europeans as a whole .
I believe , and everyone is convinced of it today , that the euro is our greatest capital , our best investment .
It is now time to assess matters , but through an assessment in a crisis period we clearly need to find the means to get things moving again .
What kind of situation would we be in without the euro ?
Without the euro , Iceland would today be more or less like Ireland , or , rather , Ireland would resemble Iceland .
We have re-opened the debates in this crisis because everyone has realised just how central the euro was to our ability to withstand events not just in ordinary times , but also in times of crisis .
Commissioner , I should like to thank you for your sense of anticipation , for when , in May 2008 , in this House , you put this document on the table , no one realised just how useful and necessary it would be , or how it would underpin vital work aimed at looking ahead to the future and at being able to tackle the crisis facing us on the basis of this solid foundation that is the euro .
However , I am fully aware that , in your discussion with the ministers for economic affairs and finance , they suddenly had their minds on other matters , they suddenly had their minds on matters to which they were not paying attention : those of the financial markets .
You must remind them that , if they want in the future to emerge from the crisis situation we are in , they will not get away without doing two things .
They will have to balance Economic and Monetary Union .
We have seen it done to manage the crisis on the financial markets .
We are seeing it being done today to manage the crisis in the real economy with which we are faced .
Monetary policy can do a great deal , by injecting liquidity to help the markets operate , and by lowering rates to try to revive investment .
But that is all !
After that , it is up to the governments to take action to save the banks , to drive out toxic products , and , in the future , to revive economic activity within the European Union .
It is therefore time that the ministers for economic affairs and finance used the Treaty , which tells them to regard their economic policy as a policy of common interest .
On this basis , Commissioner , relaunch the debate at Ecofin , demand this road map that you have suggested to them , and realign yourself with us on the basis of the proposals , of our proposals , that you will have endorsed so that , in future , the euro really serves growth and employment .
With regard to monetary policy , of course , we respect the independence of the Central Bank , but we also respect the Treaty as a whole , and Article 105 , beyond price stability , stipulates that the Central Bank must pursue the Union 's other objectives .
Need I point this out ?
Need I say that , tomorrow , we may open a new debate , as well ?
Is it not necessary , this is not in our report , but will it not be necessary to open a debate on the inclusion of a financial market stability objective in the monetary policy objectives ?
I put the question to you .
Clearly , we will not make progress with the operation of Economic and Monetary Union if we do take greater account of the relationship between the real economy and the financial markets .
We are paying the price today for having forgotten this .
On enlargement , this crisis is re-opening the conditions of the debate , but I believe that we need to remain rigorous .
Reform prior to entry into the Euro Zone is easier than reform after entry into the Euro Zone , even though this is extremely demanding .
Commissioner , you made this a key point of your report : the idea that the differences that have emerged in the operation of the Euro Zone are a cause for concern .
They are greater than we first thought .
Therefore , we , the European Parliament , call on you to provide the European Union with tools enabling it to observe the quality of public spending in order to see how the Member States react , and to ensure that this is not just a debate on thresholds , one that allows only a general debate and not a debate on the quality of public spending , which is the responsibility of the ministers for economic affairs and finance .
In the road map that you are proposing to us , we also believe , Commissioner , that you need to address the Member States today to ask them to review their plans .
Their national reform plans do not take account , at present , of the latest forecasts that you have put on the table .
If we are to take the joint economic policy coordination exercise seriously , these plans now need to be reviewed on the basis of the growth forecasts that you have put on the table and that have been backed up and confirmed by the IMF and the OECD .
Lastly , of the proposals that we are formulating , I would draw your attention to the issues at stake in terms of the external representation of the Euro Zone .
For too long we have adopted a passive attitude .
The euro protected us .
However , in addition to protecting us , it now has to enable us to be a player with a strong voice on the international stage , so that we are not just the floating link in a debate between the other major monetary powers .
We are a major monetary power , we must accept the consequences of this in full , and this is also a matter for a consistent , concerted debate within the Council of Ministers .
We , the European Parliament , are more than willing to play our part in this exercise , as you know .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to welcome the representatives of the Euro Zone , the Prime Minister and the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Taking stock overall , I think we can say that , in its first ten years , the euro has been an unqualified success .
It did not all go completely smoothly , but , particularly during the recent crisis in the financial markets , the institutions have proven their worth .
On the basis of institutional cooperation within the Euro Zone , decisions could be drafted quickly , implemented promptly and , in particular , act as examples for all 27 Member States .
We have presented a report containing 62 detailed points , including an assessment of the past and prospects for the future .
Mrs Berès has already talked about certain points concerning the outlook for the future , and I would like to expand on them .
Behind all the positive responses to the euro , there is still the question of what is to happen next .
Are the Euro Zone and the European Central Bank prepared for the forthcoming challenges ?
There will certainly be one challenge or another that will need to be analysed .
I would like to remind you of the differences in the development of competitiveness in the Euro Zone , because the secret is that , although we have a central monetary policy , we have local budgetary and financial policies .
The Stability and Growth Pact can only act as an anchor between these two levels if the Member States are prepared to stick to the pact , to accept the conditions and to demonstrate the necessary discipline .
The Stability and Growth Pact is therefore now facing its first big test , in the form of the handling of the financial crisis .
In my opinion , it has the necessary flexibility , and there can in any event be temporary exceptions in extreme cases , but the Stability and Growth Pact cannot be just set to one side .
The other question is what is to happen next with regard to debt .
The package for the financial markets was wrapped up quickly , the governments took action , and there was a demonstration of an ability to act in a crisis , including by the Commission , but the question is , are we now going to cast aside the principles that have contributed to the stability of the euro , or are we going to succeed in developing and maintaining those principles ?
On top of that , we have made myriad proposals that , due to the short time I have surprisingly been given to speak , I cannot and will not enumerate .
The fact is , though , that we need a more authoritative and unified external representation of the euro - in which respect we fully share the position taken by the Prime Minister of Luxembourg and President of the Eurogroup .
I was amazed that Mr Juncker , as President of the Eurogroup , was not invited to the most recent summit in Washington .
I can say that quite openly , because it is such a contrast with all the positive developments .
Naturally , we also want the European Parliament to be appropriately involved , and there is one item on the agenda that we have been debating for a long time , namely the issue of whether it is enough to increase coordination of budgetary and financial policy or whether - as France believes - it is not enough and we need , instead , to provide an institutional form of ' economic government ' , which is so controversial in Germany .
Which is the right path to take ?
For my group , the answer is clear : we do not need economic government , but we do need greater coordination , including with regard to the agreed policy mix .
We also , however , need the Member States to show the necessary discipline , otherwise the euro may find itself in difficulties over the long term , and nobody wants that .
Many thanks to all those responsible .
Parliament is prepared to cooperate closely , and we are sure that we will be able to set the tone with this report .
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr President of the Eurogroup , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I must , on behalf of the Commission , thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Berès and Mr Langen , and all those who worked on this excellent report .

The quality of this report on the tenth anniversary of Economic and Monetary Union is to be congratulated .
The cooperation between the various political groups , in a demonstration of the high degree of cohesion within this Parliament , should also be congratulated .
This is yet another asset and another positive element of this Economic and Monetary Union , both in its present and in its future .
This Economic and Monetary Union has existed for ten years .
That was the starting point for our analysis and also the starting point for the report produced by the Commission .
It was also the starting point for the Commission communication that I had the honour of presenting to you on 7 May .
However , the tenth anniversary of the euro and Economic and Monetary Union has coincided with an exceptionally difficult and complex economic situation .
This allows us to analyse this Economic and Monetary Union in terms of how useful the euro , our single currency , our sign of integration , can be in tackling such a situation , which we have never experienced before .
The conclusion is that the first ten years of the euro have been very positive .
In terms of the usefulness of Economic and Monetary Union in tackling the current situation , the conclusion is also positive .
We are living through difficult times but we have in our hands an extraordinarily useful instrument to tackle these difficulties .
Obviously , the conclusions of the analysis in our communication that I presented here on 7 May and the conclusions of your report must be put into practice so that this instrument can be usefully applied at this moment in time .
I agree with the two rapporteurs that coordination is a key element .
At the meeting in Washington this weekend , there was also talk about coordination .
Without coordination , we cannot tackle this situation effectively .
No one can solve their economic problems in such a situation as this without coordinating their economic policies .
This was evident a few weeks ago when we had to confront the risk of collapse in the financial system .
It is also evident now that we are having to face the prospect of a recession in most of our economies , and when we are , for the first time in our lives , even facing a risk of deflation .
Budgetary policies must be coordinated .
The report on Economic and Monetary Union talks about the need to increase budgetary surveillance , to expand the way in which fiscal and budgetary policies are coordinated , as Mr Langen said .
However , we must also bear in mind sustainability , as Mrs Berès mentioned , the quality of public finances and the fact that we have a system of rules in the Stability and Growth Pact , which was revised in 2005 .
This revision is now proving very useful , because at times of economic recovery it allowed us to move forward with fiscal consolidation .
The euro area ended 2007 almost breaking even - for the first time in its history , with a deficit of 0.6-0.7 % - but this means that we now have sufficient flexibility so that our fiscal policy can really help to sustain demand , as our monetary policy should also do .
The conclusions of our report are particularly useful now in terms of the need to link budgetary policies with structural reforms and , in this respect , I agree with Mrs Berès : we must review and adapt the national Lisbon programmes , the national reform programmes , and we must also review the stability and convergence programmes of the Member States and adapt them to the current situation .
We will be discussing this in coming months and , for this reason , as you know , the Commission will , on 26 November , present an action plan incorporating objectives , instruments , policies and commitments .
This plan will indicate the need to adapt the national programmes in order to unite national policies and make them convergent and consistent with a European strategy , policies and instruments .
I agree with you and with the report that we must reinforce the external dimension of the euro and of Economic and Monetary Union .
As Mr Juncker is well aware , we must have a strategy in relation to the multilateral organisations and the other main parties whereby we can defend our interests in terms of our currency and our Economic and Monetary Union and thus defend the economic interests of the European Union .
This strategy must be based on principles and priorities , and also on instruments for taking action which will allow us to speak with a single voice , thus reinforcing the influence of each and every European and , in particular , of the euro area .
This is also an issue of governance .
I totally agree with many of the governance aspects that you have included in your report and I hope that the Finance Ministers in the Ecofin Council and in the Eurogroup will also agree .
Mrs Berès - I am about to finish - said in her speech that the Commissioner and the Commission should once again draw the attention of the Finance Ministers to the conclusions of this report .
There is a Molière character who said that he thought he had been speaking in verse , but had in fact been speaking in prose without realising .
I believe that the discussions now being held by the Ministers in the Eurogroup under the presidency of Jean Claude Juncker , by the Ministers in the Ecofin Council and by the Ministers at the Washington meeting are discussions which fit perfectly with the priorities and need for coordination reflected in the Commission 's report and in your report , although some of them are probably not aware of this .
( Applause )

President of the Eurogroup . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Berès , Mr Langen , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating your two rapporteurs on the report they have submitted to you and to us , since we are reading it and we are debating it .
This report is fair and goes far enough to ensure that we will be kept busy during the coming months .
I agree with the analysis made in Mrs Berès 's and Mr Langen 's report on the assessment of the first ten years of the single currency .
There is nothing to add or to remove from what they have expressed in their report .
Furthermore , it is a report that has the support of a large majority within this House , at least where the Commission has expressed its opinion on it .
I note that the House 's enthusiasm for the single currency is far more pronounced today than it was 12 or 13 years ago , even 10 years ago , and we should be pleased about that .
With regard to the economic divergences , the deltas between structural reforms and the differences in terms of the management of public finances , I should like first of all to point out that I did not understand what the report meant when it said that the results do not live up to the expectations that existed at the time of the introduction of the single currency .
I know of no quantitative report on the divergences between the various Member States of the Euro Zone .
Given that this report does not exist , it is therefore a circumstantial comment , which I did not understand .
I do share the view that these divergences tend at times to increase , something which , until now , has not threatened the cohesion of the Euro Zone but , were this divergence to persist , could harm its cohesion in the long term .
For the rest , and in this regard , we should be pleased that Europe - the European Union in general and the Eurogroup in particular - which is today faced with one of the most serious crises that it has had to tackle over the past few decades , has competently managed the crisis in which we currently find ourselves , not least by avoiding making the mistakes that were made in Europe during the 1970s .
To say that we have not repeated the same mistakes is no small thing , for economically and politically , this has enabled us to prevent the crisis from increasing the divergences within the monetary Union and from helping to undermine its cohesion .
The fact is , in the face of a crisis of the size that we are experiencing and in the face of a crisis that is increasingly extending to the real economy , a strong and coordinated economic policy response at European level is necessary , and we need to reflect on the best way of organising it by taking account , on the one hand , of our conceptual and regulatory framework - I am referring here to the Stability and Growth Pact and to the Lisbon Strategy - and , on the other , of the seriousness of the crisis , the consequences of which are far graver than we imagined a few months ago .
The creation of the world 's second major currency certainly brings advantages , but it also entails obligations , with the G20 of last Friday and Saturday in Washington reminding us of the obligations of ourselves and others .
We have to use and make the most of the three weeks we have before the December European Council in order to skilfully hone our European strategy and to prevent disparate responses at national level .
These disparate responses threaten us , of course .
It moves me to hear the calls and renewed calls for economic policy coordination that are mainly expressed in the language of Voltaire .
I should like those who are calling for the coordination of economic policies first and foremost to set an example and demonstrate the sincerity of their words .
I note that the various governments of the various member countries of the Euro Zone are pouncing greedily , and justifiably , on the problems being faced by their countries ' automobile sector .
I should like those who talk about the automobile sector and who continually talk about the coordination of economic policies to coordinate their national actions when it comes to taking initiatives in the automobile sector .
The rest is of trifling importance .
Really coordinate and prove , with an example to hand , the sincerity of those words .
( Applause )
With regard to monetary policy , you know how timid I am , I would never utter a word about it , except to say that I continue to believe that the role played by the European Central Bank over the last few months was truly exemplary .
Integration and supervision of the financial markets - that is another area of considerations that your rapporteurs have covered in their report .
The G20 has set us an ambitious road map ; it must be translated into concrete action by the G20 , and hence by the European Union and by the members of the Eurogroup .
You will no doubt recall that the member countries of the Eurogroup and those of the European Union were the first to demand that appropriate lessons be learnt from the crisis we are facing , and I do not wish to save my memories of that episode for a later date .
For four years we - I am talking about those in charge of the Eurogroup - have kept on repeating to the Japanese and US ministers of finance and have kept on drawing the attention of our US friends both to the risks of their double deficit and to the risks created by systematically underestimating the risks , especially with regard to real estate .
For two years several of us , at G7 level and in particular under the German Presidency of the G7 , demanded , with a certain bluntness of tone , more extensive regulation of the financial markets .
I do not take kindly to the fact that those who rejected this in the past are today giving the impression of leading the European response .
The US and UK Governments had all the time they needed to accept the Eurogroup 's proposals on better regulation of the financial markets ; they did not wish to do so .
They should not give the impression today that they are leading the others .
On the enlargement of the Euro Zone , I have nothing to say that differs from what your rapporteurs said .
I would simply point out that , belonging to the Euro Zone is , of course , an advantage , an opportunity , but that it also entails obligations of which some will have to be met before accession to the Euro Zone is possible .
This entirely understandable enthusiasm for the new formation of the G7 does , however , cause problems concerning the external representation of the Euro Zone .
We have always appealed , within the Eurogroup , for the European Union and the Eurogroup to have a greater presence at the G20 , at the International Monetary Fund and at the Financial Stability Fund .
We , at the Eurogroup , were the first to demand a lasting and permanent seat for the Commission at the G20 , something that did not prevent the President of the Commission from not claiming the Presidency of the Eurogroup - the consequences of which we shall see later .
However , we believe that the European Central Bank and the Commission should be represented on a long-term basis at the G20 , as should the Eurogroup , whether it be represented by the President of the Eurogroup , who is modestly trying to lead the finance ministers ' work , to which Mr Sarkozy commented that they were unequal , or by someone else .
I am not seeking the Presidency of the Eurogroup at minister of finance level for my own pleasure and glory , which is hardly inexhaustible ; I am doing so out of a sense of duty .
If others think that they can do a better job of these tasks , then let them do so , but they should apply the same intensity to them in the years to come as they give the impression of wanting to do at the present time .
For the rest , with regard to the EMU 's economic instruments and the governance of our group , I believe that , over the last few years , we have made remarkable progress , but when we debate exchange policy and monetary policy at international level , it is unthinkable that the world 's second major currency should not be represented in political and monetary terms by those responsible for managing these two aspects and these two areas of our common policy .
If we want the ministers of finance within the Eurogroup properly to manage the economic strand of Economic and Monetary Union , then the various Heads of State or Government need to give their ministers of finance the necessary instructions .
In Luxembourg , as you know , this presents no problem whatsoever .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mr Juncker , not only for this report , but also for your committed work on this matter as President of the Eurogroup .


Mr President , Mr President of the Eurogroup , Mr Juncker , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall begin by congratulating my fellow Members , Mrs Berès and Mr Langen , on the quality of their report , and by thanking them for having incorporated the amendments tabled by the Committee on International Trade .
Ten years on from its creation , the EMU should be regarded as a European success story of which we should be proud .
No one can dispute the fact - and many studies demonstrate it - that there is indeed a link between monetary policy and trade policy , and that , in this respect , the positive role of currency stability is necessary for the sustainable growth of international trade .
Increased use of the euro as an international currency benefits the Member States of the Euro Zone because it enables European businesses to reduce the exchange risk and to increase their international competitiveness .
However , although the European Central Bank , by prioritising price stability , has increased confidence in the euro , no one can seriously dispute the fact that inflation is a global reality and that , in an open market economy , this global phenomenon cannot be tackled by means of European monetary policy alone .
It is clear that the euro exchange rates have been too high for too long and have had negative effects , not least by constraining exports and by promoting imports within the internal market .
Many manufacturers have voiced their concerns in this regard .
According to a study that we commissioned within the Committee on International Trade , the ECB 's high-rate policy has cost us , over the past few years , 0.5 growth rate points per year .
It is in this way that I regret that the Commission has not carried out a more precise analysis of the euro 's international role and its repercussions on the internal market with regard to international trade .
The monetary policies conducted by some of the EU 's partners with the aim of undervaluing their currency unfairly undermine trade .
They could be considered a non-tariff barrier to international trade .
It is in this context that we are proposing to study the feasibility of a body for regulating monetary differences on the model of what the States managed to create in the trade sphere at the World Trade Organisation .
This body , which would come under the IMF , could help to stabilise the international monetary system , to reduce the risk of abuse and to give the global markets back the confidence they need .
I support the Commission 's proposal to develop common , European monetary positions , by obtaining in the long term a single seat for the Euro Zone within the international financial institutions and forums .
Lastly , I regret that the report does not take up the idea of an economic government .
Mr Juncker , this is not an issue of sincerity ; it is a political proposal for organising our Community instruments .
In times gone by , governments would settle major international disturbances with military wars .
Today , we are fighting an economic and social war , but instead of having people die , we have people out of work , and we no longer really know who the enemy is .
In this context , let us not be naïve and let us work tirelessly to implement European economic and social governance .
The latter may certainly not be enough in itself , but it is a necessary condition for the success of a European social market economy .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would very much like to thank the rapporteur for his comments on the future of the euro and all the associated policy areas , and to say that he has garnered widespread support in the committee .
I am also grateful to the other participants , in particular to Mr Juncker , who was the face of Europe at the IMF meeting in Washington and made a very good job of it .
We were proud of him , and I would just like to say : do not let the negative discussions discourage you from continuing this very successful work .
Ten years ago , I had the honour of speaking about the euro on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and at the time I said , and I quote , ' the euro will be strong , in defiance of the negative comments ' , such as those from Chancellor Gerhard Schröder , as he was to become , who said at the time that the euro was a sickly premature baby .
We repudiated that , and successfully in my opinion .
After all , the euro was brought into the world following several years of dieting by means of a strict , consistent fitness policy , and it has been a success .
I do not want to go into that yet again .
At the time , Gordon Brown was President-in-Office of the Council , and he stated quite clearly back then that the European Parliament had played a major role in the historic process of monetary union .
Other players also spoke , including Jacques Santer , and also Wilfried Maartens , who at the time described the countries in the Euro Zone - first 11 , then 15 , then 16 of them - as the pioneers of a courageous Europe .
I believe that we in Europe need courage for the future , so that we can carry on working so successfully and continue to stand up in the world of the other major powers - the USA , Asia and the other world powers - successfully with the euro .
The currency reserves held globally in euro are the best possible evidence of the success of the euro and of the Euro Zone .
I want to congratulate not only the rapporteurs , but also the Commission on its initiative in preparing this text reviewing the first 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union .
It is a strategic text and this analysis was vital .
As has been said here today , the euro is an undeniable success .
From Lisbon to Helsinki and from Dublin to Bratislava , the euro has proved strong and solid , even during the current severe turbulence .
It is clearly vital that the borders of this club are enlarged .
However , every day now the solidity of the European project is being put to the test in many other dimensions .
As has been said , the euro is central to the functioning of the financial system .
However , even the Commission 's text clearly points to the fundamental conclusion that neither growth in the real economy nor social or spatial convergence have kept up with this success .
On the contrary , the Commission clearly concludes that disparities have sharply increased during the first decade of the single currency .
This divergence affects regions in my country , in particular northern Portugal , and also other regions in other Member States .
The single monetary policy , particularly the very high exchange rate , has had a greater impact on those regions which are more exposed to international competition and also on those that export most .
Today , the crisis resulting from deregulation of financial markets is seriously affecting the real economy and is further worsening the situation of many citizens in many regions .
Those regions which are exposed to international competition , those which depend on small and medium-sized enterprises and those in which access to credit is very important are now falling victim to this process and depression is even threatening .
The euro 's success depends on the trust placed in it by European citizens .
The most powerful European countries have already taken steps to stimulate their national economies .
We can cite , in particular , the initiatives taken in relation to the motor industry .
However , Europe is more than that .
It has to be much more than the more or less coordinated sum of national policies .
The time has come to make the euro one of Europe 's central tools to ensure a robust currency and also a robust real economy .
The euro must be accompanied by mechanisms guaranteeing the central objective of achieving social and regional convergence , because , in essence , that is the heart of the European project .
The debate on coordinating economic policies in the euro area is now unquestionably more relevant and more topical .
However , coordinating national policies is not enough .
More needs to be done .
Having a Lisbon Strategy that is purely the sum of national initiatives and having a Stability and Growth Pact that puts different amounts of pressure on the various countries using it and subject to it are limitations , to which we can add the limited budget available .
Crises generate opportunities .
Monetary union can only be maintained if there is convergence in the well-being of Member States and their citizens , regardless of where they were born .
How else can we mobilise the people to support the single currency ?
The Commission must be equal to its own diagnosis and that is why we anxiously await the concrete proposals to be made by the Commission on 26 November to this House and to the European citizens .
It is vital that this crisis leads to a new phase in the Union , in which consolidation and strengthening of the financial system are accompanied by real prosperity based on cohesion and a concept of citizenship which is also economic .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are currently experiencing the most serious financial crisis in decades , and the European Central Bank and the euro have so far passed the litmus test of this financial crisis with flying colours .
The ECB has acted quickly and decisively to deal with the crisis , and has done its job better than some other central banks ; it has thus given an impressive demonstration of its crisis management abilities in difficult times .
The euro has shown itself to be a strong currency , which has helped to keep the Euro Zone stable and has even been able to give a helping hand in the form of target measures to certain countries outside the Euro Zone .
The call for European economic government fails to recognise that much has already been , and is being , done to coordinate the policies of the individual Member States and to harmonise them .
The achievements in this area can be credited , not least , to you , Mr Juncker , and I would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank you most particularly .
Countries outside the Euro Zone , such as Denmark and Hungary , are currently learning the hard way how expensive it can be not to belong to the Eurogroup and not be shielded by the protective umbrella of the euro .
Countries that have previously been opposed to joining the Euro Zone , such as Denmark and Sweden , are now changing their minds and considering joining in a few years .
The financial crisis also shows how closely linked the financial systems are , and how vulnerable they are .
It is therefore in our own interests for the countries that have not yet reached that stage to join the euro as soon as possible , and for the opt-out countries to change their minds , albeit not with concessions that do not fit in with the accession criteria .
The European Economic and Monetary Union is a stable area with clear accession criteria , and this should not be watered down .
The only thing that might be worth considering would be , with regard to the rate of inflation , not to use the three best countries in the European Union as the reference point , but instead to look at the Euro Zone as a whole , given that we are now a larger club with 16 members .
Since the Stability and Growth Pact was revised a few years ago , it has been flexible enough to respond appropriately , in times of economic imbalance , to challenges such as those of the current crisis .
It would therefore be a mistake to try to weaken and redefine the requirements of the pact .
The crisis also makes it very clear that excessive deficits such as those seen in the USA are not sustainable in the long term , that economic development on credit on a massive scale does not work , and therefore that there is no alternative to measures for consistent budget consolidation .
We are confident that , contrary to what is currently being said on the financial markets and peddled in the media , the financial crisis will ultimately strengthen , rather than weaken , monetary union .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mrs Berès and Mr Langen for the work they have put into this very important report .
It is an excellent report and one that should be taken notice of .
When this topic was first reported at committee level , we were experiencing a very different economic climate .
The subprime crisis in the United States of America had emerged , but I do not think anyone foresaw the repercussions and the extent of the effect it was going to have on financial markets right across the world .
As the financial situation has worsened , the tone of our debates here in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has changed .
The current crisis is a global one , and to get through it we need a coordinated global response , so I very much welcome the initiative that was taken at the weekend and the outcome of that .
There is a lot of more work that needs to be done , but I think that is a very good start .
For Ireland , the stability brought about by the euro currency , notably as regards interest rates and foreign-exchange rates , is a key factor in enabling us to emerge from the turmoil , not unscathed , but certainly still standing .
If there is still anyone in Ireland or elsewhere in the Euro Zone or elsewhere in Europe that doubts the benefit of euro membership , just look at the north-west of Europe and take note of what is happening in Iceland .
If people in Ireland had listened to those who opposed not just the Lisbon Treaty but also the Maastricht and Nice Treaties , where would Ireland be now ?
We would be outside .
We would not be in the Euro Zone and we would be very badly affected economically because we would not have the stability which the euro has brought to the country .
I do not expect an answer from those parties like Sinn Féin who have consistently opposed Europe and the steps we have taken , but I really believe that it is time that they stood up and said what exactly they think and where they stand on the whole issue of Europe and our economic future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the Eurogroup , Commissioner , on behalf of my group , I should also like to thank Mrs Berès and Mr Langen for the important report they have submitted to us .
With its 62 paragraphs and 14 dense pages , it provides much food for thought .
I should like to take advantage of the President of the Eurogroup 's and the Commissioner 's presence to share with them , again , on behalf of my group , several remarks that , in our view , deserve to be examined more fully than is the case in the report .
The first remark concerns the euro exchange rate policy .
I admit that I still do not understand whether or not there is an exchange rate policy for the euro in relation to the other international currencies and whether , at the G20 or elsewhere , there is a discussion about the way in which the United States ' very substantial deficits are going to continue to be financed .
My second remark relates to the topic of coordination .
I believe that the euro is a success , particularly from a political point of view , because it gives the European Union the status of a political power .
However , I also believe that its coordination is not working very well , and this , at least , on three points .
The first point is the issue of taxation .
You know what the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance 's opinion is on this matter : we are in favour of tax competition within the Union , but fair tax competition .
We believe that we are lagging too far behind when it comes to combating tax havens , including within the European Union , and we believe that we are lagging too far behind when it comes to extending the Directive on savings income .
With regard to the issue of budget policy coordination - which is the second point - I note that the Member States are all embarking on ' revival ' plans .
At European level , I hear Mr Strauss-Kahn say , for example , that 1 % of the Community 's GDP needs to be pledged , a figure that represents practically the entire EU budget for one year .
Where do we stand with regard to that point of view ?
I believe that the coordination effort is not going very well and I also believe that the responses you are providing with regard to the revisited Stability and Growth Pact are neither sufficient nor a match for the challenge awaiting us .
Lastly , the third point on which coordination seems to me to be poor and insufficient is the wage policy conducted within the various EU countries .
In reality , Germany has built up its strong performance over the past 10 years by practising a wage policy that , in view of the size of the German economy , is responsible for the overall momentum of the Euro Zone .
I believe that this presents a problem in terms of the level of internal demand and of the level of wages for a number of job categories , not to mention the problem of job insecurity .
On these three points , Mr President of the Eurogroup , I shall expect , from yourself and from the Council of finance ministers that you represent , more ambition for the future , since we are also talking about the challenges to come .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 10 years after the introduction of monetary union , Europe finds itself in a major crisis .
Banks are collapsing , or are being propped up with billions from national budgets ; the market is collapsing , and millions of people are afraid for their jobs and their future .
It is not only the market that has failed : the prevailing policy seems unable to learn from its mistakes .
We take the view that serious mistakes were made in setting up Economic and Monetary Union .
One of those mistakes was the structural separation of monetary and fiscal policy : one cannot create a common currency without at the same time harmonising taxation and expenditure policy , at least in broad outlines .
It seems to me that the economic imbalances within the Euro Zone have increased enormously .
What we now need is , indeed , better coordination of economic , and in particular taxation , policy .
We need effective measures to combat tax dumping ; tax havens also need to be closed and movements of capital finally need to be controlled again .
The second serious mistake , in our view , lies in the structure of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In times like these , anybody who thinks that budget consolidation is essential is obviously living in another world : nothing would be more disastrous than responding to this economic crisis , at this point , with obvious saving programmes .
The stability pact has clearly proven that it has failed .
It should be replaced by an integrated European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development .
In our opinion , we need an investment offensive to renew public infrastructure and to improve the lives of socially disadvantaged groups in Europe .
The third mistake , in our view , lies in the structure of the European Central Bank itself , which is not subject to any democratic supervision and which has as its sole objective price stability .
We would advocate introducing democratic supervision for the European Central Bank , and we also call for the ECB 's monetary policy mandate to be adjusted so that , in future , growth and employment have to be given at least the same weight as price stability .
The current crisis is also an opportunity for far-reaching reform of the European monetary and financial architecture .
This opportunity must not just be frittered away .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , if we had a common literary reference framework in Europe , I would begin my speech with a quote from a great Swedish poet : The voice of flattery lulls you to sleep : listen to the voice of truth some time .
The meter is alexandrine with a caesura .
Both rapporteurs make the assessment that the monetary union has been a success .
As a result they are helping to create a myth surrounding the euro that is not anchored in critical Western thinking .
The truth about the euro is quite different .
Firstly , its first ten years have entailed enormous costs in the form of reduced growth and increased unemployment .
Secondly , the monetary union has not been tested in hard times until now .
Research points to the fact that the effect on the volume of foreign trade could be fairly large , perhaps even 3-4 % of GNP .
On the other hand , it is apparent that the socio-economic profit from this increase in trade is very modest , perhaps 3-5 per mille of GNP , which is a one-off profit .
This negligible increase in prosperity has been gained at the expense of the Euro Zone countries not having been able to conduct an independent monetary and finance policy .
Germany went into this monetary union with a heavily over-valued currency and has lived with a high rate of interest and too restrictive a finance policy .
The costs have been considerable , and so how is it going now ?
The story that has been put together is that the countries of the Euro Zone have united forcefully and have led the fight against the financial crisis .
As everyone knows , this is a myth .
It was the United Kingdom , which is outside the monetary union , and Gordon Brown who took the initiative .
The Euro Zone followed on afterwards .


Mr President , let me congratulate Mr Lundgren on his remarks and also challenge Mr Ryan of the UEN Group , who tells us that the stability provided by the euro has been an enormous boon to Ireland .
If he had been following recent Irish economic history , he would know that the inflexibility of the euro monetary policy has contributed to serious inflationary problems , especially in the housing market , and that the Irish housing bubble has been much more severe than it need have been if Ireland had been able to control its own monetary policy .
We were offered great benefits with the euro ; we were offered ease of travel , growth and efficiency , and transfers of money between Member States would suddenly become easier .
But this has not happened .
Yes , we have got the ease of travel , but we have not seen the growth and efficiency , and I believe that it is nearly as difficult and expensive to transfer money between euro-zone states as it ever was .
Those of us who had doubts about the euro project have been vindicated .
What we have is the wrong interest rate for most countries most of the time .
Italy has had the most fearful crisis of competitiveness , with its unit labour costs increasing by 40 % compared to Germany .
We are told that the euro is a great success because of its strength as a currency .
Well , we should go and ask some euro-zone exporters what they think of the strength of the euro .
It is doing huge damage to them .
The real test of a currency 's success is the degree of confidence in the market , and that is measured in this case by the bond spreads between euro-zone states .
The last time I looked , the bond spread between Greece and Germany was over 150 basis points .
This is not sustainable .
It shows a total lack of confidence in the euro from the markets .
The question for us is not how long can the euro last , but which Member State will leave first .
- ( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , allow me to begin by thanking both rapporteurs for a well-balanced report .
In connection with this report I will first of all respond to the current problems in the Euro Zone .
And despite ten years of positive effects achieved through its operation , the Euro Zone faces new challenges over how to confront the financial crisis and the subsequent economic recession .
I would like to contribute by pointing out some of the unsystematic regulatory interventions made by a number of Member State governments in the market under the pretext of sorting out this new situation .
I must say with some surprise that the governments of Member States are often encouraged to make certain unhelpful interventions in the financial sector by some of the statements from certain representatives of the European Union , and these often resolve only the peripheral aspects of the situation .
This applies in the case of adherence to the conditions of the Stability and Growth Pact , for example , where some governments are already signalling that they will apparently not be sticking to a planned deficit in their public finances and referring in this context to the encouragement of the European Union .
The takeover of troubled financial institutions by the governments of some Member States will create a dangerous precedence for the expropriation of private companies in any sector whatsoever who are not willing to adapt themselves to un-systematic regulatory and discriminatory interventions carried out , for example , in the interests of holding down inflation .
The large-scale financial interventions in some sectors of the economy , such as the automobile industry , give rise to questions as to whether or not such interventions cause excessive market deformation and also discriminate against other sectors .
Without clear and careful coordination and clear rules at a European Union or Euro Zone level , it will be difficult to manage these very challenging processes .
In this context , I would like to urge the representatives of the European Commission and the European Central Bank and other relevant EU institutions to take a considered and coordinated position when looking for an optimal solution in these difficult times , when the whole of Europe faces economic recession .
In the short-term , excessive regulation and government intervention in the free market may temporarily halt further economic collapse in the EU , but in the medium term they will certainly not bring the boost to development that is so much expected .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , Economic and Monetary Union has added a new dimension to the European integration process .
Its governance is based on two asymmetrical pillars : monetary union , which is federal in nature , and economic coordination , which is intergovernmental .
Both must ensure the stability , growth , fairness and sustainability that our citizens demand .
The review of ten years of the euro area is positive .
The proof lies in the fact that the euro is increasingly regarded as a refuge and place of security for Member States .
However , we need to go further and expand its scope .
We need to do this in order to confront the challenges of globalisation , climate change and population ageing , and also the current financial crisis which necessitates improvements in the way we operate .
We also need to do this in order to tackle the spectre of recession which is emerging for the first time .
The euro cannot simply act as a safety anchor , but must also be an engine that can drive growth .
The euro area and Economic and Monetary Union must be capable of responding to these challenges .
I must congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent work and , in particular , thank them for having incorporated two of my proposals .
The first was to introduce , in the definition of our monetary policy , together with the economic pillar and the monetary pillar , the need for a financial analysis in order to correctly define this policy .
Its definition must take into account the transfer of monetary policy , the development of credit and financial assets , the characteristics of new products and the concentration of risks and liquidity .
Secondly , we must take account of the divergences between the Member States , which will increase with the enlargement processes .
A ' one size fits all ' monetary policy will not in many cases suit the situation of the various countries .
It should therefore be adjusted by introducing financial facilities for those countries which may experience contractive effects due to the ' one size fits all ' policy , given that the expansive effects can easily be corrected through fiscal policy .
( LT ) It is said that any crisis highlights all the strong and weak points of economic and institutional structures .
I must admit that previously I had little doubt that greater attention to countries in the Euro Zone would create preconditions for the emergence of a two-speed Europe and that developing economies , like Lithuania 's economy , would face obstacles to their entering the Euro Zone .
But the current events in the financial markets have changed my attitude to the Eurogroup 's role and influence on the European Union .
It is obvious that the Euro Zone has withstood the first strong wave of the financial crisis .
It is clear that the economic downturn can be halted by implementing an economic policy , which is better coordinated among Member States , which speeds up integration and the expansion of the internal market .
Those countries , which have remained outside Euro Zone 's borders , have suffered more .
For the most part we suffered and became victims of the financial crisis because capital is being taken back .
That is why sometimes we object very strongly to decisions , which would ease the movement of capital in the countries of the European Union , it is not that we are against integration .
As a professional economist , I know that integration processes encourage economic growth .
But we would really like the Euro Zone to become a rock , which would beat back the waves of the financial crisis , a rock which we could climb onto and where we could seek shelter from the icy winds .
What needs to be done to make the strength of the Euro Zone the strength of the entire European Union ?
We should certainly avoid proposing a lot of new measures .
Commissioner , today I looked through the resolutions , which the European Parliament adopted on economic policy .
Now it would have been to our benefit , if at least part of those proposals had already been implemented .
There are a great number of proposals and it seems to me that we will not think of anything more .
Now we ought to consolidate those proposals .
At the moment there are discussions as to whether we need greater state interference or a more liberal policy to overcome the economic recession .
I would say that both economic strategies should be used .
Above all , what is obvious is that we need a social safety net , where the state offers support and maintenance , so that people who have lost their jobs due to the crisis , due to restructuring , can find a new place in life .
On the other hand , we need liberal reforms so that the integration process becomes stronger and creates opportunities for business expansion in the European Union .
Here the Euro Zone has a strong part to play .
In conclusion , I would like to join my colleagues and say to you , Mr President of the Eurogroup , that we value your work and know how complicated this all is - at least in the European Parliament you have support .
( PL ) Mr President , a review of the ten years of Economic and Monetary Union should be assessed from an international perspective .
The question we should ask is where the European Union has shown its advantages over its main competitors in the world , that is , the USA and Asia .
This perspective clearly shows that the Euro Zone balance sheet is in the red .
The European Union has been developing more slowly than its competitors .
Growth in jobs , and particular the growth in labour productivity has been lower than in the USA , not to mention Asia .
This means that the common currency is not fulfilling its fundamental role .
Another aspect is the future of the Euro Zone : documents of the European Central Bank and the authorities of the EU are placing increasing emphasis on the need to use the euro as a tool to impose uniform economic policies on the Member States , particularly as regards budgetary and fiscal policies .
This declaration is of concern to the more backward countries , particularly the new Member States .
How can they develop and close the gap with the old Member States if they are forced into a policy that slows economic growth in all Member States ?
The main criticism of the European Central Bank is that in striving to make the euro a world currency , it is ignoring the economic problems of the regions and the less developed Member States .
It is also failing to take into account social aspects , such as demographic structure and the mobility of citizens .
The position of the EU authorities is even less acceptable when it is considered that for many years both Germany and France failed to comply with the stringent conditions of Maastricht , because they knew that this was in their national interests .
Furthermore , they were never called to account or punished .
Therefore , in my view , what is needed is not to continue the present economic doctrine of the Euro Zone , but a radical change which will help not only to counteract the present financial crisis , but will above all release the energy for every Member State of the EU to develop economically .
( EL ) Mr President , the proposal by the European Commission on the first ten years of Economic and Monetary Union contains a series of contradictions .
It aims to close a cycle of market deregulation , while in the real economy the prices of goods and services are at an all-time high and unemployment in the Euro Zone is forecast to reach 8.6 % in 2009 and 9 % in 2010 .
Developments confirm that there has been no narrowing whatsoever of the gap between rich and poor .
The global economic and financial crisis is directly linked to limitations on the state and the policy of deregulation .
Furthermore , while we have confirmation that the distribution of wealth has been uneven , the Commission is advocating in favour of the continuing application and levelling effect of the Stability and Growth Pact and a stronger role for the International Monetary Fund .
This approach rides roughshod over the peculiarities of the economies of the individual Member States and clashes with the philosophy of different rates of growth in each Member State .
( DA ) Mr President , this year it is ten years since the introduction of the euro in a large number of countries within the EU .
In Denmark we have rejected the introduction of the euro twice after long and in-depth debates , and now it is time take stock and review the situation .
We need to look very critically at our common currency .
Since July , the euro has fallen by 30 % in relation to the dollar after the start of the financial crisis .
Investors lack confidence in the euro .
The question is , why ?
Part of the answer is obvious : there is a lot to suggest that the monetary policy pursued within the EU , which only looks at fighting inflation , is not the correct one .
The very stringent finance policy that Member States are forced to pursue on account of the Stability Pact is simply not the right one just now .
The low rate of the euro in relation to the dollar is a result of there being no confidence in the economic policy of the countries using the euro .
We can also say that the financial crisis demonstrates something else - that the euro 's ' one size fits all ' standard does not hold true .
More and more economists are of the opinion that an expansive finance policy should be pursued .
If we want to use it as a tool , we need many more individual economic policies than the euro will allow .
' One size fits all ' will never fit anyone very well .
It will always be a poor fit for everyone .
Finally , I have to say to Mr Klinz - who said that we in Denmark would like to join the euro and that our currency is weak - that the Danish economy is as solid as a rock and that we have managed the financial crisis better than the average euro country .
( DE ) Mr President , on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of economic and monetary union , there is really very little to celebrate .
We are desperately trying to use a variety of rescue packages to prevent a dam bursting in our financial system , and all we are managing to do is patch up the breaches inadequately .
The banks have pocketed billions in government money , whilst at the same time distributing bonuses and profits , and the average citizen has been made a fool several times over : his tax money has ended up on the banks ' roulette tables , and in return he is threatened with unemployment and possibly even losses on his savings and pension fund .
In the middle of this dilemma , voices are now being raised saying that we finally have to do something to ensure that European companies do not end up in the hands of non-European , for example Chinese , owners .
This sell-off of Europe started years ago , with cross-border leasing and other such machinations .
What is more , the EMU is in a certain amount of trouble in view of Greece 's spiralling debt and Italy 's carelessness after joining the Euroclub .
We therefore need to ensure that mistakes made in connection with the euro are not repeated by new members , and that no more risky financial games can be played with public money , in other words with the people 's money .
Not only do we need strict EU-wide monitoring of dubious financial constructs , but we also need to require a solidarity contribution from those who have profited from speculation .
Above all , the EU must , in principle , renounce completely untrammelled capitalism , and instead protect its citizens from unbridled greed and the negative effects of uncontrolled globalisation .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Juncker , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Mölzer seems to have missed the point , as nothing that he said had much to do with the euro .
The euro and enlargement are the European Union 's most visible successes of the last 10 years .
We must , however , also bear in mind that these successes would never have been possible without the Maastricht criteria , the Stability and Growth Pact and the European Central Bank , and without political will and a willingness to take responsibility at European level .
We are now talking about cooperation and coordination .
It is true that we need more cooperation and coordination , but , for that to be possible , we will need to trust each other more .
We need more cooperation and coordination , not least in light of more Europe with respect to economic practices .
During diverse crises , the European Central Bank , the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan have helped to protect Europe from monetary crises .
I would therefore once again stress that there can be no summit without representatives of the Euro Zone and of the European Central Bank .
The financial crisis has demonstrated that the euro has helped us to avoid currency speculation , and to prevent it from occurring in the Euro Zone .
The reactions in Denmark , the United Kingdom , Sweden and Hungary very clearly show us what the euro has done for us .
My final point , Mr President , is that we also want the European Union to be represented in the IMF , the World Bank and the global financial economy in accordance with its strength .
We call on all those who are now clamouring for global regulations to do in Europe and in their Member States what they are demanding that others do .

( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Juncker , I would like to begin by giving my hearty congratulations to a mature ten year old and my thanks to both rapporteurs for an excellent report .
The last few months have , of course , demonstrated the strength of the euro .
Few people believed ten years ago that the euro would be such a formidable success .
Some countries , my own included , waited anxiously outside .
Some critics probably thought that the euro would not pass the test , just as Mr Lundgren said .
But he and the other prophets of doom were wrong .
After months of financial uncertainty it is clear that only cooperation in economic matters , with the euro as the linchpin , can provide the certainty that the current global economic systems require .
Precisely the fact that it was joint actions that led to an easing of the market proves the strength of the euro cooperation .
The euro should be the currency of the whole of Europe .
If this vision is to become reality , then the already stringent convergence criteria should not become even more stringent .
I therefore think it is wrong to make membership of the euro into an exclusive club with higher entry requirements , which one of the amendments requires .
Allow me to say a few words regarding Sweden 's position outside the Euro Zone .
For Sweden , which has only one foot in the European Union but is still outside the Euro Zone , the advantages and disadvantages are clearer now than ever before , even , I hope , to Mr Lundgren .
When the previous financial crisis hit Sweden in 1992 , we could ultimately do nothing other than allow the krona to fall .
Lessons learned at that time led to our decision to become part of the European family .
Over the last year , the Swedish krona has fallen in value against the euro .
Now , as the financial crisis is being dealt with , Sweden finds itself outside both the protection offered by the euro and the resolutions adopted and required by the crisis management within the euro group .
It is now that small countries like Sweden should realise the value of a common currency .
The stability that the euro offers allows the long-range view that is important for a country that is as dependent on exports as Sweden is .
Sweden has good economic development , that is true , but membership of the euro would have given us more stability in our monetary policy and have created more jobs , a more stable economy and stronger exports .
The Swedish parties should therefore be prepared to review their passive attitude to the euro as a currency for Sweden .
Sweden should be a full member of the European Union .
It is therefore time that we began to talk seriously in my country about a new referendum .
For my part , I am hoping for Swedish membership within five years .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to two questions in this debate , questions which in my view cast a shadow on the functioning of economic and monetary union .
Firstly , we have the more rapid development of the countries outside the Euro Zone than those within it .
In 2002-2007 the old Member States outside the Euro Zone - England , Sweden and Denmark - developed much faster than the Euro Zone countries .
GDP growth in these countries was almost double the average in the Euro Zone , and unemployment rates were significantly lower than in the Euro Zone .
The differences between the Euro Zone countries and the new Member States are even more telling .
Secondly , there is the unequal treatment of countries aspiring to economic and monetary union , and those already in it .
The candidates for monetary union have to meet strict fiscal and monetary criteria for two years before adopting the currency , while the two largest EU countries - Germany and France - who are in the Euro Zone , exceeded the budget deficit threshold for the four years between 2002-2005 .
A change in the Stability and Growth Pact was necessary for these two countries to avoid having to pay several billion euros in penalties for non-observance .
( SV ) This report praises the EMU .
I wonder what there is in fact to celebrate .
The Euro Zone is in a recession and unemployment is rising sharply .
Several of the large EMU countries no longer meet the basic economic requirements for membership .
This alone indicates what a rigid project this is .
Five years ago the Swedish people voted against the EMU .
However , on repeated occasions I have heard the Commission say that Sweden sooner or later must join the EMU .
I would therefore like to take the opportunity of asking the Commission whether you can clarify this once and for all .
Must Sweden join the EMU ?
The EMU requires a fundamental reform .
A clear objective for the European Central Bank to combat unemployment should be included .
Greater economic flexibility should be allowed .
These would represent a few important steps in the right direction .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President , I consider the introduction of the euro a success , since we have seen unemployment fall and employment rise , given the stability that lies behind the euro .
Further proof has come from the current crisis , for any country that can use this strong reserve currency simply cannot have balance of payment difficulties , whereas others - such as Hungary - are experiencing such problems .
However , the Euro Zone has not succeeded in achieving convergence , despite cohesion fund support , and what we should be examining instead are the reasons for this . It is a very strong magnet for capital .
Therefore , I suggest that in examining what happened , we should take into account not only GDP but also GNI .
I am pleased that the report has included the point that measures should be taken against Member States who have continuously provided incorrect , rose-coloured forecasts - as we know from the events in Hungary in 2006 - and I believe that this is indeed necessary .
I think it important that we should preserve the prestige of EU membership .
On the one hand , states that are not members of the European Union should not enter the Euro Zone , since this would mean that we could not justify the dramatic efforts made by certain states to become members .
The tools of the ECB , particularly during the current crisis , should be used for each Member State , especially as regard liquidity ; we should not be selfish in this regard .
This gives meaning to the EU 's protective shield and to membership in the internal market , which represents a significant challenge , particularly for the less developed Member States .
But similarly , we should take this into account in the composition of the ECB Executive Board .
The most important consideration , however , is the external representation of the Euro Zone .
This is necessary , but each Member State should be involved in conferring the mandate for the external representation of the Euro Zone ; external representation should not be an exclusive club , since the EU is a unified entity .
Finally , I would like to say that Member States need to enter the Euro Zone as soon as possible , under strict but logical conditions .
Therefore , I am pleased with Mr Klinz 's reasonable suggestion that the reference countries be limited to the EU area countries . Thank you for your attention .
- ( SK ) In connection with the financial crisis in recent weeks the inhabitants of Europe have seen how the Member States in the Euro Zone are better equipped to cope with large disruptions .
People also see this in my own country , Slovakia , which joins the Euro Zone on 1 January .
The financial investors and speculators from the currency markets already consider us to be part of the Euro Zone .
It no longer pays to speculate with our currency , since we have established a fixed conversion rate .
At the same time , the currencies of our neighbouring countries are falling .
Speculators see in them a level of risk which they do not wish to incur , due to the crisis on the financial markets .
Some currencies have fallen to their lowest levels in years .
The adoption of the euro for a small and open economy shields entrepreneurs and inhabitants from fluctuations in the exchange rate .
Even the inhabitants of the country with the highest level of employment in the world , Denmark , which has long had one of the highest levels of competitiveness and highest standard of living in the world , have discovered that if they were members of the Euro Zone they would have more favourable rates of exchange and they would be better able to tackle the current global problems .
The same also applies to Sweden , of course , which we have been discussing here today .
Perhaps now is the right moment for them to reassess their entry into the Euro Zone .
The criticism has been raised today by a colleague from my own country that the Slovak government is drawing up measures for strengthening the framework of regulation and supervision .
I would like to draw his attention to a resolution of the European Parliament , which recently asked the Commission to propose measures for strengthening the framework of regulation and supervision across the entire EU .
There is no other way .
That is why a majority of MEPs from various political groups voted in favour of this option .
I would like to end by congratulating both rapporteurs for an excellent report .
( LT ) The Economic and Monetary Union is 10 years old .
It is a fine anniversary , but also an occasion to consider how the EU and the global economic , financial and political situation has changed and whether the Maastricht criteria suit current global changes .
In 2005 the Stability and Growth Pact was reviewed , perhaps because its requirements had not been implemented by the largest countries in the Euro Zone .
In a period of 10 years virtually none of the countries in the Euro Zone had implemented all of the Maastricht criteria .
We know that the European Central Bank 's inflation target is 2 % .
If we were to look for this target today , then we would see that it has not been achieved by any EU countries ; their inflation this September ranged from 2.8 % in the Netherlands to 14.7 % in Latvia , and the Maastricht price stability criterion would be 4.5 % .
If the members of the Euro Zone fail to implement the price stability criterion , how can we talk about inflation stability ?
Talk of inflation stability began in 2006 , when the Euro Zone started to expand .
Are we talking about new requirements purely for new Euro Zone candidates ?
What are the prospects for Euro Zone expansion ?
I invite the European Commission and the European Central Bank to review once more the Economic and Monetary Union 's principles , government , and the Maastricht criteria , asking whether they are being implemented in the current global economic and financial situation and what the future holds for the Economic and Monetary Union and candidates to the Euro Zone .

( PL ) Mr President , Mr Juncker , you are out of luck , because today 's debate on the success of euroland is being held at a moment when Eurostat has announced that a major recession is starting in the countries which have the common currency .
This should incline you to self-criticism , rather than to the unbounded propaganda of success .
In their report , the authors praise the fall in unemployment , which over nine years has admittedly been just over 1.5 % , but forecasts now predict a significant increase in unemployment in the Euro Zone in the coming year .
The other side of the coin is less pleasant , and the report does underline this , and that is the very unsatisfactory economic growth and significant reduction in productivity ( from 1.5 % in the 1990s to 0.75 % in the past decade ) .
It is clear that the euro is neither a panacea for economic woes , nor an instrument that by its nature provides faster economic growth and greater prosperity than in the EU countries outside the euro - Sweden , Denmark and Great Britain .
( EL ) Mr President , there can be no doubt that the birth of EMU and the euro are one of the highlights in the sixty-year history of European integration .
This is the first time in Europe and in the world that we have had such a structured changeover to a common currency , without war , without bloodshed , by consensus and through the political will of independent countries which jointly and democratically decided to take this road towards monetary stability .
It has been a difficult road , but a road which suited both components in Europe : both those countries which were accustomed to financial stability and continued to pursue the same anti-inflationary policies and the others which , after decades with no financial discipline , found for the first time in the euro an oasis in which they could rationalise and restructure their economic basics .
So much for the past .
Now , however , we are in a very difficult phase , at a crucial stage in which we must look at the ' E ' in EMU .
Until now the ' M ' in EMU , its monetary components , have helped us to get where we are today , but from now on , without a cohesive , consistent , single European approach to the economic aspects of the argument , I am afraid that we shall find many of our achievements overturned before us .

So we have two matters outstanding for the future : coordination rules for European economic governance which will also inoculate the global system over and above the excesses and anarchy which caused the present crisis and , secondly , we need to condemn the economic pandering to the people of all those who want to use the crisis to cast doubt on such important achievements .
( PT ) I must start by congratulating the rapporteurs on this excellent report .
Only the few who are completely oblivious or the many who lack any understanding at all might consider that the euro and its associated monetary policy have not been a huge success for humanity and a great success for the European economy .
You only need to look at the vast number of jobs that have been created in Europe during the euro 's reign to understand its importance .
It also cannot fail to be significant that , in a crisis situation in which the European economy , thanks to its instruments , is reacting more favourably than other regional economies , those who a short time ago were sceptical about the common monetary policy and the euro are now quickly asking to cooperate with and even integrate into the euro area .
However , that is not everything and it does not mean that I personally am satisfied with how the European Union has tackled the issues of financial consolidation and financial stability .
I have already said in this House on numerous occasions that I am in favour of financial stability and the Stability and Growth Pact , but that I feel that this Pact has not always been a friend to the real economy .
Neither this Pact nor the monetary policy has been a true friend to the real economy .
The real economy has frequently suffered enormous problems due to an overly conventional application of the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact .
I have never met an economist nor read an economic text book that told me that two , three and sixty , the magic numbers of the Stability and Growth Pact ( inflation , deficit and debt ratio ) , have been scientifically proven .
I have never met anyone and I have particularly never met an economist or economic theorist who at any time has said that it is absolutely vital to doggedly maintain this kind of configuration .
One idea heavily defended by the Commission and by the more conservative sectors of Europe is that we must have balanced or zero budgets .
This is an absolutely absurd idea .
At any level of growth , a balanced budget means the total elimination of debt in the future .
This is not fair in social terms , nor is it fair in inter-generational terms , and it has no connection with reality and the real economy .

Mr President , the Berès-Langen report is an excellent one because what it does is give us the history of the EMU over the last 10 years and say how it should go forward in the future .

The euro has been a resounding success : it is the second most important currency in the world ; inflation in the first 10 years has broadly been in line with the ECB 's objective of 2 % ; furthermore , it has facilitated travel , trade and employment ; and , most importantly of all , it signifies a further step in EU consolidation .
The announcement last week that the Euro Zone is in recession now means that urgent action will have to be taken both within the EU and globally , but the one thing we cannot do is blame the euro for the current crisis .
While the Stability and Growth Pact rules are well-intentioned in setting down maximum borrowing guidelines for Member States , they did not foresee - and nobody could have foreseen - the current global economic crisis .
The current crisis in my opinion calls for flexibility because , unless the credit squeeze by the financial institutions is relaxed , there is every possibility that the crisis will get even worse and that more and more jobs will be lost .
I have to say that I want to commend Presidents Barroso and Sarkozy for the manner in which they represented the European Union at the G20 talks in Washington last week .
I think they did us proud and I think they did Europe proud .
Finally , we must examine how we got into the current crisis and what the causes were .
We must learn the lessons and we must make sure that it never happens again .
If this means reform - reform of the institutions , reform of the International Monetary Fund - let us do it .
If it means examining the operations of the European Central Bank , let us do it .
Let us at this stage carry out a forensic analysis and , whatever the crisis that Europe is now experiencing - we do not know how serious it is , where it is going to end up or what the consequences will be - let us examine it forensically and let us put solutions in place .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Juncker .
I share the view that the common currency has been a great European success .
For several years we have had low prices and low levels of inflation , we have had low interest rates , we have had transparency of prices among countries , we have had macroeconomic stability - and this is a particular success for those countries which previously had problems with inflation and their budget deficit .
I share the view that this is a success .
I would like to comment on what my Polish fellow Member said a few minutes earlier , when he said that we have growing unemployment and a financial crisis in the Euro Zone .
Unfortunately he has left the Chamber now , but had he stayed , he might have heard a few words of wisdom .
Because he ignores the fact that without the euro , Europe would be in a much worse situation than it currently is .
This is particularly evident if we look at the situation of countries such as Iceland or Hungary , which are now facing huge economic difficulties .
Had they been part of the Euro Zone , their situation would be far better .
I would like to say that the long-term success of any currency will be decided by real factors , it will be decided by long-term economic development , and this is lacking in Europe .
We should note that in the past weeks the US dollar has strengthened against the euro , evidence that even in an economic crisis investors , or at least the majority of them , believe that the dollar is a safe haven for their investments .
That is why we need to create a basis for long-term growth in Europe , which will strengthen the European currency .
But this requires reform , it requires economic momentum , and it requires higher rates of productivity .
The second point is that I believe that we should review the nominal convergence criteria , and we should ensure that we adapt the criteria to the new conditions , in particular the inflationary criteria and the method of calculating the benchmark , so that they will enable those new Member State economies that are very dynamic to join the Euro Zone .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Chairman of the Eurogroup and the Commissioner , as well as the two rapporteurs who produced this report , because I am convinced that the introduction of the euro has enabled citizens to manage their own family budgets more successfully , by helping them to make savings in their spending on goods and services , and not only this .
As others have pointed out , we have seen the inflation rate contained at an average of around 2 % , as well as the creation of roughly 16 million jobs over these ten years and the reduction of the public budget deficit , which in 2007 - as the Commissioner said - amounted to approximately 0.6 % of GDP compared with 4 % in the 1980s and 1990s .

Moreover , the euro has acquired international prestige and has become an attractive currency even to countries outside the Community , and despite the recent financial turmoil that has dealt serious blows to the world financial and banking system , the euro has undoubtedly attenuated the devastating impact of this financial crisis of global proportions .
There is today , however , a danger that the global slowdown in demand will continue to weaken exports and to frustrate the advantage of the discount rate of the euro , which is threatened by the fall in value of the dollar .
It is clear that we must look again at making significant adjustments to the basic structure of the euro , in order to put Member States with a below-average GDP in a position to redress their disadvantage .
An EMU road map to better analyse economic divergence , drive forward structural reforms and monitor public finances and financial markets , accelerating their integration , is therefore most welcome .
All this can and must be achieved little by little as we emerge , and let us hope as soon as possible , from this situation of instability that is currently exacerbating not only the urgent decisions that national governments have to make , but also the confusion into which savers are thrown .
Savers ' trust must be restored in order to get investments and consumption moving and to improve the overall framework within which we can then act more calmly .
In other words , the responsibility must be a collective one , but a concerted effort is required on the part of the competent authorities to judge which reforms to support with rigorous governance and authoritative political leadership .

Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs , Mrs Berès and Mr Langen , for a very balanced report that studies the subject from the wide angle .
Secondly , I think that when this report was initiated no one thought how timely it would be at this point .
I think it is a sign of the EU 's ability to respond to global challenges , secure competitiveness and create stability .
Without European Monetary Union , both the euro countries and the countries outside the euro would have been far more vulnerable to this financial crisis .
Over the past 10 years , the European Central Bank has played a very positive role , and this initiative has ensured very stable monetary policy and economic policy that actually made us able to respond in timely fashion to the crisis and to take proactive actions , not only in the EU area , but globally when it comes to discussions of reform of global financial architecture .
I think that this is more than a crisis of a financial nature : it is a crisis of decision-making and the rules of the game .
What we need now is a firmer European role for supervision and for the European Central Bank .
We need better harmonised regulation for all different financial instruments .
We need transparency through proper procedures and , most of all , we need Europeans to be very persistent in unity to advance these policies globally .
We have to be united because markets have grown beyond our national states ' capabilities , and we need coherent actions nationally , at European level and globally .
- ( SK ) The euro will be the best investment stimulus for foreign investors in the region of Central Europe as well .
Therefore , in connection with the introduction of the euro in Slovakia from 1 January 2009 , it will be up to the government of Robert Fico how to make the most of this opportunity .
The sustainability of inflation and the deficit in the public finances will be very closely monitored in Slovakia and the current Slovak government must therefore continue with the reforms of the previous government of Mikuláš Dzurinda .
If this is not the case , Slovakia may have a problem holding down inflation after entry to the Euro Zone .
I believe that the Slovak government will take to heart the recommendations of the rapporteurs of the European Parliament and will not saddle the country with future debt .
It should not meddle in pension reform in an attempt to obtain the funds of private savers and achieve a short-term improvement in the public finance deficit , it will not pass laws that conflict with the rules of the market and it will contribute to improvements in the entrepreneurial environment .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union derives its strength from its 490 million or so European citizens .
The Euro Zone is a pillar of stability for Europe and the whole global economy .
In the Euro Zone 16 million jobs have been created in the last 10 years alone .
In the future , the Union will have to respond to the challenges posed by demographic and climate change .
An ageing population will cause major problems of a social , economic and budgetary nature .
I believe that the free movement of goods , people , capital and services needs to be defended , especially now against the backdrop of the financial crisis and economic recession .
Lifting the barriers preventing the free movement of workers guarantees proper , decent working conditions for all European workers and provides an effective means of combating social dumping and tax evasion .
I call on the European Commission and members of the Eurogroup to take the necessary measures , along with the governments of the Member States , to lift the restrictions imposed on Romanian and Bulgarian workers .
The Euro Zone needs to set an example for the social market economy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Almunia and President Juncker for their work in developing this instrument , which is so important .
The euro is a solid reality that has protected us in this crisis .
Therefore we must press ahead and develop an economic policy to work alongside the monetary policy that has been so successful ; a policy for the Eurogroup as a whole , but potentially for the Union as well , precisely because at this juncture we need to undertake an emergency programme to address the forecasted economic difficulties .
I therefore believe that a strong commitment is required ; we need to embark on a high-impact programme to build energy infrastructure in the Union and to make energy savings .
I am convinced that we must do this as soon as we possibly can .
Mr President , allow me to make my points in bullet points .
Homogenous markets are at the heart of the systemic failure that we have , and if really good operators like Mr Juncker and Mr Almunia cannot bring heterogeneity back to the markets , then we are only putting off failure to a future date .
Homogenous markets are at the centre of this problem .
Secondly , it was forecast in Ireland that the euro as a currency would be something like a vehicle with no brakes , no steering wheel and no lights .
How much they got that wrong !
Where would we be in Ireland today if the euro and the European Central Bank were not in place ?
Why are we not taking greater credit for this ?
This is one thing that could help us with the Lisbon ratification process .
Lastly , concerning the argument about vaccination , parents have the right to decide , but if every parent decides not to vaccinate , then epidemics will rise .
I would just say this : no man is an island .
Britain may well be an island , but it is time that Britain revisited the question of joining the euro , because we cannot all go our separate ways .
Mr President , it has always been economic nonsense for a number of differently performing economies to share the same interest and exchange rates .
In addition , the primary function and legal obligation of the European Central Bank is to control inflation , which in the developing economic crisis is the least of our problems .
These are the fault lines that will eventually tear the European single currency apart .
But Europhiles in the UK are now using the argument that the falling rate of the pound is an opportunity for us to join the euro .
A knowledge of basic economics would tell them that this is precisely the reason why Britain should not join .
The ability of the pound to find its own value against other countries will be an essential factor in helping Britain to weather the coming economic storm . The United Kingdom needs the European single currency like a drowning man needs a strait jacket .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to congratulate both rapporteurs , Mrs Berès and Mr Langen .
Ten years are neither a lot nor a little , but they have clearly made a major contribution in consolidating the single market and , at the moment , in creating a shield to protect against financial speculation .
I believe that tighter regulation of the financial and banking sector , combined with encouraging investment in research and development , promoting competition and providing financial education for citizens may be much more effective solutions during this time of crisis .
I think that the states of the European Union need to show economic and financial solidarity at the moment as intervention in the financial and banking sector alone is not sufficient to stabilise the economic crisis except superficially .
I hope , Commissioner , that the effects of the crisis will not have an impact on the budget projections for 2007-2013 as European funds may be able to achieve the desired effects in providing for the Union 's sustainable development .
Mr President , on the question of Britain 's membership of the Euro Zone , I think it has always been the case that Britain has been reluctant to join European agreements at the outset .
It has learnt very quickly to regret that decision .
We then apply to join at the worst possible moment .
Had we been founder members of the Euro Zone - which we should have been - we would have been in a much stronger position today .
I look forward to the next Conservative Government applying to join the Euro Zone really quite shortly .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make just two comments .
Firstly , the euro has passed the test .
Without the euro , in this financial crisis we would probably not have been spared speculation that would have gone against entire national economies in Europe .
In that sense , then , the euro has passed the test .
We would probably be facing serious difficulties - if not an absolute shambles - in Europe if we had not had the euro in this crisis .
In my view , two things will be absolutely crucial in future .
The euro can only remain stable and make progress against the dollar as a global reserve currency if two things are guaranteed : firstly , the ECB , which has proven itself in the crisis , must remain independent - as has already been argued - and , secondly , the Stability and Growth Pact must be expanded on .
It is already extremely useful in its current form , but it also needs to be applied and protected .
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Mr President , I should like to thank all the Members who have spoken in this debate .
I believe that , from this debate , we can conclude that there is a very broad consensus in favour of the report under discussion , together with very broad support for continuing with the Economic and Monetary Union project and also in favour of our single currency .
I am not saying this out of a desire to repeat the reasons given by those of us who supported the creation of Economic and Monetary Union 10 years ago , but due to the analysis of what has happened in that decade and of what we must do now , in these very difficult economic times .
Of course , the current problems cannot be attributed to the euro .
As we all know , the causes of this very deep crisis do not lie here in Europe or in the euro area .
However , it is clear that we are paying the price , as are other industrialised countries , emerging economies and developing countries .
This is because , in a global economy , decoupling is not possible .
However , with Economic and Monetary Union , we at least have the instruments to tackle the problems more effectively .
We believe that we will be able to get out of this crisis quicker if we work together than if each country tries to go it alone .
I agree with all those - and there have been many - who have said that the European Central Bank is an institution which , since its creation , has more than adequately justified the trust that we placed in it in the Maastricht Treaty .
I believe that it has done its work very well and that this work should be supported , because it is an essential part of Economic and Monetary Union .
I also agree with all those who have said that the Stability and Growth Pact should be maintained as it is now , following the 2005 revision , so that we can use the flexibility introduced in that year and debated here on many occasions .
This flexibility will enable us to maintain budgetary discipline and the rules of budgetary discipline .
It will enable us to anchor the sustainability objectives of our public accounts .
However , at the same time , it will enable us to use our fiscal policy in a situation requiring an active policy in terms of taxation and fiscal policy instruments .
The fiscal stimulus must be coordinated so that it is effective .
Our framework of budgetary discipline makes this coordination easier , but it also imposes limits to prevent the coordination of a fiscal stimulus from jeopardising the sustainability of our public accounts .
Thirdly - and many speakers have mentioned this today - we undoubtedly have to reinforce the voice of the euro in defending the stability of our currency and in bilateral and multilateral relations with holders of our currency , with those representing other currencies and , in particular , with the other currencies of the major players in the global economy .
This crisis ultimately stems from macroeconomic imbalances which should have been tackled but which could not be tackled due to a lack of effective mechanisms for solving global imbalances .
We discussed this in Washington and we must keep discussing it .
We can only do this effectively , as Europeans , if we give the euro our full political support and the necessary governance mechanisms so that our interests can be defended , as they deserve to be , through the exchange rate for our currency .
I believe that this is the road to take , as stated in the report , as has been said by the President of the Eurogroup , as agreed by the Commission and as , in coming months , the leaders of the Member States will also increasingly agree .
This requires coordination , provided that it is the right kind of coordination .
It does not mean challenging the independence of the European Central Bank or artificially coordinating economic policy decisions , which must continue to be made according to the circumstances of each country .
That is not real coordination .
It must be the coordination that has always been behind the economic branch of Economic and Monetary Union , which is coordination serving the objectives of Economic and Monetary Union , in both macroeconomic policies and in the link which must exist between macroeconomic policies and structural policies .
When we in the Commission talk about coordination , we are talking about this type of coordination .
I feel that , in the current circumstances , the risk of recession that we are facing shows that this coordination is a priority and that Economic and Monetary Union gives us the instruments to achieve this .
President of the Eurogroup . - ( FR ) Mr President , I shall be very brief , since the majority of those who tried to lead this debate are no longer in the Chamber .
Thus there is no need to respond to them .
For the rest , I would say that I have been impressed by the broad consensus that has resulted from the European Parliament 's debates , since we are almost all agreed in saying that the euro was a success .
I am pleased to note that those who belong to the Euro Zone say so .
I am pleased to note that those who would like their countries to become members of the Euro Zone say so too .
I note that those who have always said that everything we do is utterly stupid maintain this view , which cannot be characterised any differently from the way in which they characterise our attitude .
Consequently , within Parliament , there is nothing new , except to say that , a touch of anxiety - that is a polite way of saying it - has all the same filtered into our debates .
This is caused by the financial and economic crisis that we are facing at the present time .
On this point , I should therefore like to say two things in response to a number of speakers .
No one in Europe is radically arguing for an excessive budget consolidation .
No one .
We have a reformed Stability and Growth Pact .
Some Members of this House did not agree with the reforms that we made to this Pact .
They are the first ones today to commend the wisdom of the decisions that were taken in March 2005 , when we applied a more economic perspective to the interpretation of this Stability and Growth Pact .
This perspective allows the Member States and their budgets to breathe more easily today , even though we are entering a phase that is not depressive , but that makes the consolidation of public finances less straight forward .
The Member States that have been virtuous in terms of budget consolidation over the past few years have sufficient budget margins to enable them to react to the current economic crisis , which includes the structural aspects that we are facing at present .
The Member States that were less virtuous are having greater difficulty in releasing the budget resources that would enable them to react to the crisis that we are experiencing right now .
However , throughout the Euro Zone , we have a duty to react to the crisis where economic policy is concerned .
It is not enough to talk about budget stability .
It is not enough to devote our efforts exclusively to the financial crisis .
It is clear that the Euro Zone has to provide a strong and coordinated response to the economic crisis .
We therefore have a few weeks in which to gather together all the elements we need in order to analyse and take action , so that we can formulate this practical and strong response .
However , all those who are demanding greater coordination of economic policies must of course work towards this by trying not to anticipate economic policy decisions that they have not referred to their colleagues within the Eurogroup .
It is easy , within Parliament , to call for the coordination of economic policies .
I would propose to you , on the basis of your Rules of Procedure , that you put forward an intergroup text , in which the large groups , acting as the European Parliament , call on the Eurogroup and on their respective national governments no longer to announce economic policy measures before they have referred them to their colleagues from the Eurogroup .
Urge your governments - it is easy to demand it here - urge your governments to respect the principle of coordinating economic policies .
Make an intergroup resolution , and we shall see .
We shall see , in two , three , four months ' time , whether the governments - and the political parties to which you belong are very often part of the governments that you would address - have done what you demanded of them .
That would be credible , reasonable , logical , rational and consistent .
I am therefore saying that we need a strong and coordinated economic response to what is becoming more and more of an economic crisis .
And , on the subject of wage policy , we will not say everything that we want to say , but everything that is worthy of being said .
You are right in saying that the socialist governments of the Greens in Germany have practised a wage policy that has reduced the purchasing power of German workers .
The situation has improved since then .
The same comment applies , moreover , to France , whose government was not , at the time - between 1998 and 2002-2003 - a reactionary one .
It was quite the opposite , from what I understood .
A little self-criticism , of course , would enrich the comments of certain people in a good way .
For the rest , on the taxation of savings , we are three years ahead of the timetable on which we agreed .
You are absolutely right , Mr Jonckheer , to call for the expansion of the range of financial products that are due to fall within the scope of this directive .
With regard to tax havens , you will converse in the language of your country with your own government and you will discover that you have work to do .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this debate .
I believe that it is a sound contribution from the European Parliament to what we are expecting you henceforth to implement , Commissioner , Mr President of the Eurogroup , through a road map .
Mr Juncker , you said to us : ' If only the groups would come to an agreement ! '
Well , the groups are going to come to an agreement : tomorrow , they are going to vote for a paragraph 61 ( d ) and 61 ( g ) , in which they demand exactly what you are calling on them to demand .
Therefore , you can count on this tomorrow when you go and meet with the ministers for economic affairs and finance .
You said to us : ' There is no report on divergence ' .
There may not be a very precise report , but one thing is for certain : convergence of economic situations within the Euro Zone , which we expected , has not taken place , and Mrs Ferreira has given you a concrete example of this .
On the contradictions between the Member States , Mr President of the Eurogroup , again , I cannot share your view .
I have no time for those who demand coordination when it suits them and who then reject it and advocate national sovereignty when it suits them better .
Issues of economic policy coordination are issues of common interest , and the situation we are in today is unacceptable : on the US side , it has already been possible to implement two Paulson plans , while , in Europe , you tell us that we still need a few weeks to find something to say to the people of Europe , who are awaiting our responses .
We all need to join forces , and the Commission has in its hands today the means with which to progress on the basis of the European Parliament 's proposals .
I hope that we will be heard and supported .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to start where the prime minister left off .
I believe that the flexibility shown by the Euro Zone and the 27 Member States in recent weeks is a very good start .
It now needs to be developed further , and I have no doubt that , if the experience you have both brought to bear here is also accepted by the Member States , we will be on the right track .
I would like to thank everybody for their contributions .
Mr Hoppenstedt quoted from the first debate on the euro , in which the euro was called a premature baby .
Today , 10 years on , it has become a strapping young boy - the euro is a boy in my language , whereas the German mark was feminine - who got good marks all through primary school and is now going into secondary school .
It remains to be seen whether he will continue to make it over the obstacles , but I am reasonably optimistic that he will succeed .
When I hear from Mr Beazley that even the Conservatives in the United Kingdom are seriously considering joining the euro , that is quite a new perspective .
All I can say to all that , of course , is that even the United Kingdom will not be able to join the euro for free : you will need to meet your obligations regarding the coordination and regulation of financial markets and comply with the necessary minimum harmonisation .
In that sense , we are on the right track .
I would like to thank the Commission , and particularly Mr Almunia , and the President of the Eurogroup for their excellent cooperation .
We will take you at your word regarding your suggestions .
We want to work with you .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 18 November 2008 at 12 noon .
Application of the principle of equal pay for men and women ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Bauer , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , with recommendations to the Commission on the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) The gender pay gap is nothing new .
For more than fifty years there has been an article in the Treaty of Rome forbidding gender discrimination in levels of pay and since 1975 Directive 117 has been in force , which requires Member States to enforce the principle of equal pay for equal work .
It is of course true that not all differences in pay result from discrimination .
According to the law of large numbers , however , the persistent differences in gross hourly rates of pay are not explainable .
Between 1995 and 2006 , according to Eurostat , the differences based on hourly earnings fell from 17 to 15 % , and this is at a time when the majority of university graduates are now women .
The trend may be declining , but not in a straight line .
According to a study from the Dublin Foundation in 2007 covering four countries in the European Union , the gap was actually widening .
If the pay gap narrowed at the current pace and did not increase again from time to time , pay would perhaps equalise after seventy years .
We can agree on the fact that the current legislation in this area is not very effective .
The reasons for the pay gap are varied .
They are of both a systemic and an individual nature .
Sectoral , vertical and horizontal segregation , the classification of professions , the conditions for establishing a work-life balance and stereotypes all play a significant role in the persistence of the pay gap , which later carries over into a pensions gap and the final result is that poverty wears a female face , as we have been saying .
The pay gap also has individual dimensions .
According to a study from the Commission , these increase with age , period of employment and education .
Moreover , the statistics show that there are minimal differences in the case of young people .
The gap appears after the birth of the first child and the return of the woman from maternity leave .
In relation to the demographic crisis now confronting us , this problem , besides being a major factor in economic competition , raises a profound moral problem which should also not be overlooked .
The question today concerns what the European Parliament can do to resolve the situation .
On the one hand we have a persistent problem and on the other hand we have some rather ineffective laws .
At the same time , of course , we must not lose sight of the fact that the reasons for the pay gap lie far beyond the bounds of legislation .
The European Parliament , however , has in its hands only one instrument - legislation .
Everyone involved in this situation bears their own responsibility and ours is whether we can manage to send out a clear signal that we want better and more effective laws in the interests of establishing fairer conditions in the labour market .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes this own-initiative report on the principle of equal pay for men and women and I congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of her work .
The Commission , like Parliament , considers the 15 % pay gap between women and men in Europe today to be unacceptable .
We must of course be careful and not lose sight of the fact that this indicator compares relative differences in the gross hourly earnings of women and men across the economy as a whole .
It does not therefore measure just direct discrimination but is an indicator of all of the related factors and all of the disadvantages which women suffer from before they enter the labour market and over the entire course of their professional careers .
The Commission Communication of July 2007 stated that Community laws were effective in eliminating direct discrimination - in other words in cases where the remuneration for the same work is lower for women than for their male colleagues .
They were , however , less effective in ensuring adherence to the principle of equal pay for work of equal value .
Based on a detailed analysis the Commission has concluded that it should be possible to consider amending Community law with the aim of ensuring above all that the systems for setting pay rates exclude both direct and indirect gender-based discrimination .
The Commission announced that in 2008 it would be evaluating Community laws from the standpoint of their implications in respect of the pay gap and that it would be proposing necessary amendments .
The detailed analysis mentioned earlier is currently under way and I cannot predict what the results will be .
In order to ensure quality , the Commission is making use of external specialist consultants as well as the extensive and detailed expertise and knowledge of intra-state bodies concerned with gender equality .
The preliminary results of this study will be discussed at a workshop in the first quarter of 2009 , when all the interested parties should attend , including Member States , legal experts , intra-state bodies concerned with gender equality , social partners and civil society .
Parliament 's attitude in this process will be decisive .
It is significant that one of the participating law creating bodies has expressed a clear opinion that the laws in question must be amended quickly .
It is also important that the practical recommendations of Parliament regarding the amendments relate to the areas which the main interested parties have identified as problematic , among them are transparency of remuneration and work assessments and sanctions .
In conclusion : we share Parliament 's view that such a great difference in pay for women and men in Europe is unacceptable .
The Commission considers that this is the right time to complete the analysis and the assessment and to plan the next steps , which will lead to more concrete results .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am truly proud of the work carried out in this Parliament and of its ability to make use of the already recognised powers to propose legislation .
The report that we are about to vote on concerns a key issue , a fundamental principle of European law : the principle of equal pay for men and women in the workplace .
Not only is it a fundamental principle , it is also the first , at least in order of time , among the principles of equality .
We know that it was already included in the Treaty of Rome , we know that it has been applied since the very first judgments of the European Court of Justice , that it was already regulated by a directive dating back to 1975 , and re-regulated when this directive was recast in 2006 , that it is the subject of continual studies and research , as the Commissioner himself said , and of continual claims for its application .
Why then do we return to look at it again in such breadth and depth today ?
There are many reasons : firstly because we refuse to accept its widespread non-application , to which all the statistics bear witness , and secondly because we believe that the extreme injustice suffered by women in all countries of the European Union and in all professions , at all levels and in all sectors absolutely must be tackled , and it is in fact obvious that the instruments we possess will not suffice for this , otherwise after all this time we would surely have succeeded in reversing this trend .
Finally , because we believe it is time to take the pay gap seriously and above all not to look on it as a mere accident in the working lives of women .
What , then , are we asking for ?
We are asking the Commission for a specific , pertinent directive on pay gaps in general , but we are not stopping there ; we are not merely asking for a directive , we are sending the Commission precise recommendations .
We have built a bridge to cross over to genuine change and we believe that this bridge can be solid if it rests on eight pillars .
First and foremost , we want to lay down a definition of pay discrimination ; it is not enough to look at gross hourly pay alone because that would indicate direct discrimination and such direct discrimination has in fact already been overcome .
It is no accident then , if all the research looks at the whole picture , pointing towards part-time working , encouraging us to consider direct and indirect segregation , discrimination and horizontal and vertical segregation .
We are calling for comparable , effective , consistent and complete data .
All too often we encounter manipulated or hidden data , facilitated by systems for classifying personnel , from backward-looking working structures marked by stereotypes .
We believe that equality organisations can play a key dual role in combating discrimination , by raising awareness and by providing training for the judiciary and for social partners .
We aim to introduce specific penalties , bearing in mind , however , that preventive action and measures are also required ; we need positive action and integration , therefore mainstreaming .
I hope that this House will adopt the text in its entirety , because the more precise and detailed the work we submit to the Commission , the more we will gain in effective speed .
That , in fact , is our hope : it is not enough to talk or write about equal pay , we want to make it a reality .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SK ) I would like to offer my frank congratulations to Mrs Bauer on the proposed text .
As Mrs Bauer has said , the topic we are debating is as old as the Treaty of Rome .
Little has changed in fifty years .
The question of equal pay for equal work performed by women and men rears its head with remarkable regularity especially during election periods .
If the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality proposes sanctions for companies which do not respect a basic principle of remuneration , objections are raised with reference to the principle of subsidiarity , as if this justified the inequality .
Last week I took part in the ministerial conference in Lille .
I appreciated the attempt of the French Presidency to debate this topic but there were very few constructive responses aimed at solutions from the Member States .
The statistics show that inequality in women 's pay appears mainly after the birth of the first child .
The national and European policies aimed at achieving a balance between the responsibilities for the family and professional ambitions should not permit new differences to arise between employees who have family responsibilities and those who are unmarried or childless and who do not have such responsibilities .
This is first and foremost a question of the social model we are aiming for .
I propose that we establish a coalition with industrial firms .
If the managers of these firms are not prepared to work in close partnership with us to promote equality of pay , our report will simply gather dust .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am amazed that women are still so patient with us .
We have been talking about pay inequality for 50 years , and nothing significant has changed .
The numbers speak for themselves : 15 % less for the same work .
This deprives women of a fair wage , because , looked at the other way round , it means that women have to work one and a quarter times as long to earn the same money .
Where do we stand in the European Union ?
The Member States need to do more in this respect , and I am grateful to Mr Špidla for taking on board our proposals here in Parliament and for showing the will to take legislative action .
Evidently there is no other option .
In Germany , one of the largest Member States of the European Union , the pay differential in the private sector is 23 % .
That is unacceptable , and means that we are bringing up the rear of the EU .
We know full well that France and Scandinavia have taken positive measures .
That is what it is about .
We call on the social partners to take action , and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament calls for transparency in businesses , so that bonuses can be seen clearly and be included in the official assessment , so that we can get a grip on it .
Regular wage audits may reveal successes or failures in combating wage discrimination .
In my view , a law for the private sector will be unavoidable in Germany .
We must put more pressure on the Member States to introduce a statutory minimum wage , so that it can be taken for granted that women can earn a living wage , because that is the best safeguard against poverty in old age .
I would , in any case , call on the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , in order to retain this clarity in Mrs Bauer 's report , to withdraw its deleting amendments , which would further water down the report .
Let us stick with the clear language it has at the moment .
on behalf of ALDE Group . - ( ET ) Commissioner , President , colleagues .
Rapporteur Mrs Bauer stated that poverty has a woman 's face .
I must also reiterate that even in 1957 , Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome contained the principle that men and women should receive equal pay for equal work .
Today however , in the year 2008 , women in the European Union earn on average 15 % less than men , and in my home country Estonia they earn as much as 25 % less than men .
The wage disparity significantly influences women 's position in economic and social life , both during and after their active working lives .
It also intensifies women 's risk of poverty , especially in families with single parents .
The wage disparity between men and women often leads to differences in men 's and women 's pensions .
Single female pensioners often live in risk of poverty .
As a result , I welcome the position proposed in the report , that is , that the European Commission should present a legislative proposal concerning the examination of current legislation concerning the principles of equal payment for men and women by 31 December 2009 .
We have passed too much legislation and waited too long , but the results are not very good .
As time has shown , this problem cannot be solved with European Union legislation alone .
One significant outlet for the solution of the problem would be for the topic to be prioritised in political action plans .
Only an effective combination of policies that includes better and more effective legislation and designates the responsible party will make it possible to find a positive solution to this problem .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for pointing out very important aspects in the report , and thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , it is indeed true that , 50 years after the Treaties of Rome were concluded , we have made little progress regarding equality for women in the labour market .
The figures are alarming : 80 % of part-time workers are women , and only 57 % of women are in employment , compared with 72 % of men .
Wage inequality has also remained stable since 2003 , and has only changed by 1 % since 2000 .
These are alarming figures , which all of us here lament .
We have also referred to the fact that women are doubly disadvantaged , because this wage inequality is translated into differences in pension rights and social standards , and we also have a tax and social system that continues to penalise women , in that , for example , unmarried couples and double-income families are still disadvantaged in many tax systems , such as in Germany .
The Commission has stated that there will be legislative proposals , but why are they coming so late ?
Why have so many years gone by , in this parliamentary term , without any proposals in this field ?
We in Parliament have already called for proposals .
With regard to quotas , we have said that there should be legal requirements .
We also have Member States , such as Sweden , that have set objectives with a timeframe .
Why do we not make use of the fact that we have these gender requirements to encourage the Member States to make efforts to resolve this shameful pay gap .
In Germany , as has already been said , we are unfortunately third from bottom , with a shameful pay gap of 23 % .
We also need to make it clear that a statutory minimum wage will bring about changes particularly in sectors primarily employing women .
However , we must also have the courage to make it clear ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) The devaluation of work by imposing low pay continues to be one of the ways most commonly used by capitalism to increase worker exploitation .
This particularly affects female workers , which also implies a devaluation of motherhood .
It is unacceptable that , more than 30 years after a directive on equal pay for men and women , levels of discrimination remain high , particularly indirect discrimination resulting from a lack of job stability , which especially affects women and young people .
In some countries , such as Portugal , where unemployment is very high , average pay differences between men and women have increased , exceeding 25 % in the private sector and meaning that poverty still has a female face , including among the retired .
The European Commission and the Member States must adopt the measures needed to enhance the value of work , overcome pay differences and eliminate stereotypes linked to the jobs and sectors which always discriminate against women .
Those professions and sectors in which women predominate , such as the retail and services sectors and some industries , need to be valued more highly .
Experience shows that worsening unemployment weakens women 's rights , intensifies worker exploitation and increases discrimination .
We therefore insist on a new policy which gives priority to employment with rights , the fight against discrimination , and the protection of motherhood and fatherhood as fundamental social values .
We therefore support this report , to which we have suggested some amendments , pointing out that collective negotiation and bargaining have an important role to play in combating discrimination against women , not least as regards access to employment , pay , working conditions , career advancement and vocational training .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the draft report on equal pay for women and men contains some legitimate facts on equal pay for work of equal value .
Equality in remuneration is necessary , as is proper payment in jobs that are dominated by women because of their psychological and physical predispositions .
The effect of regulations that have been written down in multiple pointlessly duplicated documents definitely depends on the effective implementation of the law in individual Member States .
However , implementation may be quite difficult with regard to the predominant private sector , where the majority of managers look above all at the profits of their companies and have no respect for ethical and moral principles , at the same time preventing the action of trade unions which would protect workers and take part in pay negotiations .
The problem of unequal remuneration is therefore an element of discrimination against the weak .
We do not need academics and experts to realise that discrimination is above all the result of left-wing materialist ideology , the lack of implementation of ethical principles , lack of personal development , selfishness , greed , taking advantage of the weak and poor , and not just in terms of salaries , but in terms of the growing practice in the European Union , which goes down even to the poorest and weakest states , of discrimination against Catholics and persons with views differing from those imposed by the political correctness which is required here .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that women are still paid less than men for the same work is a sad chapter in our European community .
Really , it is quite incomprehensible , because in law the situation is absolutely clear .
Since the Community was established in 1957 - as has already been said several times - the principle has been enshrined in the Treaties of Rome as a directly applicable right .
In other words , any woman could go directly to the European Court of Justice to enforce this right : the EU provides no stronger legal protection .
Nevertheless , we have missed the target on this principle by an average of 20 % .
It is therefore absolutely vital - as the Commission is proposing here - to enforce this principle by means of secondary legislation .
That being said , this situation once again shows us that there is a difference between the law and real life .
People who depend on their job and their salary - many of whom are women - often simply do not dare to demand their basic rights , for fear of being thrown out .
We therefore cannot simply once again call for company responsibility , based on the fact that decency dictates that women should not be treated worse than men in terms of pay .
However , he that will not hear must feel .
I am therefore in favour of severe and consistent sanctions for those who break the law .
It is up to the Member States , in particular , finally to take this seriously and to expose those companies that contravene this principle and to punish them , for example using procurement law .
I have one small criticism for the Commission : it is possible that the process has been rather too lax in this case , and that you paid too much attention to business .
I congratulate Mrs Bauer on her report .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work .
This is a highly relevant report given that the pay gap in the European Union is a reality that should be eliminated .
It is unacceptable that women earn 15 % less than men and that , in the private sector , this difference can be up to 25 % .
This pay gap is difficult to fight as it stems from indirect discrimination : the most precarious work and the majority of part-time jobs are carried out by women .
What should we do ?
Basically , we must promote equal opportunity policies aimed at reconciling work and family life , and also policies aimed at cutting the number of and increasing the pay for the lowest-paid jobs , which are mainly held by women .
Therefore , among the report 's recommendations - all of which are very important - I should like to highlight that of amending the Directive on the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and women in matters of employment and occupation by including references to the pay gap , and also that of amending the framework agreement on part-time work , which is where the differences are greatest .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say to Commissioner Špidla that , in addition to considering the excellent proposals in Mrs Bauer 's report , if we can legislate at EU level against pay discrimination , I believe that would be right to include discrimination relating to pensions .
Although this may be a more subtle , indirect form of discrimination , it is particularly heinous in a country such as Italy .
It also concerns discrimination in terms of retirement age , an issue that the European Commission has already looked at , and which I believe must be acknowledged .
Back in 2004 , the European Commission stressed to the Italian Government that it was unacceptable to have different retirement ages : 60 for women and 65 for men , which we can consider the more common legal age .
As the radicals , we have , together with Emma Bonino , sought in every way possible to stress to public opinion , to the government , to the opposition and to the parties , that this structure must be removed .
It has not been done .
Thanks to the European Commission , on 13 November the Court of Justice at last ruled that this discrimination is illegitimate and violates the Treaties and Community laws .
The most serious thing is the line of reasoning taken by Italy in defence of this discrimination .
Italy claimed that it was justified by its objective of eliminating the existing socio-cultural discrimination against women - in other words , discrimination on the labour market does exist .
In order to remedy this form of discrimination , another is created , by forcing women to retire before men .
In my view , this measure in particular also requires intervention , because it could be eliminated at European level .
( SV ) Mr President , I wish firstly to thank Mrs Bauer for an important and constructive report , which I fully support .
Secondly , a fellow Member recently referred to women as being weak .
I would like to say that women are not weak .
However , it is the patriarchal structures in society that make women weak .
The EU Equal Pay Directive has been in existence for 30 years .
Despite this , women are still not worth as much as men - either when it comes to pay or influence - both in society and in the workplace .
Despite the fact that women generally have a higher education , they earn on average 15 % less than men for the same or similar work .
It is thus clear that improving the existing legislation will not be sufficient to solve the pay discrimination .
The differences in pay between women and men is ultimately yet another indication of the continued discrimination against women in all of the different areas .
It is not enough that we have lower pay for equal work , we are also very often forced to take atypical work or part-time work etc .
This pay discrimination haunts women right through their lives , as we also often get poorer pension terms and poorer conditions when we get older .
It is high time that we took action together to stop this discrimination against women .
Mr President , there is sadly a fundamental misunderstanding by most politicians as to the reasons why there are differentials between the genders in pay .
The basic premise , erroneous though it is , perpetuates the myth that employment is a demand-led , employer-governed phenomenon .
It is no such thing .
Those who argue that all women should be paid the same as men for perceived similarities in the job description miss the point entirely that no individual is an economic unit .
In spite of already overburdening employment legislation , usually drafted by people with little or no business experience , pay differentials continue for one simple reason : employment is about demand and supply ; it is about lifestyle choices ; it is often based on priorities , early retirement goals , a desire to live in certain parts of a country or town , pressure of hobbies or sport , or one of those offspring .
Employer and employee strike a mutual bargain in the same way as the buyer and seller of any commodity .
The UK Equality and Human Rights Commission employs substantially more women than men , and the average pay for their men is higher than for their women .
I agree that past legislation has had a limited impact on these dynamics .
Yes , you might as well legislate against a ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
- ( SK ) Thank you Mr President , Commissioner .
I am delighted that this ' women 's ' debate is under your chairmanship .
I appreciate the efforts of the rapporteur , Edit Bauer , to find a balanced approach towards formulating recommendations for the Commission and improving the framework of EU laws , particularly their effective enforcement .
As a result of varying transpositions , implementations and interpretations at an intra-state level , the directive setting out the principle of equal pay for men and women has failed to eliminate the gender pay gap , which is connected mainly with levels of professional segregation .
I appreciate the fact that the rapporteur has emphasised in her report that motherhood should not disadvantage women who have decided to interrupt professional careers to look after their children .
In all Member States parents should , for a minimum period of one year after the birth of a child , receive support at the level of their net income prior to the start of maternity leave and at the same time these arrangements should be linked into a system of pay according to which the number of years worked are taken into account when setting pay rates .
Motherhood should bring advantages to women , not disadvantages .
Education is equally important as it can contribute towards eliminating gender stereotypes and improving the remuneration of the few paid positions and posts which remain unoccupied by women .
The Member States must implement a consistent information campaign aimed at raising awareness among employers and employees of the existing or potential differences in pay on the labour market in the EU .
At the same time , they must be informed about the essential measures that have been passed with the aim of ensuring that employers are penalised for breaching the principle of equal pay for equal work .
Thanks to the European Parliament 's recommendation in this report , for which I congratulate the rapporteur Mrs Edit Bauer , I believe that the European Commission , in cooperation with the European Parliament and the Member States , will draw up laws that will indeed ensure equal pay for men and women .
( RO ) Fellow Members , this report is perhaps the most serious document we have drafted concerning the pay gap .
In particular , the recommendations accompanying it represent a step forward in terms of the principle of equal pay for work of equal value finally being applied .
I must congratulate those who contributed to the report .
Until now , work has been evaluated on the basis of tradition and the ability to negotiate .
When I talk about negotiating , I am thinking of the involvement of powerful trade-unions capable of making governments and employers accept proper wages .
Both these criteria have put women at a disadvantage .
We need a non-discriminatory system of evaluating work and a new way of classifying professions .
We call on Member States and the Commission to finally embark on the path of adopting specific measures in favour of gender equality .
We hope that they will make this public by supporting the clause which is the most favourable to women in Europe at the end of this month in Paris .
Let us not have any illusions however .
Even when the new system has been devised and implemented , it would only refer to paid work .
Work carried out at home and in the black economy will continue to be performed , especially by women , without any pay gap as they do not even receive a salary for this work .
- ( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I consider the report of Edit Bauer to be a great success .
Inequality in the pay of men and women is one of most stubborn forms of discrimination against women .
As Mrs Bauer said , there is a lack of decent statistics on workplaces at both a national and an EU level .
I have addressed this issue myself in a number of the books and articles I have published over recent years .
Lower pay for women performing the same work and having the same qualifications and productivity is unfortunately caused by profound stereotypical perceptions on who should be the family breadwinner .
This duty is traditionally assigned to men and until now all employment structures , whether in the private or public sector , have more or less connived with it .
There is a deeply-rooted view that a man supports from his wages not only himself but also his family , while a woman 's pay is merely some sort of added extra for the family budget .
Incredible though it may seem , this illusion is so firmly entrenched that even with the fulfilment of equal rights in the workplace we cannot rely on cultural enlightenment , but instead we must unfortunately find ways to enforce equality through legislation .
I am therefore very much in favour of the idea that Article 29 of Directive 2006 / 54 should be extended to include precise instructions on the application of principles of equality .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the report by Mrs Bauer does not need any additional comment on our part in order to show the path which needs to be followed to abolish a phenomenon of which society should be ashamed and which creates a reproduction cycle of injustice , with children in a family seeing their mother doing the same job as their father and being paid less and female colleagues seeing their male colleagues working like them and being paid less .
Thus society tolerates this phenomenon and reproduces it , because women should have the legislative means which will allow them to correct their circumstances as and when necessary , and the powers of state should introduce appropriate measures which take account of periods devoted to family life , periods of unemployment and periods of illness and which provide fair taxation in order to compensate for women 's unequal pay for their work , which should be judged not only by the time spent working , but also by the quality and additional elements that a women brings to her work .
I repeat , Commissioner , the call made by Mr Cappato for you to review your stand as a Commission on the disputes which some Member States had on the retirement age for men and women and the country which had these disputes and was taken to the European Court of Justice .
These disputes were corrective disputes for all women , regardless of whether or not they were mothers , and of course for mothers it is even more important to take account of the overall time , especially as you advocate an overall life cycle when calculating time at work .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , in the European Union , women earn an average of 15 to 25 % less than men .
In addition , the system of payment which takes into consideration years of service in determining pay levels is unfavourable for women , who often have to interrupt their careers for family reasons .
Bringing up children , changes of job or less working time puts women in a situation of constant structural delay .
The concept of equal payment for equal work cannot be distorted by a stereotypical approach to gender and social roles , which have previously significantly affected people 's choices of profession and education , while maternity leave or family career breaks cannot be grounds for discriminating against women on the employment market .
The Directive on implementing equal opportunities and equal treatment of women and men in the area of employment and work is an irrevocable element of the acquis communautaire , and the Member States must implement it as soon as possible .
The aim of reducing the pay gap must be fully implemented in employment regulations , and regular audits on equal pay and the threat of sanctions should put an end to all kinds of discrimination , particularly gender discrimination .
( NL ) Mr President , I am grateful to Mrs Bauer for her excellent report .
It beggars belief that today , we are discussing a topic that has been on the agenda since 1957 , no less , when the equal treatment of men and women , equal pay for men and women were anchored in the Treaties .
We have had European rules and laws for 30 years .
We have a 2006-2010 road map from the European Commission , and one of the key objectives , which is also included in the Lisbon Strategy , is to narrow the wage gap between men and women .
Despite this , the wage gap is not getting smaller .
In fact , last Saturday , I read in The Times that the difference in wages between men and women in the United Kingdom has increased to 21.7 % in the private sector and to 13.8 % in the public sector .
There is no sign of improvement - take my own country , for example - in other Member States either .
The gender report for the Netherlands from the World Economic Forum shows that the Netherlands is only ranked 88th on the list of equal pay for equal work .
Action is therefore called for .
On Friday , the ministers from France , the Czech Republic and Sweden adopted a plan of action .
How many more plans of action do we need though ?
Mrs Bauer makes a large number of recommendations in the resolution that she submitted , which is great , but there are two priorities in my view .
First of all , we must ensure that equal treatment is applied , and much stricter controls should be put in place in this respect - equal pay for men and women on which all our social security systems are based .
Secondly - and I really believe that this should be brought to your attention - there is the pension gap between men and women .
We are faced with an ageing population , and if women do not have a pension , then we have a deeply sad situation on our hands .
That is what we need to focus on in future .
- ( BG ) I welcome the discussion on this report .
That inequalities in pay between men and women persist is unacceptable .
However , we should not limit our discussion to equal pay for equal work .
We need to take a broader perspective .
The individual nature of work lies at the basis of all activity , and it is important to find an objective way of assessing its value , with clear rules , criteria and indicators which will achieve greater objectivity , and eliminate discrimination through clear legislative measures .
An important instrument is to evaluate occupations and jobs and to assess their price .
The low financial status of some occupations makes them unattractive so that men generally avoid them and women take them .
Improving this situation would have a positive impact on improving the economic independence of women .
The low financial status of , for example , the services provided by nurses or teachers , is not acceptable , because it does not at all correspond to their importance in the development of society .
This is an area where the Commission and the Member States also have their obligations .
( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen .
I would like to begin by saying that I for one find it quite unacceptable that women earn on average 15 % less than men and that in the private sector the differential is as great as 25 % .
Let me stress in this respect that in my own country , Slovenia , women do not lag behind men in terms of education , so action needs to be taken .
Many people probably question why it is necessary to take action at a European level and why the solution to this problem cannot be left to the Member States .
One of the reasons is that it is taking too long for these differences to reduce and another reason is that in the majority of Member States there are too few women involved in politics for proper attention to be given to gender-related problems .
A minority is only in a position to highlight its problems in a credible manner if , in a particular institution , such as a parliament or a government , it makes up at least 30 % of the total numbers .
And there are a large number of European countries which do not have a 30 % representation of women in politics .
The average proportion of women in the governments of the Member States and in their parliaments is less than 30 % .
Our representation in the European parliament is 31 % , which is just a little higher than the critical mass we need to highlight gender-related problems effectively .
This is why we have to do so from here .
Another question I have asked myself is whether the proposed measures are too revolutionary and whether they contravene the principle of subsidiarity .
Here I agree with the rapporteur when she says that the legislation is not effective enough and that it could and should be strengthened .
Our proposals must be bold and must represent a valid starting-point for the shaping of real policies .
I support her proposal that the Commission should prepare a new legislative proposal regarding the existing laws on equal pay for men and women by no later than 31 December next year and I congratulate her on a well-prepared report .
( ES ) Mr President , two months ago , here in this House , we debated the annual report on equality between women and men .
One of the most worrying aspects highlighted in that debate is now the subject of today 's debate : the difference in pay between men and women .
It is worrying that , since 2003 , we have not managed to reduce this 15 % pay gap .
This means that a woman has to work 52 days more in a year than a man to receive the same pay .
This is a wholly unacceptable situation in the European Union and we must therefore , without any shadow of a doubt , adopt both stronger legislation and stronger agreements with employers to try and eliminate this pay gap .
However , we will also shortly be looking at another questionable issue in this respect .
Next month we will be discussing the Working Time Directive , which may also prove to be a worrying factor in terms of reconciling women 's family and working lives .
This is unquestionably a very sensitive issue in relation to work .
We are therefore also expectant in this regard .
( BG ) My congratulations to Edit Bauer on the excellent work she has done on the recommendations on equal payment between men and women .
I know that she has put a great deal of effort into drafting a document that takes as much account as possible of the real situation , and I hope that the recommendations contained in it will be put into practice .
In my country , Bulgaria , the pay gap between men and women is between 25 % and 30 % , and while the overall picture in the European Union shows a lower differential , the fact remains that women are paid less than men .
Why is this ?
One of the factors is the pay structure of some occupations with a high proportion of female workers .
Another cause is rooted in the fact that nobody feels responsible for the situation , and therefore nobody feels responsible for solving it .
The current deeply ingrained stereotypes and prejudices on how labour is distributed between the genders not only hinder , but are often used as an excuse to ignore the problems .
What can we do in this situation ?
In the first place , as the report states , a mandatory condition is that the Member States must conform with current legislation .
State policies must encourage the implementation of equal rights and equal pay .
Secondly , transparency in evaluating work and setting pay rates must become an integral , rather than a formal , aspect of work in companies .
And finally , encouraging in-house dialogue and good communications between management and the workforce , particularly in small and medium-sized enterprises , must become part of a truly new culture in individual European societies and Europe as a whole .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Bauer once again on her skilful presentation of the problems and the solutions she has outlined . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for this debate .
I would like to raise one issue , and perhaps the Commission could address this .
We are speaking about equal pay for equal work , and we all want and desire that to happen .
What is the Commission 's view of the current job situation ?
I have a concern that , with so many jobs being lost in countries in the European Union , this issue could get worse rather than better because of people 's desire to earn money , even if it is less than they are truly worth .
I would like some comments from the Commission on that .
I would like to raise an issue of discrimination which certainly exists for men and women : public sector versus private sector workers where there are very different terms and conditions .
They enjoy different pension rights and security issues and sometimes the inequalities are not just gender-based , although I appreciate that this report is about gender , and certainly my concern is that in the current situation this problem may get worse , rather than better .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is a difference of 15 % between salaries received by women and those received by men for carrying out the same work .
In the case of women managers , this figure reaches 20 % and even 30 % , when it comes to managers of SMEs .
28 % of female researchers in industry and only 34 % of women in industry have more than one child .
Commissioner , while women are on maternity leave , the average annual percentage used to calculate the benefit relating to these periods produces a financial loss , in spite of the importance of this period in terms of social welfare .
Mothers must not be penalised for giving birth and looking after their children during the first few months of their life .
I also believe that maternity benefit must be paid not only to mothers who have worked during the last 12 months prior to the birth .
I do not think that it is a child 's fault if their mother has worked or not during this period .
Above all , I believe that there must be no discrimination among children right from birth .
( LT ) I can only repeat that as far back as 1974 documents were adopted obliging Member States to pay men and women equally for the same job .
However , although more than 30 years have passed , the situation has not changed .
Furthermore , in my country , Lithuania , reform of the pension system has begun .
Part of the funds paid by workers into the state pension insurance fund is being transferred to private pension saving funds .
In a few years it became clear that in order to receive an equal annuity from these funds women must pay 35 % more contributions than men , as they live longer .
Moreover , leaving these funds is like leaving slavery , it is impossible - this in itself is an infringement of human rights and freedom of choice .
Apart from Lithuania only Bulgaria uses the same gender system .
Having investigated such cases , I invite the Commission to take the initiative and propose decisions .
- ( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that women in the European Union must work almost two months longer in order to earn as much as men is more than alarming .
Even though Europe is dying , all we can do here is to state that wage discrimination against women and families with children persists up to the rate of 25 % , although women have now surpassed men in educational attainment at a ratio of 60 : 40 .
Mrs Bauer has noted that in the so-called male professions the work of women is routinely undervalued for no objective reason .
However , if the reason is the lack of working years that women devote instead to caring for their families , we must give the matter some serious thought .
Families should not be a handicap .
Mrs Bauer is making waves and her arguments for starting on a review of anti-discrimination laws are convincing .
I also support the proposal that access to public tenders and projects financed from EU funds should be made conditional upon a given company being able to demonstrate an anti-discriminatory pay policy .
I believe this is the way to change the gender stereotypes of employers , especially in the private sector .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a highly professional report .
( PL ) Mr President , in discussing this important issue , it is typical that there have been only two male interventions on this issue .
In the case of Mr Bloom , his intervention was so male , that it was difficult to agree with .
However , we are considering a very important report .
We are considering a report from which we know that work has great value , that it must be adequately paid , and this payment has to be differentiated on the basis of criteria such as the nature of the work , the efficiency with which it is done , ability to create added value , and not on gender criteria .
But change is coming in the Member States as well .
Allow me to mention my own country , where we have only very recently introduced gender equality which allows a father to take paternity leave , which shows that we are converging and we are on the right track .
( PL ) Mr President , women do not get equal pay for equal work .
However , their pay is also lower because they work in lower-paid sectors , and in temporary , lower-quality forms of work .
A result of pay inequality is also inequality in social provision , particularly as regards pensions .
On the one hand they get paid less for the same job , and on the other their shorter period of employment because of the responsibilities of motherhood are both reasons for the poverty of women when they reach retirement age .
That is why unequal pay hits women twice as hard .
I would like to point out that the law usually forbids discrimination , while practice shows continued discrimination .
The main question is therefore enforcing the law in practice .
( PL ) There are no grounds for discriminating against women in this respect , and it is not a matter which is open to discussion .
Three brief questions : on economic grounds , pay should correspond to the effects of work on the basis of the service provided , regardless of who does it .
The second point : Europe is getting older , like it or not .
Perhaps we should consider a bonus for women who are doing the same work as men , but at the same time decide to have children and bring them up , thereby keeping up the population .
Point three : a good example in this area are academic institutions , or at least those which I know , where the opportunities given are equal , and payment is simply results-based .
Perhaps this model could be extended to other sectors .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to join those male voices , which unfortunately have been so few in the present debate , and which recognise that public debate and putting such an important matter as pay and equal pay for women and men on the political agenda is one of the most important matters guaranteed and rights guaranteed in national and European law .
I can say that like everyone else , I do not agree that payment rates should depend on gender .
It may depend on education and experience , but under no circumstances on gender .
It is my impression that national and EU law is quite well developed on this point , and in many cases it may be said to be very good , but what worries me is that it is not enforced , it is not put into practice because there is no tradition of doing so .
The European Court of Justice has frequently reiterated that it is not being enforced .
The question therefore is not to make more laws , but to ensure they are observed .
- ( FR ) Mr President , the pay gaps denounced in this House are all the more difficult to understand given that the young women of today boast higher success rates at school than men in all the Member States and that they account for the highest proportion of graduates .
I should like all the same to emphasise that we have had a solid legislative base since 1975 and especially since 2006 , and that the latter enabled me , in the years 1975 to 1980 , to encourage women in my country who were being discriminated against to start legal proceedings against their employers , in particular from the public sector .
Hundreds of millions of Luxembourg francs , the currency in use at that time , were paid out to them retrospectively .
First and foremost , then , we should make use of the sound legislation in force , even if it means improving it by endorsing our rapporteur 's excellent recommendations .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my thanks for a debate which has tackled an issue that is simply unacceptable .
There are no real or defensible reasons why a situation should persist under which women continue to receive less pay on average than men .
You have mentioned in the debate a very wide range of approaches and a very wide range of issues that are linked to the pay gap and I think it was clear from the debate what a complex question this is .
I would like to state that this question is on the European political agenda because the Commission has just addressed the matter in a number of its documents and also in view of the fact that the Commission is drawing up a specific potential revision of current laws , and of course also because Parliament has taken up the topic thanks to the report of Mrs Bauer , for which I would once again like to express my appreciation .
Also , however , thanks to the fact that in Lille the troika of the three succeeding presidencies did not just announce but actually adopted an action plan which establishes this issue on the agenda of three consecutive presidencies , in other words those of France , the Czech Republic and Sweden .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to state that the debate in Lille , in addition to the action plan , presented the individual Member States with a set of concrete actions in this area , some of which , I must say , were very radical and in my view capable of producing results .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like once again to thank you for allowing me to speak and for the debate and I would like to say that the Commission is fully prepared to cooperate with Parliament in this matter in order to bring about the gradual elimination of this unjust and untenable state of affairs .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for a very interesting debate .
Allow me to make a few remarks .
First , legislation alone will not solve this problem .
As has already been said , there are many reasons for legislating but it is not possible , of course , to solve some economic problems through legislation .
I also agree that we should beyond any doubt make better use of the existing legislation .
The long history of this legislation clearly suggests , however , that it is not very effective in its current form .
We have no other instruments available to us apart from legislation .
This means that our task is clearly to help in ensuring that the existing legislation contributes towards solving this long-standing problem in such a way that the labour market becomes a fairer place .
I would like to conclude with one final remark .
Many fellow Members have emphasised that the continuation of such differences is unacceptable from the perspective of equal rights .
I would like , however , to emphasise another angle , another aspect to this issue , and that is the requirements applying to economic competition , because equal pay for equal work is enshrined in the Treaty of Rome as a requirement of fair economic competition .
I feel that this is the response to give to those colleagues who have been emphasising that the labour market operates under a different set of requirements .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 18 November 2008 .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - The legal framework within the EU relative to equal pay for men and women is widespread .
The problem lies with enforcement .
It is agreed that discrimination in pay based on gender is diminished by existing legislation .
Indirect discrimination is still an issue .
Mostly , this results from economic segregation and in such cases existing legislation is limited in application .
Evaluation of the legislative framework shows some differences in legislation concerning Gender Pay Gap ( GPG ) .
Although operative legislation stricto senso has the same scope , existing directives show fundamental differences :
a ) in 1975 the GPG was considered to be an economic competition issue , an " integral part of the establishment and functioning of the common market ' , while
b ) the 2006 Directive relies on the principle of ' equal treatment and equal opportunity ' .
The data show a persistent gap between pay for men and women .
The latest figures show a 15 % difference between the gross hourly pay of men and women .
In the private sector this is more prevalent and the rate rises to 25 % .
The GPG used to be explained by differences on an individual basis , such as age , education and experience .
Evidence suggests , however , that these differences play a relatively minor part in the persistence of GPG .
The principle of equality of opportunities and equality of treatment between women and men is a topic with specific connotations in the Eastern Europe countries which have recently been integrated .
The benchmarks used for professional performance essentially continue to be predominantly male-based .
This outlook cannot be changed easily in the former Communist zone where , as a result of the propaganda efforts of the regime , the collective mentality has adopted a totally artificial model of equality .
The lack of consistency with the primitive equality promoted by the propaganda of the Communist regimes has succeeded in undermining current efforts to promote equal treatment between women and men .
Based on these premises , I feel that every effort made nowadays to promote the principle of gender equality needs to focus on a broader educational aspect , offering the Community 's citizens realistic system models for non-discriminatory treatment .
In order to implement this principle throughout the Community , we need Europe 's institutions to propose more than organising a European Equal Pay Day .
It is no coincidence that one of the main elements of the 2006-2010 roadmap for equality between men and women is the effort to eliminate the pay gap between the sexes .
The problem of the pay gap between men and women goes beyond the fundamental principle of equal pay for equal work .
The difference in wages mirrors the serious inequalities that can be observed on the labour market and that affect women most of all .
This indicates Europe 's serious democratic deficit .
Solving the problem requires complex arrangements , which cannot be made without political determination .
Existing legislation needs to be perfected , and its practical application promoted and monitored .
The true principle of equal opportunity can only be put into practice if each Member State shows decisive political will , and takes constructive steps to end the pay gap between the sexes .
It is unacceptable that a good number of Member States should still fail to devote special attention to the pay gap between the sexes , be that in public debates or in political programmes .
Launching a social debate and organising educational campaigns are likewise indispensable .
I urge that a package of political measures be prepared in order to remedy this problem , which in any case must take into account national differences and tried and true practices .
We need more precise and detailed statistical information in order to ascertain the true state of affairs and closely monitor developments .
The reasons for wage differences need to be examined , and the information thus gained should be used to shed light on discrimination and to remedy and prevent it in the future .
in writing . - I would like to congratulate Ms Bauer for her hard work in contributing vital recommendations to the European Commission on the application of the equal pay principle .
The pay gap has a major impact on the status of women in economic and social life and constitutes an obstacle to equal economic independence .
There are several areas where women are affected by the gap in pay based solely on gender in Europe .
Women encounter differences in their hourly pay in new and old Member States alike .
Differences can be seen in the income distribution between men and women : 20 percent of women , compared to 40 percent of men in Europe , receive a similar income distribution in the top-range of salaries .
Another glaring pay inequality lies in sectoral gender segregation , as half of jobs in three sectors are male dominated .
Finally , the over-representation of women - 30 percent - in part-time positions affects labour market contributions .
These figures are even worse when it comes to women with certain ethnic origins , such as the Roma .
While the EU 's legal framework regarding equal pay is very extensive , in the European Union women are still paid less then men - even those with similar skills and education - which proves that improving legislation by strengthening its effectiveness is the main goal to achieve .
in writing . -The gender pay gap is alarmingly high in the EU .
There have been some initiatives to decrease it , but the rate at which the gap is shrinking is much too slow .
Parliament has repeatedly asked the Commission to take initiatives .
The report on the gender pay gap outlines many specific ways the EU can tackle this problem .
It is important to define concepts like ' pension gap ' , ' direct pay discrimination ' , and ' indirect pay discrimination ' more clearly and in more detail so that we have better tools for dealing with the gender pay gap .
We currently are lacking the accurate statistical data that we need to assess the situation .
Member States and the Commission should improve their statistics , but so should private companies .
Companies should be required to perform regular pay audits and make the results widely available .
Another way we can help to solve is problem is to add a specific reference to pay discrimination in Article 26 ( Prevention of discrimination ) of Directive 2006 / 54 / EC .
It is simply unacceptable that women in the EU earn on average 15 % less than men .
As a governing body , we must do something to correct this injustice .
General arrangements for excise duty ( debate )
The next item is the report by Astrid Lulling on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a Council directive concerning the general arrangements for excise duty - C6-0099 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal for a directive , which is meant to replace the 1992 Directive , is above all intended to make the introduction , on 1 April 2009 , of the electronic supervision of the movements of goods subject to excise duty - the famous Excise Movement and Control System - compliant with the legislation .
It is therefore a technical measure , but at the same time a step in the direction of less red tape , less fraud and more speed .
Apart from a few amendments , which I have tabled and which have been accepted , to guarantee more consistency in the operation of the new system , we are in agreement concerning this strand of the European Commission 's proposal .
In its view , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has made the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs 's report far more cumbersome by copying a large number of amendments negotiated within the Council .
In fact , this move achieves nothing substantial as far as we are concerned .
The political debate lies elsewhere .
It relates to the conditions of movement and taxation of goods subject to excise duty , in particular alcohol and tobacco purchased by private consumers .
The European Commission has had the wisdom , for once , to submit a text that is based on recent case-law , that is to say , case-law that permits Europeans to transport goods subject to excise duty that are purchased in a Member State other than that of their residence , without quantitative restrictions , provided that the goods have been purchased for private consumption purposes .
My proposal and my position as rapporteur are unequivocal : I am wholly in favour of this Commission text , which is clear , precise and based on the principles governing the internal market .
However , some of my fellow Members , socialists and liberals in particular , have felt obliged to table amendments that would re-instate tax frontiers such as those that existed before 1992 , by re-introducing indicative limits .
The fact is , indicative limits in theory mean quantitative restrictions in reality .
As a result of the absences , and taking advantage of the lack of knowledge of certain fellow Members , they have obtained a majority in committee .
My political group has taken the unanimous decision to table amendments intended to re-establish the European Commission 's initial proposals .
It is only fair that we do so .
We do not want a return to borders and to practices such as those that existed before the single market .
On the contrary , we want solutions that are adapted to our time , including with regard to electronic trade .
Our message to the Council must be clear : do not propose to our fellow citizens that we go back on the acquis communautaire .
What seems just as incomprehensible is the attitude of certain socialists and liberals who want to do away with the last remaining duty-free shops at the land borders of the European Union .
The Commission wants this too , unfortunately , even though these shops in no way disrupt the single market .
Their closure would lead , however , to thousands of job losses , in particular at Greece 's borders .
We have really picked a good time to propose such things !
There is worse to come , however .
The circumstantial majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has even rejected my amendment , which was to keep the duty-free purchase option for travellers whose final destination is a third country , in order to take account of the situation concerning connecting flights .
Why , if I am travelling to Singapore from Luxembourg , via Frankfurt or Paris , can I not buy duty-free in the airport of departure ?
I must say that this is rather depressing , Mr President ; I would inform you that I have six minutes , but I will not use them all .
I have confidence , now , in the good sense of most of our fellow Members - it is a pity that they are not here - to adopt a solution that is also in the interests of consumers and that does not re-invent new tax and bureaucratic barriers .
Those who vote against our reasonable proposals tomorrow will have difficulty in explaining this backward step to our compatriots .
They can count on me and on my colleagues to denounce their rearguard views .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first of all thank the rapporteur Mrs Lulling and the ECON Committee for the report and the speedy treatment of this proposal , which provides the legal basis for the computerisation of excise procedures as of April 2010 .
Member States as well as the Commission have invested a lot in the Excise Movement Control System ( EMCS ) .
It replaces the current paper-based movement monitoring system with a new computerised one .
The greater use of trans-European networks for communication between traders and excise authorities , and between excise authorities themselves , will reduce the time needed for the discharge of tax liability for excise movements .
This will provide excise authorities with an essential tool to effectively address fraud and hence protect legitimate trade .
At the same time , it will improve the services to taxpayers who will benefit from improved legal certainty and real-time information exchanges with their tax authorities .
Apart from these new provisions , the proposed Directive will entirely recast and update the old Horizontal Excise Directive of 1992 .
It will simplify and modernise the excise procedures , with the aim of reducing excise obligations for traders , in particular for traders carrying out cross-border business , without compromising excise controls .
Clearly , as the Commission had proposed a new and up-to-date legal framework for excise , some of the more political issues included in this legislation had to be re-discussed .
This concerns the issues of land-based tax-free shops , the position of transit airports and the maintaining of guide levels to distinguish commercial excise movements from movements of excise goods for personal use .
Many amendments proposed by Parliament already conform to the text of the general orientation agreed in the ECOFIN meeting of 4 November 2008 , or go in the same direction .
They are also acceptable to the Commission .
I am therefore confident that the proposal can be adopted soon and that the timely application of the EMCS is ensured .
I am going to use the first of my two minutes to quickly highlight the main principles of my opinion , which was unanimously adopted in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
These principles are as follows : increase efficiency in production and distribution of goods and services , mainly by reducing red tape ; improve the existing rules and adapt them to the current circumstances , notably to facilitate risk-based monitoring procedures for national administrations ; simplify procedures and increase transparency for intra-Community trade , by increasing legal certainty and fair rules ; finally , the system for the collection and reimbursement of duty should not give rise to discriminatory criteria , and should avoid double taxation .
These were the guiding principles of the opinion that I presented to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on behalf of the Committee on Industry .
I would repeat that there was broad consensus on the opinion within the Committee on Industry .
That is why I must say , as a Member for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , using my second minute , that I do not understand Mrs Lulling 's observation that the Socialist Group and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - and only they - introduced quantitative limits .
It was not just the Socialist Group and the ALDE Group as , at least in the Committee on Industry , it was everyone , given that my opinion was unanimously adopted , as I said .
I feel it is truly extraordinary that quantitative limits have not been included , as we know that this type of duty has various aims .
Obviously the first is tax revenue , but there is also protection of public health .
Of course , each country attaches a different level of importance to each of these two aims .
I therefore feel that the solution we found ( of defining quantitative limits ) is a fair and balanced solution , which does not excessively benefit any country in particular .
It also does not prejudice any of the countries which naturally have a different understanding from that of the country which Mrs Lulling represents and which I naturally respect .
However , the wishes of that country obviously cannot be placed above the general wishes of the other countries of the European Union .
My final comment in just 10 seconds is that the Socialist Group obviously supports the internal market and the expansion of the internal market and does not believe that the proposals adopted in either the Committee on Industry or the Committee on Economic Affairs may jeopardise the internal market .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President , Parliament defends individuals and small organisations , small businesses , as opposed to governments who want to sweep away inconvenient things and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection feels very strongly that the external land-border shops should be allowed to remain .
They should be better policed , as should all the policing against crime across borders in Europe be much better , but it is not a reason to sweep them away .
Secondly , on sea and air travel , the Internal Market Committee believes strongly that travellers - based on their final destination , as opposed to a transit destination - should be allowed to buy duty-free because that would help small regional airports generate revenue .
It may be inconvenient to the governments , but we defend it very strongly .
The third and final point that I want to make - which it is very regrettable that the Commission did not include in its 2006 consultation on this legislation - is the removal of these exemptions which it is now proposing .
Why did it not include it ?
Why did it not carry out an impact assessment on what it would mean before it proposed it ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to congratulate both the Commission and the rapporteurs for their work , and I believe that this electronic updating system will have a timely and very positive effect .
I would like to make two remarks .
First , let us allow the internal market to operate .
If the tax record system and the exchange of information are working well , I believe that traffic for personal use by private individuals will not cause great harm .
If someone somewhere - having purchased goods for personal use - pays the excise duty , then the wholesale prices , and in part the divergent VAT rates will in any case compete with each other .
It is not necessary to put limits on everything , and it is entirely unnecessary to send negative messages in the interests of protecting the treasuries of high-price countries .
It would be very strange within the Schengen zone in particular , if we were to bother with police or customs inspections , since we know that there are various other methods for scanning the contents of larger lorries .
Therefore , I see no point in an indicative listing .
My other remark is that I too support the rights of citizens leaving the internal market to purchase such goods when they leave that market .
As regards overland travel , I do not think that this would give rise to large-scale smuggling , or that the neighbouring Member States would suffer great losses , since prices in neighbouring third countries are much lower than within EU Member States .
Thus , I am not thinking of industrial-scale export of goods .
I presume the same is true in the case of airports , since one cannot take such great quantities of goods in checked baggage or carry-on bags that we should have to forbid taking such goods for personal use to third countries outside the customs union . Thank you very much , Mr President , for the opportunity to speak .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the main rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , and the shadow rapporteurs , Benoît Hamon and Olle Schmidt .
For unavoidable reasons , my colleague Benoît Hamon cannot be here today , so I will try to convey his position , which is the position of our political group , on a matter that deserves our full attention .
In fact , taxation in terms of excise duties is a sensitive matter .
When talking about excise duties , we must remember that they are levied on clearly defined consumer goods and services : tobacco , alcohol and energy products .
The Commission proposal amends a text dating from 1992 .
The internal market in these goods has changed a great deal since then .
It should also be noted that the new electronic system for managing and controlling transactions is a change that we welcome and that should simplify the operation of the system , for both operators and tax authorities , as the Commissioner has just mentioned .
As regards the more technical aspects - including time limits for forwarding documents , rules for the establishment of financial guarantees by operators , and so on - the Commission proposal and the rapporteur 's report deserve congratulations and agreement as they represent genuine and useful advances .
However , with regard to these excise duties , the political content should not stop at technical aspects , as already mentioned by my colleague Manuel António dos Santos .
The goods covered by this proposal are sensitive goods , the sale of which should not be subject merely to the forces of competition .
In this respect , I should therefore like to focus on two illustrative examples .
One is the guideline limits for the personal transport of these goods and the other is the rules applicable to Internet sales .
On these subjects , we clearly disagree with the rapporteur .
With regard to alcohol , tobacco and also fuel , the differences in taxation between the Member States are huge and therefore the retail prices also differ .
I only need to point out that the price of a packet of tobacco can vary between EUR 1 and EUR 7 within the Union due to these significant differences in duty .
As a rule , duties are payable in the country of consumption , except with regard to goods transported within the European Union .
Under current rules , certain quantitative limits must be respected , otherwise it may be presumed that the goods are being transported for commercial purposes .
The Commission proposal aims to abolish these quantitative limits and , on this specific aspect , the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , agrees .
This was not the understanding of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
By contrast , we agreed to lower these limits , following initiatives by the shadow rapporteurs , Benoît Hamon and Olle Schmidt , and also myself .
Liberalisation does allow some consumers to purchase these goods more cheaply .
However , this does not make sense where it may prejudice the public finances of Member States or public health objectives which Member States have the right to safeguard .
It also does not make sense where it may support the grey market , which is something that we should all avoid .
Therefore , the final agreement reached in committee was to maintain the limits at a reasonable level , namely 400 cigarettes or 45 litres of wine per person .
These are the amounts assumed to be for personal consumption .
As a result , those travellers who purchase these goods up to this limit will not be affected .
For the same reasons we oppose Amendment 68 of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which proposes to tax distance sales , particularly those made over the Internet , in the seller 's country and not in the consumer 's country .
This is an ( unjustified ) inversion of the general principle applying to taxation .
This amendment would also open the door to a large-scale grey market and must therefore be absolutely rejected .
Finally , I must just mention the issue of duty-free shops .
The internationally recognised principle is that duty-free shops may only exist at ports and airports , to ensure optimum control and prevent any risk of fraud or abuse .
We must therefore allow sufficient time for people to adapt and that is why we propose , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , a transitional period for those Member States which still have duty-free outlets , allowing them to gradually adjust to the new situation .
We therefore propose the distant date of 1 January 2017 to allow a gradual convergence towards the common rule .
We believe that this approach is appropriate .
It is an approach which resulted in consensus .
It was not total consensus , but it was adopted by a majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and I hope that it will be adopted in the vote tomorrow in plenary .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner and Mrs Lulling , we meet again on this issue .
Of course , it is not the first time we have come into conflict with each other , Mrs Lulling and I , on the form excise duty should take in Europe .
However , it is probably the first time that I have felt that I am the one with the majority on my side .
It is dangerous to pre-empt things , but we will see how it goes .
On the issue of the new technical system , EMCS , we are fully in agreement .
It is on the sensitive issue of import quotas that our views seriously diverge .
If the committee 's approach is taken up , Parliament will have made clear both its commitment to freedom of movement in Europe and its commitment to encouraging the desire for a sensible public health policy .
As always when it comes to tax-related issues it is necessary to find a balance between what should remain within a Member State 's competence and what is considered our common responsibility .
If we vote through the Committee 's proposal it will mean that the European Parliament will establish that tobacco and alcohol are not the same as any other goods , just as we have previously heard in this House , and must be treated differently .
This is , of course , nothing revolutionary , as many people have been saying this for a long time .
By deciding to halve the indicative import levels while at the same time retaining the principle of a limit , we are giving Member States a lot of room to conduct their own policy while at the same time the common legislation will make it easier for undertakings and individuals to conduct cross-border trade .
Or to put it more simply : Sweden will be given room to prioritise public health issues while Lulling 's Luxembourg can continue its packaged low tax policy .
The internal market cannot be built with alcohol tourism as its model .
Drunkenness and its consequences is not a Swedish problem , as I sometimes hear people say .
Recently , we have heard demands for forceful measures to combat drunkenness in the United Kingdom , something that the British Members should also think about perhaps .
I think that it is high time that the European Parliament took a more sensible view of these issues and gave Member States the opportunity to take action in the direction of public health .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , speaking on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to draw your attention to three points .
Firstly , changes in duties at European Union level should encourage an increase in the production and distribution of goods and services , mainly by reducing red tape , but also by making it easier for national administrations to apply control procedures based on risk analysis .
Secondly , the solutions proposed in this directive meet these requirements .
Simplifying administrative procedures and an electronic system of information exchange will for the tax authorities of the Member States become a tool for improved and better managed controls .
Thirdly , we must support the solutions put forward by the rapporteur on including distance selling of excise goods within the scope of the directive , and also , in the duty suspension arrangement , by the application of reduced guarantees in respect of entities which meet the conditions of good behaviour and regularly use the system of guarantees .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Commission proposal relating to procedure states in Article 10 that ' Member States may [ ... ] make excise goods which have been released for consumption eligible for reimbursement [ ... ] of excise duty ' .
On this basis , Ms Lulling tells us that , as regards the conditions for reimbursement of excise duty , the proposal lays down , as a general principle , that it is for Member States to determine these conditions .
However , Article 10 goes on to say : ' provided that such reimbursement [ ... ] does not give rise to exemptions other than those referred to in Article 11 ' .
Article 11 refers to exemptions for diplomatic purposes , for subsidising international organisations , for assisting the armed forces of NATO and under special arrangements with non-EU countries , all of which - I think you will agree - are rather specialised exemptions which , contrary to Ms Lulling 's assertion , do not uphold the general principle that it is for Member States to determine the conditions for reimbursement .
There is no exemption for Member States in this proposal , and on these grounds I commend to Members Amendment 54 , which seeks to repair a glaring flaw in this proposal .

( EL ) Mr President , we find ourselves facing yet another eccentric proposal by the Commission ; with what is no more and no less than a bulldozer policy , it proposes to abolish all duty free shops at land borders between the Community and third countries .
The big question is why ?
Why , Commissioner , did you have this thought and , having had it , why did you not table it at the consultation which you organised in 2006 and why did you not include it in an impact assessment which you were obliged to carry out within the framework of the new principle of better regulation ?
You must therefore explain to us why we should tell hundreds of workers that they will lose their jobs , especially in these difficult times ; you must explain to us what this impact is on the internal market which is so great that you need to abolish at one fell swoop all shops at land borders with third countries , which in the case of my country , in Greece , are working extremely successfully and with no fraud problems and no impact on the internal market .
Parliament and the political groups which share this opinion must also take the political responsibility for explaining to the workers why it is that we want to abolish these successful shops .
As far as I am concerned - as Mrs Lulling said quite clearly and as the IMCO said quite clearly in its report - we have not been given a convincing answer , which makes us believe that , for the Commission , this is something of a whim .
We have not been given a convincing answer .
I therefore make an eleventh-hour appeal for us to vote tomorrow in favour of Amendments 63 , 64 and 65 , so as to prevent this bulldozer policy from flattening once again everything that is working in the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I shall make a specific proposal for the system of exemption of land-based shops .
Commissioner , you are introducing a general exemption for land-based shops which constitutes discrimination against these undertakings and has an important impact on the functioning of these otherwise healthy shops , which make a significant contribution to national communities and local employment .
In Member States such as Greece , with long land borders with third countries , these shops have been operating smoothly and profitably for a long time while , on the other hand , the question of systematic infringement of the criterion of purchase for personal use or cases of systematic abuse and tax evasion are clearly controlled by the national authorities .
I consider that allowing duty free shops to continue to trade on land borders would be a solution which is also in keeping with the Commission 's own proposals , while controlling their modus operandi and stamping out cases of tax evasion would , as with all other shops , be the responsibility of the ports and airports .
I therefore consider that , in the forthcoming vote , we should support Amendments 57 , 63 , 64 and 65 and , in the worst case scenario , Amendment 69 , which extends the period of operation of these shops to 2012 .
Mr President , I welcome the report on general arrangements for excise duty .
I wish to highlight the progress made in the matter of purchasing duty .
The original proposal , if implemented , would have restricted passengers to purchasing duty-free goods only in the final airport of departure before leaving the EU .
In practical terms this would have meant that if a person went on a journey from Cork in Ireland to Dubai via Paris they would only be able to purchase duty-free goods in Paris .
This would have decimated the profitability of Irish regional airports , as many currently rely on commercial activities for the bulk of their income .
This would undoubtedly have led to job losses .
However , this has now been addressed and accordingly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on working to address our concerns .
This represents a welcome development at a time when the Irish Government has introduced a new airport tax which will discriminate against beleaguered smaller regional airports to the advantage of the already congested Dublin airport .
In that regard I call on the Commission to investigate the legality of this measure under EU competition rules .
I welcome the report from Mrs Lulling and the Commission .
Mr President , perhaps if I were Mrs Lulling living in Luxembourg I might feel as strongly about not having indicative limits .
Unfortunately , I live on an island where there is a lot of smuggling and much of the alcohol and tobacco which people think that they can use for their own particular purposes is in fact later sold on to other people through commercial resale .
I am afraid that anything we do to end the indicative limits would send a signal and a message to those smugglers who look for the resale of alcohol and cigarettes .
Indicative limits may not seem like a safe guide for consumers but they are a safe guide for children , children who often end up taking the alcohol and cigarettes sold by bootleggers and smugglers who bring them into my region in the South-East and sell them in the streets , on the back streets and on the estates , for small change , one or two cigarettes at a time perhaps , but enough to get kids started .
It is this trade which needs to be controlled and can only be controlled by setting indicative limits so that we can get to the source of the people who are trying to do this and trying to smuggle it past our police and customs officers .
That is why I believe that indicative limits should stay .
It is not , as I say , an end to the integration of the single markets , but it certainly does bring about a better idea of social cohesion and social behaviour and , in the United Kingdom , the customs and excise officers and the police officers asked for this .
They asked for it because it gives good guidance as to what people would be expected to bring back for their own personal use .
Tobacco has a life of only six months , so when you stop vans packed to the ceiling with cigarettes , you have to ask the question : is that really for personal use or is it going elsewhere for resale , and often to children ?
- ( RO ) Fellow Members , excise duty and electronic charging systems in general appear to be technical matters , but they also serve certain powerful political objectives .
However , to be able to use them , we need to take account of the specific situations in Member States , along with the abstract theories .
At the same time , we need to maintain consistency with more general principles of the policies which we apply . For instance , the principle of equal treatment .
This report would meet both conditions if a proposal is accepted .
This applies in particular to Amendment 69 , which refers to maintaining duty-free shops at customs points in the Union other than at ports and airports , until 2017 .
This amendment will eliminate the discrimination between those who travel by water or air and those who travel on land , which is totally unjustified not only from an economic and theoretical , but also a practical perspective .
At the same time , it offers a certain advantage to those living in the border areas , as has been pointed out already .
These people are generally economically disadvantaged due to their peripheral status , but if their jobs were to disappear , this would have a negative impact on them .
Fellow Members , there are serious reasons for you to accept this amendment during tomorrow 's vote .
Compared to the huge expense we are prepared to go to without any objections in order to save corporations , this exemption has only minor financial repercussions .
- ( CS ) Mr President , the free movement of people and goods is one of the great achievements of the European Union but it does not function well in the case of goods which are subject to varying high levels of consumer tax between the Member States .
The conflicting views of the Commission , the committee , the European Court and the rapporteurs concerning quantitative policies have shown that we will not find a good solution as long as these tax differences continue to exist .
It bothers me that the Commission has not carried out an impact study in order for us to assess the economic importance of the parallel market and the social importance which restricts our citizens and which perhaps we all acknowledge .
I would like this debate to lead to the coordination of consumer tax policies on alcohol and tobacco , for , among other reasons , the health risks .
It is a fact that countries with high taxes cannot boast of any visible success in the fight against alcoholism .
- ( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , Chapter 4 sets out the basic provisions and procedures which are applied as part of the Excise Movement Control System .
The novel aspect is the introduction of the system and administrative documentation in electronic format .
In order to ensure the efficient operation of the computerised system , Member States should adopt within their national applications a uniform data set and structure in order to provide a reliable interface for economic operators .
The transitional period for adopting the Excise Movement Control System under suspension of excise duty must be set with due regard to the feasibility of introducing the computerised system in each Member State .
With this in mind , the Member States and Commission are taking the necessary measures to implement key public facilities at national level and to ensure their interoperability .
Commissioner , in view of the food crisis mentioned and the social and economic importance of Europe 's agriculture , I believe that we need to look closely at the possibility of abolishing excise duty on fuels used for agricultural activities , as well as on the energy used to pump water for irrigation purposes .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , from the discussions I do see a general support for the main objective of the Commission proposal , which is to provide the legal basis for the computerisation of excise procedures by April 2010 .
I want to emphasise and confirm that the purpose of the proposal is to simplify and modernise the excise procedure , to improve control of the movement of excise goods and at that same time to reduce red-tape excise obligations for traders and to reduce the burden on private travellers .
These were the guiding principles for the proposals .
I would like to make some observations in relation to the amendments concerning some of the more sensitive issues in the proposal .
On the ' guide levels ' , the Commission could accept to maintain guide levels as a tool , although we did not want to introduce or propose guide levels .
However , the present quantitative reference values have to be kept .
We cannot accept a reduction of these values , which would be a step backwards in comparison with the 1993 Directive .
On the abolition of tax-free shops at land borders , which is another sensitive issue , I want to remind you that the origin of this approach dates back to as early as 1960 , when the WCO , the World Customs Organisation , recommended the abolition of land-border tax-free shops , and I also want to remind you that in 2002 , when the accession talks with 10 new countries were completed , countries like Slovenia , Hungary and some others were forced to abolish their land-based tax-free shops ; so I think that the proposed solution , which provides a very long transitional period for Greece and for Romania , is quite fair in comparison to the stand taken with regard to the former new countries .
On the reimbursement of excise duty to small fuel distributors , the Commission maintains the principle that the insolvency of the final consumer cannot be a ground not to charge excise duty .
At the same time , in view of the ongoing economic crisis and sometimes remaining high fuel prices , and to ensure fuel distribution to end users , it should be possible for Member States to otherwise safeguard the interest of small distributors , provided that such measures do not disturb competition .
Concerning the impact assessment , a point which many speakers raised , I want to remind you that an impact assessment was already made in 2004 , so we simply did not find it necessary to repeat it two years later .
In conclusion , I would like to thank Parliament for its support and constructive approach .
Providing the legal basis for the new Excise Movement Control System will allow the Member States to speed up their preparation for the introduction of the system , foreseen by April 2010 .
The Commission will take all necessary steps to ensure that all central systems will be operational by that date , as well as provide support to allow a smooth transition to the new paperless environment .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Commissioner , we very much want the Excise Movement and Control System to replace the paper system in April 2009 , and we hope that the whole unfortunate debate on the indicative limits will not delay adoption of the directive .
I should like to say to Mr Dos Santos that these indicative limits have nothing to do with health or with Luxembourg .
I should like to point out to Mrs Ferreira that , in 2005 , we adopted in this House the report by the member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mr Rosati , in which we already endorsed the abolition of the indicative limits .
Moreover , Mr Hamon , who now has other concerns , had proposed in his amendment much higher limits than those of the infamous social-liberal compromise concocted behind my back .
To Mr Schmidt , I would say that we really ought not to mix things up and speak in the same breath about taxation and health .
Moreover , the scourge of alcoholism is , unfortunately , directly in proportion to the level of excise duty ; the higher the rate of excise duty , the greater the scourge of alcoholism in countries .
The latter are obviously free to impose as high a rate of excise duty as they like , because we have only minimum rates , not maximum ones ; but , please , do not talk to us about health policy when you have rates such as that .
I should like to say to Mr Skinner that , really , smugglers could not care less about levels and indicative limits .
Moreover , in the Commission 's proposal , there are criteria for defining goods acquired for personal use that are better safeguards than the indicative limits , including against smuggling .
I hope that , tomorrow , we will be able to find the right solution , namely the one that I am proposing .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European Union Solidarity Fund : obstacles for its reform ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Gerardo Galeote Quecedo , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the European Union Solidarity Fund : obstacles for its reform - B6-0472 / 2008 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again we are dedicating a debate in plenary to the reform of the European Union Solidarity Fund which , as we all know , is intended to alleviate the damage caused by a major natural disaster within the Union territory .
This Fund very quickly proved to be ineffective in meeting its set objectives and , as a result , in 2005 , the European Commission presented a proposal modifying the regulation governing this instrument of solidarity .
The aim was to improve not only its operability , but also access to it and its coverage in the event of a major natural disaster .
The European Parliament , as can be easily proven , worked promptly and intensively on this proposal so that in May 2006 our institution had finished its first reading .
At that time we all thought and believed that the Council would do the same , given that this was a regulation under the codecision procedure .
However , as we now all know , that was not the case .
Contrary to expectations , the Council put a hold on the process due to its inaction .
During this period , in addition to serious flooding , the European Union has suffered serious fires , which in some cases have resulted in deaths , and also major droughts .
However , the Council has remained impassive .
The proposal to improve the regulation is still sitting on the Council 's table , despite calls from the European institutions and social forces .
Today we want to once again call on the Council to act and remind it that modifying this regulation will not require one additional euro from the Community budget : our demands have no financial consequences and aim solely at rectifying the operational problems that have arisen since this instrument of solidarity was created .
We simply want to improve its operability and agility , always in line with the subsidiarity principle .
We note that , as this instrument currently stands , access to it is very difficult , restrictive and inflexible , as we have unfortunately witnessed over the nearly seven years of its operation .
I therefore want to ask whether this inability of the delegations forming the Council to reach a common position has any real explanation , and whether anyone can tell us who and what arguments are blocking reform of this regulation .
We should like the European Commission to drive forward the reform of this fund , to tell us what actions it plans to take , and to clearly set out the possible alternatives that it is considering in order to help unblock this matter .
If the Commission does have any alternatives , we should of course like to know what they are and what their time horizon is .
I believe it is appropriate to remind those present , in particular the French Presidency , that this instrument was set up with a laudable objective : to promptly , adequately and visibly show the Union 's solidarity with its citizens .
To end , Mr President , I want to make another call , this time specifically to the French Presidency , on a matter closely linked to this one : the creation of a European civil protection force , on which Michel Barnier , a former Commissioner as you all know , presented a report to the European Council in 2006 .
I am ending .
The Fund was created in particular as a symbolic expression of solidarity between the European Union and its citizens .
My final plea is that , if we manage , after so much time and effort , to make this operative in any degree , our first thought and action should be directed towards those who have died in these disasters in the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament , and in particular the members of the Committee on Regional Development , for their continued interest in , and support for , the Solidarity Fund .
It is an important instrument to promote the European Union 's strategic objective of solidarity and , since its creation in 2002 , 61 applications have been received and the fund has intervened in 33 cases in 20 different countries .
The total amount committed so far is EUR 1 523 million .
According to the recent special report by the Court of Auditors , the fund is well managed and delivers quick , efficient and flexible assistance .
However , this fund has its limitations .
The threshold for mobilising the European Union Solidarity Fund is extremely high .
As a result , the fund is not well equipped for certain types of disasters , typically involving lower eligible expenditure , such as forest fires , and more than two thirds of all applications for the fund assistance presented so far were based on an exception for so-called ' extraordinary regional disasters ' .
Moreover , with all the existing Community instruments , it is extremely difficult , or indeed impossible , for us to react to man-made disasters , as illustrated by industrial accidents , such as the Prestige oil spill , or terrorist acts , such as the Madrid bombing of March 2004 .
Likewise , it is not possible at present to provide assistance from the European Union Solidarity Fund in the event of a serious public health crisis .
For these reasons , in April 2005 the Commission adopted a proposal for a revision of the Regulation .
Despite joint efforts with successive presidencies since 2005 , the Council has so far not been able to reach agreement on this proposal .
One reason is that the large majority of Member States consider that the fund works very well under the present scheme and they do not consider it necessary or appropriate to expand it to cover additional situations , fearing in particular the budgetary consequences of such an expansion .
The Council has not formally specified the position of each Member State , although the Council opinions are supported by quasi-unanimity .
In addition , it was not indicated where areas of compromise could be found in order to reach an agreement on the Commission proposal .
The Commission remains convinced that revision of the Solidarity Fund Regulation is necessary to increase the Union 's capacity to react quickly in case of major disasters which are currently not covered .
Therefore , it will adopt a report to take stock of the six years of implementing the fund and to identify Solidarity Fund limitations and any room for improvement .
We hope that the report will relaunch discussions in the Council and in the European Parliament on a revision of the current Solidarity Fund Regulation .
The report should be ready towards the end of the first quarter of 2009 .
With regard to civil protection , the Commission has begun to identify gaps in civil protection response resources on the basis of scenarios for major disasters , and assess options to fill identified gaps .
In this context , the Commission will explore innovative arrangements with the Member States for reinforcing the overall EU disaster-response capacity in the framework of the pilot project and the preparatory action included in the 2008 budget .
On the basis of this work , the Commission may propose to fill the gaps through the development of civil protection modules available for deployment at any time or through additional reserve capacities designed to complement national responses to major disasters , including in the area of fighting wild fires .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking in my capacity as rapporteur for the Social Fund , the 2002 Solidarity Fund and the expanded and improved version from 2006 .
This report , which the European Parliament adopted by a huge majority , has been on ice for over two years , because it is being blocked by the Council , despite the fact that citizens are calling increasingly loudly for European solidarity against the background of the ever more frequent occurrence of natural disasters .
The Solidarity Fund , which was hastily cobbled together following the devastating floods of 2002 to provide urgently needed assistance , was an instrument that promised immediate aid in the event of disaster .
Over time , however , it has emerged that - as you quite rightly said , Commissioner - that the currently available instrument makes it extremely difficult , if not downright impossible , to respond appropriately to large-scale crises at EU level .
Moreover , the current threshold for mobilising the fund is , as you said , Mrs Hübner , extremely high , which means that the derogations are getting out of hand .
The revised version of the Disaster Relief Fund , however , provides a clear response to this .
The European Parliament therefore feels that it is even more important for this effective instrument to be made available to the people affected by disasters , hence , once again , the specific question : why can the Council not reach a common position on an issue that is so vital to suffering citizens of the European Union ?
Which Member States support the improved Treaty , and which reject it ?
You in the Commission have indicated that it might be a possibility at the start of 2009 .
We hope so , but we also want to push for it once again here , because one cannot simply disregard the vote of this Parliament as the various Presidencies have done previously .
Mr President , Commissioner , as stated by my fellow Members , in 2006 we debated in this House the modification of the Solidarity Fund Regulation with a view to adapting it so that it could become a rapid and effective instrument of response .
However , today this issue is still on the table .
It was not easy to achieve the very broad agreement that was reached in this House , given that both the various political groups and the interests of certain countries put forward very different ideas as to how to modify this regulation .
However , I feel that we all made a major effort to reach agreement and allow this regulation to be amended .
I feel that Parliament set an example of what we all now have to make an effort to achieve : the consensual modification of the regulation .
The European Commission must make every possible effort to foster this agreement and achieve the set objective .
I am pleased at the response given today by the Commissioner , who has said that a study will be carried out in order to determine the objectives that we must now set with regard to the modification of the regulation , not least so that we can ensure future agreement by the Council .
We must ensure that , through the modification of this regulation , a rapid and effective response can be given to those disasters which the Member States are unable to tackle on their own , by extending the current eligibility to industrial disasters , acts of terrorism and public health emergencies , not forgetting such an important issue as the severe droughts which are occurring increasingly often , particularly in certain Mediterranean areas .
In addition , we must be firm in proposing to lower the threshold for mobilising the fund from EUR 3 000 to 1 000 million in damage caused , not forgetting the regional component .
This instrument must respond with financial aid to situations of extreme drought , fire and flooding , not forgetting under any circumstances the victims who need immediate help and assistance .
The Solidarity Fund is a political instrument for solving problems , which is why I must once again stress the need to make every effort to take this fundamental issue forward , but we must do so with the necessary changes that are appropriate to today 's reality .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , my fellow Members have already cited some examples .
I should like to refer to some of them in order to introduce this subject , since we need to combat natural disasters .
Who remembers what took place just a century ago , in 1908 , in Messina , where 100 000 people died ?
Everyone obviously remembers Chernobyl , but if we focus on the last 10 years or so , there were the storms and the sinkings of 1999 , the floods in Central Europe already cited just now , not to mention 11 September in New York , the terrorist attacks of March 2004 , the problematic disease , chikungunya , and so on .
We do not know what the next disaster will be or on what scale it will be , but we are sure of one thing , and that is that there will soon be another disaster again .
When that time comes , our fellow citizens , who for 50 years have been used to seeing a supposedly united Europe being built - and a number of reports on which we have voted this week are testimony to this - will turn round and ask us the same question that they have been asking us regarding the current financial crisis : ' but what have you done ? '
Over the past few weeks some of you may have heard the former director of the International Monetary Fund explain in a previous report , from three or four years ago : ' We said at the IMF that the crisis was going to happen , and we explained how to prevent it ' .
So , Commissioner , this evening you have come to listen to us , and we hope that you will be able to hear us and to ensure that , unlike what is happening with regard to the current financial crisis , Europe will not be behind if a disaster occurs .
For my part I should like to make a twin proposal .
Firstly , a proposal concerning the type of action to take .
You said this in your closing remarks , Commissioner , you referred to the report by Michel Barnier .
We cannot have two separate actions , even though you yourself , like each of us , in particular within the Committee on Regional Development , are forever saying that we need integrated approaches .
We cannot have development of the Solidarity Fund , on the one hand , and a prevention policy , on the other .
The two should be linked , not least in order to convince these infamous ministers of finance , who explain to us that perhaps even if the Solidarity Fund criteria were adapted - and you spoke about this - it would cost more .
They should draw inspiration from the Barnier report and they would understand that if , at the same time , we conducted a prevention policy by pooling the means of action and pooling accident and natural disaster prevention , then , we would save money .
Therefore , it is clearly a question not only of saving money and averting disasters , but above all of saving human lives - that really is the priority .
That is why , Commissioner , I , along with all my fellow Members , urge you to do your utmost to ensure that , at the end of the French Presidency and during the Czech Presidency , you obtain a genuine guarantee from the Swedish Presidency that the action plan will not just be studied , but launched .
We are counting on your determination .
We need it .
You know that Parliament is behind you - this evening it has said so loud and clear .
We shall now wait to receive results for a year 's time , without fail .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council is not present , but it is the institution that is creating the blockage , and it is to the Council that this discussion should be addressed .
After all , who is it that submits the applications when the fires or the floodwaters are spreading ?
The Member States - and they attach all sorts of special requests .
They want generous aid , and it is not always used appropriately : we have just had the example of the United Kingdom .
Nevertheless , I would like to take this opportunity to express another concern to the Commission .
Originally , the Commission , under Mr Bernier , was very committed to the area of prevention , because it understood that natural disasters can only really be combated through preventive action .
Today , this aspect is not being given sufficient attention .
I would welcome it if the Commission could draw up guidelines for the implementation of the Solidarity Fund that really focused on prevention .
I would once again point out that the Commission already has opportunities to put greater emphasis on prevention , for example as part of the ERDF programme , but what are they doing in that connection ?
So far , little has come across , and little investment has been made to prevent the occurrence of natural disasters .
There has been no investment in natural flows , and there has not been enough insistence that reforestation should involve a natural mixture , for example in Greece , where it is the pine forests that burn particularly easily .
I expect the Commission to act with greater commitment on the current applications , and to keep an eye on what the money is being spent on , in order to ensure that disasters do not recur , and to enable investments can really be in harmony with nature .
I have seen no sign of this commitment , and in that respect the Commission needs to shoulder a portion of the blame .
Although we talk about natural disasters , the majority of natural disasters are to a large extent man-made , due firstly to the inadequacy of our fight against climate change and secondly to building on flood plains and planting monoculture forests .
In this connection , the Commission needs to commit now , and not wait .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) During the debate on modifying the Solidarity Fund Regulation , held on 18 May 2006 , in which we actively participated by tabling a series of proposals , we underlined our disagreement with the position adopted by a majority in Parliament .
In particular , we disagreed with the failure to maintain the eligibility of regional disasters - which are the kind that occur most - as provided for in the current regulation .
We also disagreed with the rejection of the possibility of greater financial assistance for the cohesion countries and convergence regions and we disagreed with the reduction in the threshold for mobilising the Fund , so that it is the European Union countries with the highest gross domestic product which will clearly benefit most .
In line with everything we have done to date , in addition to amending the issues highlighted above , we will continue to fight for the following aspects , inter alia : recognition of the specific nature of Mediterranean natural disasters ; adaptation of the Solidarity Fund in terms of time limits ( having witnessed unjustifiable and unacceptable delays in its mobilisation and the delivery of Community funds to victims ) ; adaptation of the Solidarity Fund in terms of eligible actions , particularly with regard to the specific nature of various natural disasters such as drought and fire ; inclusion within the eligible actions of support for re-establishing productive activity in areas affected by disasters , and also operations to provide emergency land-based and airborne equipment for fighting forest fires .
With regard to all initiatives in the area of civil protection , we consider that the priority should be promoting prevention and improving the civil protection resources of each Member State , and also their coordination .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is the expectation of Europe to be pro-active .
Citizens in affected areas cannot understand why it should take months before Europe , caught up in its own procedures , can grant clarity .
How does it work ?
Something happens somewhere and a few hours later , you can watch it all on TV and you find yourself thinking , this area needs our help and solidarity .
This is followed by a deafening silence .
We are then caught between the national state and European offices .
What is frustrating is that there is no communication at that point .
It is stuck in the Council , and has been for the past two years , but surely we should be able to find out what the reason is for the obstruction and hear alternatives .
This is the big issue .
Shortly , in six months ' time , Parliament will be outgoing .
When we will have a new Parliament , we will be expected to hand over this dossier , without having achieved our goals , with sound proposals on the table .
The French Presidency is involved in everything other than this dossier .
Nothing has happened with it , and we should particularly like to hear why that should be .
I should like to congratulate the European Commission though .
Mrs Hübner and her colleagues have definitely made some headway with it , and it should be possible to remove the obstruction completely by joining forces .
In a naming and shaming exercise , we have to say that the Council and the French Presidency have failed on this score .
( DE ) Mr President , when do citizens need the solidarity of Europe ?
When do Member States need the solidarity of the European Union ?
Primarily , of course , in the event of disaster .
This is precisely the question that I asked in connection with the vote on the fourth cohesion report this spring .
Mr President , today we are discussing revising the Solidarity Fund to arm ourselves better for future challenges and to allow us to provide rapid and effective aid .
The Commission and Parliament are , according to their resolutions , of one mind concerning the objectives of this legislative initiative .
In July this year , I asked the Council about the status of this procedure .
It informed me that , unlike Parliament , it saw no need for an initiative at the current time .
In view of the fact that a former French Commissioner and minister stressed the need for revision in his report , I find the Council 's attitude incomprehensible .
I therefore could not ask for a better committee chairman than Mr Galeote , who is not prepared to accept Parliament decisions being disregarded .
I would like to thank him quite specifically for that .
I would call on the French Presidency , as a matter of urgency , to reconsider their attitude towards the citizens of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , this is long overdue , and I would like to thank the rapporteur most warmly .
I think this is one of the core issues that holds Europe together , and it is also a question of solidarity .
It is high time for the Member States to take action in this area .
The EU must provide financial support for those organisations that help us in crisis situations .
Many Member States have suffered devastating natural disasters in recent years : I am thinking of the forest fires that repeatedly occur in Greece , including within the last year , and the floods in Central Europe in 2002 , which also badly affected Austria .
Disasters like these pull the economic rug from under people 's feet .
In such situations , exceptional resources are needed , Mr President , because it is not just about emergency aid , but also about rebuilding centuries of infrastructure .
One Member State on its own does not have those resources .
It should also be borne in mind that , unfortunately , certain States are more prone to these national disasters , and here , too , I am thinking of Austria .
The people of Austria are still talking , with considerable gratitude , about how quickly the EU helped them .
The European Solidarity Fund should not only help to fund reconstruction , but also support emergency organisations .
The work of the voluntary fire service , the Red Cross and other voluntary organisations is priceless : one cannot begin to imagine how much it would cost if such services were not provided on a voluntary basis .
These organisations always help in emergencies and are an indispensable part of the social structure in rural areas .
We therefore urgently need to take action to maintain and expand these aid structures .
I hope that we will reach agreement here quickly , so that we do not regret it when another disaster occurs and we cannot act quickly enough .

( BG ) As the rapporteur Mr Galeote and a number of other Members pointed out , the Solidarity Fund is a necessary instrument whose very name and purpose is to fulfil one of the most important principles of the European Union - that of solidarity among the Member States .
During the time the Fund has been in use , omissions and failings have become evident , and for this reason reform is required to remedy these failings , and to respond to the dangers that face us .
As has been mentioned , there is a reform mechanism and the European Parliament has stated its position .
The important thing is to account for all potential problems that the Fund may encounter so that it can become an instrument that is genuinely useful and people feel that something is getting done .
Nobody needs a useless instrument which has the potential to be used , but which in practice hardly works at all .
At the same time , let us state quite clearly , that the greatest effect is achieved through quick response .
We are still very far from achieving an effective system .
The smaller Member States do not have the resources of the larger ones , while cooperation and coordination at European level is something we can only dream of .
And , as has been pointed out , it does not always necessarily mean more cash .
This summer in my country , Bulgaria , there was a huge fire in the Rila Mountains , the most picturesque and inaccessible mountains in the country , which we were only able to contain with the help of French firefighting helicopters , and we are deeply grateful for them .
But organising and coordinating the operation cost too much valuable time .
The citizens of the European Union are impatient for effective decisions , and not necessarily large amounts of funding .
Effective decisions , which as Mr Beaupuy said , could even save us money .

Mr President , we are all aware that the background and the origins of the European Solidarity Fund lie in the devastating floods in Central Eastern Europe in 2002 ; its necessity was further cemented by other natural disasters such as the forest fires in Greece .
And recently the flooding in my own constituency in Northern Ireland brought it home to me how important this is .
Despite widespread support and enthusiasm for the Fund expressed by Parliament and the Commission and among EU citizens , the Council 's reluctance to cooperate is hindering its full implementation .
Surely the European Union wishes to grant assistance to Member States which have experienced natural disaster .
This aid must be administered in a swift and responsive manner in order to have any chance of being effective .
However , the Council is currently placing obstacles in the way which are preventing the smooth operation of the Fund .
I am glad therefore that the tabling of this oral question and its urgency is a matter which is highlighted by the Committee .
Furthermore I would like to stress the part of the question posed by the Committee , which asked which Member States are opposed to the Fund , and please tell us why .
The Solidarity Fund is an extremely important mechanism for the European Union to have at its disposal .
However , problems of its implementation have dragged on for far too long and in my opinion this needs to be resolved as soon as possible .
It matters nothing whether it is floods or forest fires , when people are in trouble they need help and assistance and above all they require financial support , upfront and speedily ; not like the present system that has taken months and years and has been stifled totally by bureaucracy .
If you really want to do something positive , this is it and will bring you more credit to Europe than any of your other proposals or all of them put together .
I want to make it very clear to the Council .
The Council disagreed because , in my opinion - and it is only my opinion - they do not want Parliament , and more importantly , they do not want the Members of this Parliament in the local region , where we are more important than you , the Commission or they , the Council .
Because when something happens the people look to the Members .
They do not look to the Commission and they do not look to the Council and they do not know who you are .
You are an untouchable , faceless , bureaucratic body in Brussels .
So it is the Members - so do not run away from it - we , the Parliament , are the people who are out there with the people all the time and we need that support .
I have never heard such feeble excuses in all my life ; it is time to get this done .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we usually say that we are a Union whose basic principle is solidarity .
Today our citizens need a Union which can put this principle into practice .
They need actions , not just words .
Today we call on the Council to take account of the citizens ' expectations and show that it is up to the job as far as the Solidarity Fund is concerned .
All of us in our countries have experienced the effects of what are frequently occurring natural disasters .
We have all witnessed the despair of our fellow citizens who have been affected and we all know and understand how important it is for these citizens to feel that the European Union is standing by them .
In May 2006 , the European Parliament adopted the European Commission 's plan for a new Solidarity Fund , a new , faster and more flexible and effective fund , which it was planning to implement in the period 2007-2013 , but which has so far been collecting dust on the Council 's desk .
I honestly cannot understand how we can possibly have such a good instrument and yet not implement it .
The European Union needs the new Solidarity Fund now more than ever .
- ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Committee of the Regions I had a chance to see with my own eyes the storm-damaged forests in the Slovakia 's High Tatra mountains , the fires in Portugal and the floods in the Czech Republic .
In discussions with local people I fully realised how the use of European funds to repair the damage and regenerate the Tatra national park was strongly felt to be a concrete manifestation of European solidarity .
The solidarity fund is able in certain crisis situations to assist individual states and thereby to give a major boost to the sense of belonging to a wider Europe .
Unfortunately , the actual administration of this fund is not very efficient , so help often arrives after many months of delay .
Therefore the European Parliament has been trying for a long time to change the legal framework in order for the law to be able to consider fresh needs when using these financial resources and enabling the provision of rapid and effective help in a shorter period of time .
In view of global climate changes it can be expected that catastrophes involving floods , droughts , storms and fires will become more frequent on our old continent .
There are also new threats in the form of terrorist attacks and health pandemics .
In reality individual states are attempting on a bilateral basis to cooperate and are organising joint exercises and events for their emergency services .
They are thus indirectly supporting some of the ideas on civil defence outlined by Michel Barnier in 2006 .
Unfortunately , that discussion has yet to be continued .
Ladies and gentlemen , rapid responses , the more effective use of the Solidarity Fund and international cooperation in preventing and attempting to counter the effects of catastrophes are very hot topics , particularly ahead of the forthcoming European elections .
I therefore fully understand the questions that have been submitted and I call on the European Commission and the Council to resolve the situation quickly .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Community created the Solidarity Fund with the stated purpose of enabling it to respond in a rapid , efficient and flexible manner in cases of dire emergencies .
It cannot be said , however , that promptness and efficiency characterise the Council when it comes to formulating a common stand .
Unfortunately , the greatest natural disasters do not wait for the formulation of a common stand .
In spite of positive results obtained since the existence of the Solidarity Fund , further improvements are needed in order to be able to deliver aid more rapidly and efficiently to those in need .
There are enormous challenges facing us , and for this reason I cannot understand why the years go by without the Council taking any decision .
Our citizens ' understanding will be even harder to gain than mine .
We must not allow further delay , but need to strive for a debate that leads to results , and come to an agreement as soon as possible in order to meet the challenges posed by more and more frequent natural catastrophes . Thank you for your attention .
- ( BG ) In recent years we have had to face increasing numbers of disasters , both natural and man-made .
These disasters have resulted not just in serious financial , but unfortunately also in human , losses .
Over the past few years we have had to deal with floods , drought and forest fires in Bulgaria .
This weekend Bulgaria experienced an earthquake , which fortunately was not very strong .
Although little consolation , it does confirm the need for an effective European Solidarity Fund .
I would like to point out that we are not the only country in Europe to suffer from such disasters .
Neighbouring Greece , for example , had to deal with devastating forest fires in 2007 .
This means we have to do more to deal with the consequences of these disasters .
It is clear that we need changes in the regulations to provide more flexible tools .
As Mr Berend correctly concluded in his report in 2006 , we have to speed up the delivery of aid and decrease the amount of red tape involved .
We must ensure that the aid reaches citizens when it is needed , and not days or even weeks afterwards .
That is why I welcome the reduction in the threshold and the implementation of new fast-track payments which are an expression of real solidarity .
Another aspect that is very important is that the new revised proposal also covers industrial disasters .
If in Bulgaria , for example , we have an oil pipeline explosion or a shipping accident , this would also qualify for aid from the Solidarity Fund .
And finally I would like to put forward an idea about funding .
We could in the long term think of financing instruments such as the Solidarity Fund by using part of the monies that are lost under the ' N + 2 ' and ' N + 3 ' rules .
For the time being , though , we need to concentrate on real change , and that is why I urge the Commission , and in particular the Council , to support the modification of the European Solidarity Fund .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Solidarity Fund is an important tool for the exercise of social policy in Member States hit by natural disasters .
It is a practical expression of solidarity with European citizens affected by such disasters and it is through such procedures that we do justice to the vision of active support by the European Union for its citizens .
The important contribution of the Fund in dealing with major disasters was demonstrated during the floods in central Europe , the earthquakes in Italy and the fires in Portugal and in my country , Greece , in 2007 , and it is telling that a large number of Member States have used appropriations from the Fund .
At the same time , with the current regulation and the existing resources , the European Union cannot respond to other such crises which are not due solely to natural causes , such as industrial pollution , a pandemic in Europe , droughts and such like .
The proposed reform of the regulation covers broader requirements , speeds up procedures , introduces the innovation of advance payments and generally takes practical and positive measures .
This being so and given that the European Parliament has adopted the Commission 's proposal , I fail to see the reasons and causes for the delay in ratifying the regulation .
It is comforting , Commissioner , that you made clear your support for our views in your stand today .
This delay is not in keeping with the spirit of solidarity which should govern us .
The Council bears a great deal of responsibility and we hope that it will respond to the call by the European Parliament and assume it immediately , even though it is absent today .
- ( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , fellow Members , first of all , I would like to say how happy I am that we are finally having a debate on this topic .
I hope that today 's debate will also produce the results which the Commissioner has already promised us .
We all know that the current procedures for actually accessing the Solidarity Fund take a long time .
I am therefore proposing that the Union 's budget be amended .
For example , when Romania wanted to obtain aid from the Solidarity Fund following the floods which took place in the spring / summer of 2005 , it had to wait around a year to receive the money .
The provision of the Regulation stipulates that the application should be submitted no later than ten weeks after the disaster takes place and the total value of the losses must be given , which helps to classify the type of disaster .
It is rather difficult to meet these requirements when floods are involved , for instance .
In order to evaluate the losses properly , the water needs to be drained off completely .
This does not depend in any circumstances on national institutions and authorities .
The next procedure is for the Commission to verify compliance with the conditions , primarily those of a major disaster .
This requires a good deal of time , including additional information and clarifications .
Finally , after the amended budget has been approved , the Commission prepares and approves the decisions for awarding the grants .
This is ultimately followed by the transfer of funds , which must be spent within a year at the latest .
In practical terms , this money reimburses the expenses already paid out by the beneficiary state following the disaster it has been through .
On the basis of these conditions , we all ask ourselves whether this is really emergency aid .
I would like to conclude by saying that rejecting the Commission 's proposal to modify the Regulation after discussing it in the Working Group of the Financial Counsellors , without consulting the ' Structure Action ' group , may lead to the conclusion that , in practical terms , the finance ministers were not in agreement .
This conclusion creates numerous problems for us , especially in the current climate with so many problems and at Member State level too .
Mr President , some of the best questions are raised late in the evening and this is one of them , although there is an element of ' the dialogue of the deaf ' because we do not have the Council here to hear this debate .
There are two words which we talk about a great deal in Europe : one is ' subsidiarity ' and the other , ' solidarity ' .
Subsidiarity is about respecting the Member States and their rights and solidarity , in my view , reflects the commonality of the European Union and our support for each other .
So , why does this fund not work to do that ?
Indeed , one of the dangers and the damage as a result of its failure to work is that we make announcements about funding being available and then fail to deliver because the system is complex , bureaucratic and very unwieldy for communities and for individuals to work with .
It is , I presume , about budget and about money , ultimately .
I listened very carefully to the comments of the Commissioner responsible for Financial Programming and Budget last week about many things , from the common agricultural policy to other issues but , in particular , calling for a more flexible budget , a budget to react swiftly to world events rather than the European Union running after events .
I am sorry that she did not speak about the need for flexibility to react to events in the European Union because I think that is what we are talking about here this evening .
I come from a country which has said ' no ' to the Lisbon Treaty , where we talk increasingly about trying to bring citizens closer to the European Union , and the best way to do that is to see Europe in action rather than in words .
I am afraid that there are too many announcements about things in the European Union and too little action on the ground where people see it working .
On a positive note there was a survey this morning in the papers which suggests that the Irish public are looking perhaps at changing their minds on Lisbon .
So I would hate you to leave the Chamber despondent .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this oral question put to the European Commission by Gerardo Galeote , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , is totally justified and relevant .
The reasons why the Council has blocked reform of the Solidarity Fund , given its inability to reach agreement on a common position that would allow the legislative process to continue , should be spelt out .
It is difficult to see what reasons there might be for the Council 's position , except perhaps mean financial reasons .
Does the Council not want a more agile and immediate response to the natural disasters that occur ?
Does the Council not want this type of speedy response to be available for any other type of disaster , such as major industrial disasters , acts of terrorism or public health emergencies ?
It is vital that a clear answer is given to these questions , just as it is also vital to clarify what the European Commission thinks about this situation and whether it intends to take any steps to unblock the legislative process .
The value of solidarity must also be fully ensured in this area .
Citizens really would not understand if this did not happen .
( PL ) Mr President , this fund is one by which citizens often judge the European Union .
In recent years we have observed a growing number of natural disasters , which have been increasingly violent in nature .
Time and again we hear of floods , droughts , fires or storms in various Member States .
They are not the only problems .
We need to make it possible to get aid in events like chemical spillages , explosions , industrial fires or accidents at nuclear power stations .
We also have to be prepared for new challenges , such as countering terrorist attacks and dealing with their aftermath .
Neither should we forget crisis situations concerning the health of our citizens , or animal diseases .
In the face of such threats , the cost of drugs , vaccinations and equipment are a great obstacle to dealing with these situations .
The Fund must be elastic so it can adequately respond to situations , and do so comprehensively .
The procedure for applying for aid also has to be as simple as possible .
( PL ) Mr President , today Commissioner Hübner finds herself in a very difficult situation .
She has to reply on behalf of the Council , which has no representatives present .
During the Danish presidency in 2002 , when there was a flash flood , they managed to mobilise themselves and prepare the relevant documents in a matter of weeks .
Today we should accuse the four presidencies for this sluggishness in reforming the Solidarity Fund .
We need this Fund .
The aid from it should not just be a token of our solidarity , but needs to be fast and effective , with a minimum of red tape .
I believe that we need to address two issues here .
One is how the Solidarity Fund should be managed , and in what situations , and the other is how to use other resources , from other funds , such as the Cohesion Fund , for long-term disaster prevention activities .
But this is a separate subject .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Commissioner a question .
At one time the question was discussed of setting up a ' rapid reaction instrument ' and of readiness for major disasters , with a budget for this eventuality of approximately EUR 200 million .
I do not know what is happening with this project , which is also related to the issue under discussion .
( DE ) Mr President , it is unusual to be given the floor again under the ' catch the eye ' procedure , but I just wanted to reiterate at the end of the debate that the criticisms expressed this evening are for the most part not directed at the Commission at all .
The Commission has continually helped us in drafting the revisions to this Treaty , and it has always been on Parliament 's side in the efforts to implement them .
It is the Council that is at fault , and we wanted to phrase this question so that we could express our criticisms to the Council .
The fact that it is not present shows contempt for Parliament , and we should not put up with being fobbed off like this .
Mrs Hübner , you have our full support in all your dealings with the Council attempting to get this revised fund off the ground .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have three explanations to present to you .
This is not an emergency aid solidarity fund ; it is a fund which is based on reimbursement of specific costs for emergency operations after disasters , allowing for a return to normal living conditions .
The Commission proposes ; Parliament and the Council decide .
Secondly , in the Regulation amendment we propose to enlarge the scope , we propose to lower the threshold and we propose to change the procedure allowing specifically for the advance payment .
Thirdly , the list of my interventions , and those of President Barroso , with seven presidencies is a very long list ; it takes practically two pages , the list of all the meetings and letters .
None of the seven presidencies , although some of them initially presented positive attitudes , managed to get agreement in the Council for approving the amendment to the Regulation .
I refused to withdraw the proposal from the Council , hoping that with the new report that we will produce and adopt as the Commission early next year we will have a new debate which will allow us to go on with amendments ; maybe we are now also having new ideas , maybe a broader scope of amendments to this Fund .
In that regard , I hope very much that you will be present and participate in this debate and will support the proposal of the Commission .
Briefly on another issue , prevention , we will adopt at the end of this year a communication ' Towards a comprehensive new approach to preventing disasters ' .
We have already completed the two exploratory studies , we have also completed consultations and the impact assessment is currently in preparation .
Also , cohesion policy - somebody , I think Mr Janowski , suggested involving cohesion policy in prevention actions - has as one of its priorities precisely preventive actions , especially in the area of environment .
That is all , Mr President .
I hope that we will continue to work together with a view to getting this Fund amended in such a way that it will be more important and more responsive to the needs of European citizens .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Parliament and the Commission reached an agreement over two years ago to extend the scope of the Solidarity Fund so that it covers not just natural disasters but also industrial accidents , terrorist attacks and major public health crises .
The agreement specifies that particular attention will be paid to the outermost regions even if they do not meet the eligibility criteria in full , so that they receive emergency aid in the case of unforeseen happenings .
However , this reform has still not come into force , as the Council has not managed to reach a decision , with the result that the adoption of a common position has been delayed even further .
In spite of the fact that this Fund has recently been harnessed to help Réunion following Cyclone Gamede , and Martinique and Guadeloupe , both victims of Hurricane Dean , uncertainty remains about the admissibility of each request , because the Council did not take a swift decision on this reform .
The Commission should also review its proposals with the aim of strengthening the Union 's civil protection capacity , in order to exploit the expertise and geographical location of the outermost regions and the OCTs , which aspire to be support points in the event of intervention outside Europe .
On both these issues , the outermost regions expect an ambitious response from the EU in order to guarantee their security .
Improving consumer education and awareness on credit and finance ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Iotova , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on protecting the consumer : improving consumer education and awareness on credit and finance .
The report on financial education which will be put to the vote at tomorrow 's plenary session is more important than ever .
It is clear that the financial crisis we are now facing can be avoided if consumers are well informed of the risks that various types of credit entail .
We can definitely say that if in the past we had concentrated more on the financial education of people , we would not be facing the present situation , or at least the crisis would not have assumed the proportions it has .
For the sake of the future we must be sure that our children are given the opportunity to learn and to handle credit cards and loans properly everywhere in Europe .
We have to concentrate on student mortgage loans and pension and investment funds .
These financial products strongly affect the lives of consumers , which is why they must be taken into consideration .
We must not forget that increasing numbers of young people are getting deep into debt without even suspecting what effect this will have on their lives .
We have spent many months working very closely on the texts of the report .
We conducted a very interesting public discussion with representatives of European and US banks and financial institutions right on the eve of the crisis .
Even then the problems had clearly come into focus , and the alarm was sounded .
On the other hand , we were able to see the experience and good practice of financial education in countries which have traditions in this area and which are constantly working to improve it - the UK , France , Germany and elsewhere , and we heard the opinions of those who are taking their first steps in this field .
I am pleased with the results of the vote on the report in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and by the Commission 's decision on the budgets needed to provide assistance on the project .
We also received many encouraging responses from leading financial instructions on the initiative report .
I believe we have reached a compromise solution which satisfies all political groups , which is why I hope tomorrow 's vote on the report will be successful .
We can only overcome the present financial crisis through joint efforts , which is why we need to unite and work together on this common initiative .
It is time to act and to ensure that European consumers have the knowledge they need about consumer and other types of credits , so that a similar financial disaster is not repeated .
To achieve this it is extremely important that the Member States implement the measures undertaken and cooperate closely .
And finally I would like to thank the members of the European Commission greatly for the assistance they have given me .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is a very timely report .
It highlights many of the challenges which European consumers are facing in the context of the current financial crisis .
That is why I give many thanks to Mrs Iotova for the outstanding work .
The Commission recognised the importance of financial education for the proper functioning of the internal market in our Communication which was adopted in December last year .
Consumers definitely have to be empowered to take responsible decisions regarding their personal finance , and only in this way will they be able to reap the tangible benefits that come from financial integration in the European Union .
Education is the competence of the Member States .
The Commission 's role in this regard is mainly supportive , but nevertheless important .
The national level is the most appropriate for the delivery of consumer education programmes and it is also the most effective and efficient .
Member States have a key role to play , for example by adopting national financial education strategies based on public / private partnership .
We believe that the Commission 's role is to act as a promoter of financial education EU-wide , showing benefits , coordinating efforts , demonstrating best practice .
In this regard we have implemented several practical initiatives and created the expert group on financial education , which held its first meeting in October , devoted to discussions on the national strategies for financial education .
We have also been advancing the development of the Dolcetta online tools for teachers to make it easier for them to incorporate financial topics into the existing curricula .
Soon we will be publishing the European database for financial education , an electronic library of schemes run by various types of providers .
Finally , the Commission regularly offers its patronage to selected events giving visibility to financial education .
We fully agree with the general thrust of this parliamentary report and the majority of its proposals .
The issue of crucial importance is the education of children and young people , and the Commission shares with Parliament the conviction that financial literacy should be taught at school .
We are ready and willing to assist Member States in developing their basic educational programmes in the field of personal finances , and a similar concern applies to the idea of tasking the Commission with running EU information and media campaigns on financial education .
Such awareness-raising campaigns should be tailored to the specific needs of the audience and are most efficient when run at the national or even local level .
Again we are ready to assist .
I would like to conclude by thanking Parliament for its good work on this file and look forward to continuing the dialogue between Parliament and the Commission on the important issues of consumer financial education .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) Ignorance of the law does not exempt us from its consequences , in much the same way as ignorance of financial mechanisms does not exempt us from the losses suffered .
Finance and banking institutions and insurance companies had and still have an obligation to provide consumers with ' user instructions ' for financial instruments so that they can make enlightened decisions .
This is why I believe that the need to educate Europe 's citizens in financial , banking and insurance matters by governmental and non-governmental institutions is a good solution for those who really want this .
However , providing information to the citizens who use these instruments must be a duty performed by the providers of services in this area .
I think that it is the obligation of the EU Commission and Member States to warn and inform Europe 's citizens about the harmful nature of particular products or services and to regulate the European market so that these harmful products or services cannot appear on the market .
I would like to conclude by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Iotova , and our colleagues from the Committee on International Trade and Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the efficient way in which they drafted this resolution .
in writing . - ( SK ) The crisis over risky mortgage loans has confirmed that the level of financial awareness among EU citizens is low .
Consumers are not sufficiently familiar with the risks of bankruptcy and excessive debt .
Information on financial products from financial institutions , mainly provided through advertisements , is hard to understand and sometimes confusing .
They do not provide consumers with enough information prior to signing contracts .
The job of informing consumers about finance and loans should begin in school , where the consumers of tomorrow should be familiarised with the products of the banking sector .
Particular emphasis must be placed on programmes for young people , pensioners and vulnerable groups .
I firmly believe that the Commission should create a budget item for financial education programmes at an EU level , which could bring together all of the relevant bodies , such as the state , non-governmental organisations , consumer organisations and financial institutions .
I would like particularly to emphasise the role of the consumer organisations at a Community level and also at an intra-state level , since they know best the special needs of the target groups in the area of educational programmes .
Many Member States fail to assign adequate funding in their budgets to consumer protection policies and fail to give attention or financial support to the activities of consumer organisations .
There are few consumers who can afford the services of personal financial advisers and I therefore firmly believe that consumers should be provided with independent advice on proper training courses via EU educational programmes and within the framework of consumer organisations .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Iotova for the subject matter dealt with by this report .
I consider financial education to be a very important topic .
At the moment in Romania , we are facing the problem of people who are no longer managing to pay their debts because they have taken out credit from different banks .
Not only have they been badly advised about the implications of this credit , but they have not been given any kind of adequate financial education to allow them to decide which financial service might suit them better .
We must not confuse financial education with information supplied to consumers .
Financial education programmes need to be developed according to the age groups and needs of the various sections of the population .
I hope that the Dolceta service will be translated into Romanian and Bulgarian as soon as possible so that all the citizens of the Member States can benefit from it .
Consumer Markets Scoreboard ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Anna Hedh , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
Mr President , The internal market is an extremely important part of the European cooperation , but for many consumers it is nothing more than a vague concept .
Irrespective of how well we recognise its importance , rules and provisions , we are all consumers and are all affected by how the internal market operates .
I have always maintained that if we have satisfied and confident European consumers , we will also have an internal market that operates efficiently and thrives .
In order to win this trust , we must make the internal market more efficient and sensitive to citizens ' expectations and problems .
This does not necessarily mean more or stricter legislation and rules imposed by the EU .
Information , education and self-regulation can often be a more appropriate and more effective solution .
Irrespective of how we solve the problems , the aim must always be to ensure that we safeguard consumers ' rights so that they can make good and well-founded decisions .
This is , of course , also a good thing for the market itself .
Therefore , the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and I welcome the Consumer Markets Scoreboard that the Commission presented at the request of the Committee .
We believe that it could be an important tool for the future development of consumer policy .
The internal market comprises around 500 million consumers and has a large supply of goods and services .
It is , of course , impossible to examine in detail all aspects of the internal market .
It is therefore important to use analytic resources where they are actually needed most .
I welcome the five areas that the Commission has focused on , namely complaints , price levels , satisfaction , switching and safety .
These five main indicators are relevant and applicable , even if there will , over time , be a need to further develop and improve them and maybe also to include some new categories .
I would also like to stress the importance of raising awareness of the Scoreboard amongst consumers themselves and the general public .
It is therefore important for it to be written in an easily accessible language .
Moreover , the Scoreboard should be visible on relevant websites .
Finally , I would like to say that it will take time to develop the Scoreboard , partly because we have made very different degrees of progress in the different Member States with regard to consumer policy and consumer protection , but also because we are different , with different cultures and different traditions .
We must be patient and give this Consumer Markets Scoreboard time .
I would also like to take the opportunity to thank Commissioner Kuneva and her secretariat , as well as my own secretariat , for their extremely constructive cooperation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Scoreboard initiative came into existence less than a year ago and during that time the Commission has greatly appreciated Parliament 's interest and support .
The Scoreboard has been the subject of many debates in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and we have learnt a lot from these debates and from the suggestions made .
Thank you very much for all that , but especially thanks to Ms Anna Hedh for the excellent report .
Let me reiterate briefly why the Consumer Market Scoreboard is so important for all of us .
If we are to deliver to consumers , we need to be more responsive to their expectations and better understand the problems they are facing in their day-to-day lives .
To do so , we need an evidence base that shows how markets perform in terms of economic and social outcomes for consumers , and how consumers behave on the market .
Sound policy-making requires accurate data , and we fully share your view on this .
The Scoreboard brings together evidence to identify markets that risk not delivering well for consumers and therefore need further attention .
It also allows progress in retail market integration to be tracked , and helps to benchmark the consumer environment in Member States , particularly in terms of compliance with consumer legislation , enforcement , redress , and consumer empowerment .
We share your views on which indicators to include in this Scoreboard , and we believe that the establishment of a harmonised EU-wide database of consumer complaints will be an essential step forward .
It will allow us to detect problems in consumer markets at an early stage and , if necessary , to take appropriate action .
The Commission firmly believes that it is important to include price data , since prices are one of consumers ' principal concerns .
The current political and economic climate further reinforces the need for good price data .
We need to send a clear signal to our consumers that we are keeping an eye on how prices compare across the internal market .
The Commission can assure you that it is fully aware of the complexity of this issue , and will of course interpret this data carefully and make sure the data are put in the right context .
Prices may diverge across the internal market for sound economic reasons , but also because of market malfunctioning , and our aim is to find ways to tell the difference .
We share Ms Hedh 's view on the importance of close cooperation with Member States .
This year , the Commission started to work together with national policy-makers , statistical offices , enforcement authorities and consumer organisations to further develop the Scoreboard indicators , and we will continue with this cooperation in the coming years .
Ms Hedh has stressed that we should make this Scoreboard more accessible to a larger public and that we should raise awareness .
The Commission accepts this point , and will step up efforts to do so .
I invite you to see the results in the second edition of the Scoreboard .
Finally , what the Commission wishes to take from Ms Hedh 's report - although I could quote many other points if I had more time - is the wish for more empowerment indicators such as literacy and skills .
Within the framework of Eurostat 's revised European Social Survey Programme , the Commission plans to run a module on consumer empowerment through which it wants to measure consumer skills , consumer information and awareness of rights and assertiveness .
This would allow us to start drawing up a statistical snapshot of Europe 's citizens in their capacity as consumers .
We see this as the main subject of the pilot project proposed by the Parliament for 2009 .
Let me conclude by again thanking Ms Hedh for the interest and support , not least in financial terms .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( BG ) I welcome Anna Hedh 's report on the Consumer Markets Scoreboard and its aim of making the internal market more sensitive to the expectations and concerns of citizens .
Over the past 19 years of Bulgaria 's so-called democratic transition , we have had our fill of various privatisation solutions put forward by the ruling authorities in Bulgaria .
A striking case is when proven thieves from the ČEZ Měření power company were allowed into the Bulgarian domestic market .
The gentlemen of ČEZ , whom we of ATAKA have long identified as blatant gangsters , have been indicted in their own country .
32 of their employees have been arrested for blackmailing customers whom they accused of stealing electricity .
But obviously too busy with corruption , the tripartite coalition in Bulgaria did not consider this reason enough to throw these criminals out , as the governments of Canada and Hungary did , and so ČEZ continues to rob and blackmail the Bulgarian taxpayer under the guise of their neat little privatisation agreements .
I believe that the adoption of the Consumer Markets Scoreboard will improve the tools for keeping tabs on sectors which need to be investigated for weaknesses and infringements , will involve the national consumer protection authorities in preserving the quality of social services , and will help to restore consumer confidence in the internal market .
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection of the European Parliament has the priority aim of improving the position of European consumers in the internal market .
It is constantly calling on the Commission and the Member States to research what consumers think about the internal market and particularly what they need .
The main precondition for an effective and well-functioning internal market is consumer confidence .
Recognising the advantages of the evaluation table for the internal market which has been used since 1997 , the committee has called on the Commission to submit a proposal for an evaluation table for consumer markets as an instrument for assessing the market from a consumer perspective as well .
Complaints , pricing levels , satisfaction , interfaces and security are the five main indicators used in the evaluation table .
The committee realises that since this will be the first ever evaluation table for consumer markets , some of these indicators will have to be replaced with new ones in the future .
The indicator referring to pricing levels is particularly doubtful .
I agree with the opinion of the rapporteur , Anna Hedh , that the table should be properly promoted through the media and placed on the relevant websites .
My preference would be for the Commission to provide financial support for a public awareness campaign which would be carried out by the consumer organisations .
Due to their experience in the area of consumer policy , they will know the best way to get the table across to consumers .
I firmly believe that the table will have to capture the interest of consumers if it is to become an important instrument for the future development of consumer policy .
Supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Christian Ehler Ehler , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Brandenburger I would of course particularly like to greet Mrs Hübner .
I would like to give a brief overview of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy 's report on a Commission communication on CCS demonstration facilities .
If we are to meet the energy and climate change targets adopted by the European Union , it is clear that one of the most decisive factors is reducing CO2 emissions , in which connection coal , as a fossil fuel , has an essential role to play .
On the other hand , we in Europe are currently faced with a dilemma .
We have three goals in environment and energy policy : the first is environmental protection , the second is security of supply , and the third is price stability , which goes hand in hand with security of supply and is particularly important in economically difficult times such as these .
It is clear to all of us in Europe that coal is the only fossil fuel , Europe 's only fossil energy source , that is thus strategically important for these three goals .
However , without CCS technology , in other words without clean coal technology , this fuel will have no future .
The Commission 's proposal to support the urgently needed demonstration projects is therefore welcomed by the majority of the committee .
The Commission has put a very sensible proposal on the table .
We need - and the majority of the committee agrees on this - to provide incentives as quickly as possible for the use of CCS technology on an industrial scale .
However , a majority in Parliament therefore feels - and we have said this quite explicitly - that financial support for clean coal technology is absolutely indispensable to Europe 's energy and climate change goals .
The proposal by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is therefore very specific , with funds from the Seventh Framework Programme on research and also from anticipated emissions trading allowances to support the construction of at least 12 demonstration facilities .
These facilities need to combine the various technologies with the various storage and transport options , and they should be spread as widely as possible across Europe .
We are cautiously optimistic to see the first signs of movement from the Commission in the current trilogue negotiations on the CCS and ETS Directives .
With the same cautious optimism , we take the view that we must manage , in the trilogue negotiations , not just to clarify the future framework conditions for CCS but also to lay solid foundations for funding the vital preliminary trial facilities .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank Mr Ehler very much for his report on the communication of the Commission on supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels .
We appreciate the general support in the report for our policy objectives and for the recognition of the important role CCS can play in combating climate change worldwide .
The report also clearly recognises the urgent need for up to 12 large-scale demonstration projects to make CCS commercially viable by 2020 .
Our communication has to be seen as a part of the complete and comprehensive climate and energy package which includes the CCS Directive , which sets the legal framework for allowing operation of CCS technologies in Europe , the emission trading system , which provides the economic and commercial framework for CCS , and the Commission 's proposal that suggests that 20 % of the auction revenues are earmarked by Member States for investment in low-carbon technologies , such as CCS .
No matter what the final decision is , the auctioning revenues will be one of the substantial financing sources for CCS demonstration projects .
Finally , our communication also suggests the creation at the beginning of 2009 of a European coordination structure to support CCS demonstration projects through knowledge-sharing , joint communication activities and other joint actions .
I appreciate your general endorsement of the climate and energy package and especially the communication .
However , the report also states that the efforts of the Commission might not be sufficient to reach the aim stated by the Council of having up to twelve demonstration projects .
I understand this concern .
To address the financing issue , an amendment to the ETS proposal has been adopted by the Committee on the Environment proposing to use EUR 500 million allowances from the new entrance reserve to finance CCS demonstration projects .
The Commission has sent a policy option paper to Parliament in order to help build consensus in the Council , too , to ensure sufficient financing of low-carbon technologies .
In the report two other issues are also raised with which the Commission cannot fully agree at this point in time .
First , the report calls on the Commission to produce a detailed assessment of the costs and the share of private and public funding of each of the twelve demonstration facilities .
Let me say in this context that the demonstration projects will only be identified after competitive tenders organised either at European or at Member State level .
Cost assessments are currently underway but they can only provide rough cost estimates as each project is unique .
Secondly , it also suggests the use of resources from the risk-sharing finance facility to support CCS .
As resources here have been fully committed , as you know , any change would require amendments to the Seventh Framework Programme .
So let me conclude by thanking you for the excellent work on the report , and I hope also that Parliament will keep the overall direction and objectives of the report in the vote .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , one of the European Union 's goals is an ambitious climate protection plan up to 2020 , known as the 3 x 20 objective .
The instruments for its implementation include the introduction of auctioning into the emission trading scheme and of CCS technologies after 2015 .
However , the emission limit of 500g CO2 / kWh to be imposed after 2015 is technically unachievable , even for modern coal-fired power plants .
It would therefore represent a sort of moratorium on building coal-fired power stations , and thus endanger energy security .
CCS technologies could also be used in industries which generate large CO2 streams as a waste product , for instance in pig iron smelting .
For this reason , Member States most dependent on coal should even now start building demonstration plants , so as to acquire the relevant experience .
This will require immediate financial support , since any funds generated by emission trading after 2013 will arrive too late .
In Poland , for instance , we should now be building two to three such facilities using different CCS technologies .
What I have in mind are modern hard coal- or brown coal-fired power plants using different methods of CO2 storage in porous geological formations or underground reservoirs .
, in writing . - ( HU ) The question of carbon dioxide capture and storage is today an indispensable part of the discussions about climate change .
We are talking about a very promising technology , which nevertheless has yet to earn the trust of society .
Its future utilisation could serve as a sort of realistic compromise between the unavoidable use of fossil fuels and the aims of climate protection .
Since carbon dioxide capture presupposes considerable long-term investments , it is crucial for the European Union to establish a consistent , stable legal framework .
I think the climate package as amended by Parliament points in all the right directions in this regard .
In a commendable turn , the relevant Parliamentary report proposes issuing free emission quotas to the 10-12 experimental power plants , instead of giving direct financial support .
I deem it imperative that the power plants entitled to free quotas be designated by the European Commission according to the principle of regional balance .
I agree with the rapporteur that in order to promote the new technologies , sources for new research and development must be substantially strengthened - at both Member State and EU levels .
EU support cannot be a substitute for efforts by the private sector .
Provided that carbon capture and storage is really a viable solution , there will be companies willing to take an active role in making the necessary investments .
In addition , it is important to note that support for carbon capture should not divert funds from sustainable energy sources .
The technology being discussed here may be feasible but is by no means the only solution for limiting the effects of climate change .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
Madam President , this discussion will take place this evening , if the plenary votes in favour of the urgent procedure on this issue .
This is an amendment to European legislation that enables us to grant facilities for balances of payments , for countries outside the euro zone .
As we are all aware , the issue at hand is that of Hungary but , unfortunately , I believe that we must look ahead and therefore enhance this facility of the European Union to provide assistance to its Member States , including those that lie outside the euro zone .
I would therefore ask the plenary assembly to kindly vote in favour of this urgent procedure .
Support schemes for farmers under the CAP - Modifications to the common agricultural policy - Support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development - Community strategic guidelines for rural development ( 2007 to 2013 ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing common rules for direct support schemes for farmers under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers - C6-0240 / 2008 - ;
the report by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on modifications to the common agricultural policy by amending Regulations ( EC ) No 320 / 2006 , ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 , ( EC ) No 3 / 2008 and ( EC ) No [ ... ] / 2008 - C6-0241 / 2008 - ;


the report by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) - C6-0242 / 2008 - ;
the report by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 2006 / 144 / EC on the Community strategic guidelines for rural development ( programming period 2007 to 2013 ) - C6-0239 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to welcome you all at the start of this debate .
This is the final act in a long and participatory process of discussion and reflection on the present and future of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
It has proved very arduous work which has involved , over many months , in fact over more than a year , a great deal of cooperation by Parliament , the Council , the Commission and the whole agricultural and rural world in the European Union .
Throughout this period , I have had the opportunity to hear many opinions of organisations representing the agricultural sector and the rural world in various Member States and to dialogue with members of parliament and institutional representatives from many , in fact almost all , Member States and Community institutions , obviously starting here with the European Parliament .
I have taken part in various seminars and conferences and listened carefully to everyone , including through the media , in my search for the best possible synthesis .
I must therefore thank all my colleagues who have enthusiastically participated in this debate and also all the political group coordinators .
In particular I must highlight the role played by Mr Goepel , not only as coordinator of the PPE-DE Group , but also as rapporteur on the own-initiative report which preceded the reports being discussed here today .
I must also thank Chairman Parish for the way in which he conducted the work in our committee and for the excellent cooperation of the secretariat of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , given that they bore the hardest and most technically demanding part of the work .
Finally , I must thank the Commission , as represented by the Commissioner , for its readiness to cooperate , as also demonstrated by its departments , and also Mr Barnier for the way in which he continually corresponded with Parliament , even before the formal start of the French Presidency .
This exercise in enhanced cooperation has proved a good early example of the virtues of codecision , which I hope may enter into force on the full ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , hopefully as soon as possible .
This debate , with all its inherent agreements and disagreements , clearly shows the complexity of European agriculture in all its variety .
It also shows , in exemplary fashion , the importance that Europe , its institutions and Parliament in particular attach to this subject .
The 1 170 amendments tabled to the Commission 's proposals , particularly taking into account the fact that the period available was interrupted by the summer recess , illustrate the wide participation of Members in this debate .
However , the compromises reached between four of the main political groups in Parliament , with nearly 400 amendments on the most important issues being concentrated into six compromises , also reveal the Members ' sense of responsibility , spirit of compromise and readiness to yield ground .
As for the content of the report , which I regard as fairly balanced and capable of responding to current challenges and providing good guidelines for the future , I must say that Parliament acknowledges as positive and accepts many of the Commission 's proposals .
I would highlight the following : confirmation of the need for a common policy as a prerequisite for competitive and environmentally sustainable agriculture in Europe ; the contributions made by the Commission to ensure that the CAP is fairer and more acceptable to society ; the emphasis on simplification and cutting of red tape ; confirmation of the proposal to give more freedom of choice to farmers in defining their productive options ; financial reinforcement of rural development and expansion of its scope to the new challenges ( energy , climate , water , biodiversity ) ; introduction of the principle of progressive modulation ; additional flexibility granted to Member States in managing the CAP ( I am talking about Article 68 ) ; creation of a risk and crisis management system with Community cofinancing , and the positive general direction taken in discussions on the post-2013 model and in the European Union 's response to the World Trade Organization negotiations , aimed at a fair and reciprocal agreement for regulated international trade in agricultural products .
However , the Commission 's proposals also contain aspects which Parliament , and I as rapporteur , regard as less positive .
As I have already mentioned on other occasions , the Commission 's proposals contain , in some aspects , for example with regard to the market management instruments and the milk sector , an overly liberal tone which may prove dangerous just at a time when there is enormous instability and volatility in the markets .
There is also a lack of social sensitivity , which is quite clear in the proposal to exclude small farmers .
I also think that the Commission 's proposal with regard to social and territorial cohesion is off course , given that it suggests ending the payment redistribution mechanism under the new modulation .
I also think that the Commission has not taken due account of certain sectors which are particularly vulnerable to the current crisis in the markets and which face a serious risk of abandonment given the proposed timetable and rate of decoupling up to 2013 .
This is the case with the sheep sector and that is why we have agreed to call these small CMOs ( common organisation of the markets ) as , although small , they are very significant and very politically , economically and socially important to certain regions of Europe where alternatives are very hard to find .
The report and the vote in the Committee on Agriculture aimed , by a large majority , to correct some of these less positive aspects .
The five compromises adopted in relation to the key elements of modulation are important proposals by Parliament .
These are : the percentage and progressive nature of support for small farmers , giving greater freedom to Member States to set the minimum thresholds ; the retention percentage under Article 68 and the enlargement of its scope ; the broader scope of the insurance system , which is extended to the fishing industry ; the issue of cofinancing of rural development , and the expansion of new challenges .
Many other proposals by Parliament also represent positive contributions .
I would highlight , for example , valuation of the employment factor in calculating the allocation of aid and respect for health and safety at work requirements in relation to the conditions for receiving said aid .
The Committee on Agriculture also adopted a very clear position on the most difficult aspect of this issue , namely the milk sector .
This is a very important issue which must be carefully tackled , given the current market situation .
Despite the profound respect that I have for all points of view , some of which are totally contrary to mine in certain areas , but which still deserve to be respected , I feel that the position adopted in the Committee on Agriculture is fairly sensible .
I should like to see this adopted in plenary and confirmed by the Council with the backing of the Commission .
A prudent increase in production in two years ' time , adding to the 2 % that we have decided on for 2008 , and a final decision early in 2010 on the future of the sector , based on market developments , with a 4 % increase in three years ' time , seems to me to be a fairly sensible position and perhaps the one which could form the final compromise .
I will end , Madam President , by stating my hope that this debate will serve to clarify positions and that we will able to achieve the consensus that agriculture and farmers expect from us .
I hope that we all - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - are up to this challenge .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely pleased to visit this House again and to visit you at a crucial moment , since both Parliament and the Council are seeking a definitive position on this issue of the health check of the common agricultural policy .
We are well aware that this health check is not a fundamental change in approach , as the reform of 2003 was , but a significant adjustment of that reform to a highly changeable situation .
In particular , it makes it possible to respond to a situation that was genuinely unimaginable a few years ago .
Indeed , who could have imagined market trends since 2008 , which have led to a drastic increase in agricultural prices and caused , as we are well aware , food riots just about all over the world ?
This situation has shown the extent to which agriculture remains , for our European continent , a strategic asset , and how much the concept of food sovereignty makes sense in this context of increased volatility in the prices of agricultural products .
However , while the health check only concerns amendments , there are nonetheless many and they are complex , and they form , for us all , a package that is difficult to complete .
The Council has already done a lot of work at all levels to settle many issues .
In this regard , I should like to offer my sincerest thanks for the valuable work carried out by the Slovenian Presidency , which has made it possible to make a very constructive start to work , particularly with regard to the Commission communication .
Furthermore , ladies and gentlemen , it is your rapporteurs , Lutz Goepel and Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , who have done this work on the communication regarding the legislative proposals , on behalf of Parliament .
I should like to offer both of you my sincerest thanks for the quality of your respective reports , which were very thorough and full of proposals .
As you know , I have wanted to work with the European Parliament from the beginning .
I also had experience of working with it when I had the honour of being , for five years , European Commissioner responsible for regional policy and the institutions , and , as I told you , I wanted to work on this issue in the spirit of future codecision .
I have taken a very keen interest in the subsequent work Parliament has carried out in parallel with the work of the Council , and we have all had what we could call a kind of enhanced dialogue between us .
In this regard , I have had very productive and regular discussions on the status of the negotiation , with the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and within Parliament - almost 50 hours of meetings with the European Parliament or among colleagues .
At each decisive stage of the negotiation , we met with the Council , on 27 September and 22 October , after the vote in the Committee on Agriculture , and on 4 November to deal with the final phase of the negotiation and the proceedings of the October Council .
At this point , ladies and gentlemen , I should like specifically to thank the Chairman of your committee , Neil Parish , for his active cooperation throughout this process .
I should also like to thank your group chairmen , Lutz Goepel , Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , Niels Busk , Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf , Vincenzo Aita and Sergio Berlato .





Since we now hold the Presidency , we have regularly kept the Council informed , at ministerial level and at a technical level , of the status of Parliament 's work .
For example , at our last meeting of the Council of Ministers in Luxembourg , I personally informed each minister , in writing , of Parliament 's position regarding each of the items we had to discuss within the Council .
Tomorrow , after you have given your opinion , we , together with Mariann Fischer Boel , will be able to seek a political agreement within this Council .
Before starting , and I mean before starting , the last phase of negotiations , I shall inform the ministers of the outcome of your vote on the health check .
As ever , ladies and gentlemen , finding a compromise is not easy , since there are many significant points outstanding .
These are divisive issues but we are determined - the Presidency is determined - to find , together with the Commission , and in the light of your vote , the best possible dynamic compromise .
The work within the Council has shown that , on many issues , we , as ministers , have similar concerns to those of Parliament .
I shall take two examples : firstly , the search for increased flexibility for Article 68 ; secondly , the retention of exceptional market measures in the event of health crises , Article 44 of the Single CMO Regulation , which will be incorporated in the final compromise .
I can assure you , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that , among the most sensitive issues , there are at least two that are extremely sensitive : the issue of milk and the issue of modulation .
In the Council , we have had debates every bit as in-depth , passionate and lively as those that I have heard or observed here , in Parliament .
The same concerns have been expressed in both our forums .
This morning 's debate and tomorrow 's vote on the health check are therefore very important steps that demonstrate , once again , the vital role of Parliament , which Parliament must continue to fulfil .
In any event , it is in this spirit , namely in the spirit of this enhanced dialogue , in the spirit of codecision , that , for several months , I have wanted to work on behalf of the Presidency .
That is why I am very pleased , as no doubt the Commissioner is too , to listen to you this morning , to answer some of your questions and to have this final discussion with you .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , before going into the more detailed content of this discussion , I would like to thank Mr Capoulas Santos for all the work that has been done on the report .
I certainly do not underestimate the hard work and , as Mr Capoulas Santos mentioned himself , the number of amendments certainly did not make the task any easier in trying to find the middle ground for the landing zone .
We have now spent more than a year together discussing the health check , sometimes in very great detail , firstly on the basis of the Goepel report , and now finally on the basis of the Capoulas Santos report .
I do not think I need to explain my gratitude for the constructive cooperation I have always had with Parliament , and that we have always tried to listen and find a compromise that was not too far away from each other .
As I have limited time , it will be totally impossible for me to go into all the details so I will concentrate on some of the more important ones , starting with the milk sector .
2007 has been a very , perhaps strange , but certainly instructive year .
One thing we learnt during 2007 was that our quota system did not allow supply to meet demand .
As a consequence , we saw prices on dairy products simply go through the roof .
Quite a few farmers said to me this was nice as long as it lasted , but the result was that because of increased production responding clearly to the higher prices , we then saw a very steep drop in prices .
I think we can agree today that the sector is really struggling to get back some of the customers that left the milk or dairy sector because they thought prices were too high .
I see therefore that Parliament is proposing an increase of 1 % but only for two years , so a 2 % increase taken forward to 2010 .
I think it is important that we review the consequences of the decisions that we will be taking in the dairy sector , but 2010 will be too early and I think we should stick to 2011 , whilst clearly indicating that we will be open to discussing everything in 2011 .
The fact is , however , that the quota system expires in 2015 .
I have also learned from all the discussions we have had that there is strong pressure to get this milk fund .
I agree that certain flanking measures should be adapted or adopted , and I am convinced that quite a lot can be done in the new Article 68 .
I acknowledge that the present Article 69 is much too narrow and too restrictive to be used in a forward-looking way , so we are now opening up possibilities in the new Article 68 .
If we can reach a good combination between Article 68 and the new rural development possibilities , then I am quite sure we will find solutions to the specific problems we see in some regions .
On the single payment scheme , on de-coupling , the Commission proposes that we maintain the possibility to couple the payment in two or three areas - suckler cows , sheep and goats - because we acknowledge that you do face specific problems in those three areas .
You also want to keep coupled payments for the male bovine premium , for protein crops and for dried fodder .
My fundamental view is that it is important to decouple the system - this is actually a fundamental element of all the reforms that have been undertaken - and we need to look again at simplification to take any opportunity to simplify our system .
I am , however , open to finding a solution that is less complicated than what we have suggested .
We have suggested a two-step decoupling approach and I might be willing , together with the presidency , to do this in one step but postpone it until 2012 - the last application year - so the effect will be for the 2013 budget year .
You had a point in asking why we should make it more complicated than necessary .
As I said , Article 68 is to be used as a more flexible instrument but with certain limitations , because you want a situation where you can couple 10 % .
I think we should be careful not to have a situation where you decouple via the back door , via Article 68 .
Last but not least on modulation , on rural development and the new challenges , I think we all agree that we need more money to face these new challenges .
Climate change is at the top of our list .
Then we need to find new ways on how to manage our water .
Water is a scarce resource , but an extremely important one for agriculture , especially in some of our southern regions , so we need to use new technologies to use water in the most intelligent way possible to avoid wasting water .
This could be done , but certainly needs money .
That is the reason why I have proposed this transfer from the first to the second pillar : 8 % phased in over the years .
I know that we might come back tomorrow on a compromise on this issue , but I would emphasise that money will certainly be needed , as it will be for biodiversity and for the milk axes that we have been putting into the system .
I will not go into details on progressive modulation .
I know your views and I know that you say now ' 1 , 2 , 3 ' .
I am sure that we will again be able to find a decent compromise on this issue .
I have only touched on some of the major issues , and I am sure that I will have the opportunity to respond after the debate , but I am committed , together with the presidency , to finding a decent compromise .
We all know that you never get everything you want , so I think that it will be a question for all of us to accept that we have to ' swallow some camels ' to be able to find a compromise that will be to the benefit of the European agricultural sector in a more globalised world .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( NL ) Madam President , whilst the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety sets great store by being a reliable authority , this does not mean that you cannot implement major changes ; what it does mean , though , is that you have to announce them well in advance and that people should also be offered alternatives .

Last year , the European Commission submitted a communication about the state of health of the common agricultural policy , which is in need of radical reform .
The intention was to make drastic cuts in direct subsidies and to increase output in terms of environmental protection and employment .
We were ultimately disappointed by how the proposals were fleshed out , involving , as they do , a number of insignificant cuts on direct subsidies .
Farmers should not be subsidised according to past yields or land ownership .
The Environment Committee would like to see this done for the public services they provide , such as extending biodiversity and water management , and for their activities benefiting the environment , animal welfare and food safety that go above and beyond the statutory requirements .
We would like to see this in place from 2020 .
This evening , we are discussing the decline in bee stocks .
In order to improve this situation , it will be necessary to cut down on the use of sprays , and biodiversity will need to be promoted by introducing buffer zones .
Gen technology and the intensive unilateral agriculture are a problem in this connection .
I hope that this evening , as we did this morning , we will commit to a type of agriculture in which arable farming and nature reinforce each other .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have made some progress towards free agricultural markets , both in terms of opening up market regulations and the social and economic cushioning of European policies .
I expressly welcome the fact that the Commission has already taken a positive stance in relation to several proposals from the Parliament .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , who has taken up many of the proposals from the Committee on Regional Development in relation to modulation and rural development .
However , one concern remains for us : we want to exempt more small farms from the additional cuts in resources .
The Committee on Regional Development and a large number of other colleagues believe that the exemption limit should be increased to a maximum of EUR 10 000 .
Commissioner , contrary to the opinion expressed by others , with which we are all familiar , this is not a ridiculous proposal .
On the contrary , our proposal is very serious because it aims to allow farms to plan with certainty as they enter the market economy , and also keeps the promises set out in the agricultural reforms of 2003 .
Smaller farms have been particularly affected by market turbulence in recent months .
For this reason , we should offer them political support .
Of course , this programme could restrict special programmes in specific sectors .
Nonetheless , we must be aware of the fault in the system .
We cannot cut premiums for dairy farmers on the one hand and then point to the milk fund financed in this way as a rescue option .
If money is needed for these structural changes , it must be found in unused agricultural and structural funds .
Agricultural policy will remain contradictory and imponderable as long as it continues to be pushed back and forth in this way .
Therefore , we , the Committee on Regional Development , are calling for planning security for the rural development programmes and for farmers ' incomes .
Both of these will only be possible if we strictly separate the operational approach of compensation payments from regional programmes in the future .
We would now like to see proposals in this direction from the Commission .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , goodness knows that two minutes is very little time in which to deal with one year 's conscientious work on this health check .
There are just a few points I would like to make .
To remind you : in November 2007 , the Commission indicated 8 % modulation plus 45 % degression .
A figure of 4 % progressive modulation , that is to say modulation depending on farm size in the Goepel report , was indicated .
We then heard 8 % basic modulation and 9 % progressive modulation for a total of 17 % as an offer proposed by the Commission and we have recently reached a figure of 5 % during voting in committee .
It was important to us that all modulation resources should remain in the region and should be used , irrespective of the size of the farm or its legal form .
Commissioner , you called for more flexibility for the Member States during the system changeover .
This would mean more opportunities to introduce further decoupling and a move away from historical reference values .
In principle I agree with this .
Debates within the committee have shown that this is not advisable in all areas , as should be remembered in relation to the area of crops in particular as we move away from smaller market organisations .
New challenges and increasing global mobility in the markets require new , flexible mechanisms .
In the dairy sector , we have also succeeded in redefining Article 68 so as to support disadvantaged regions .
Finally we come to milk , the most complicated matter in this evaluation .
Because it is so complicated , I would have preferred us to have dealt with this complex of dairy-related issues with options and complementary measures as a complex report when quotas are abolished in 2010 or 2011 .
However , the milk fund is sizable and will provide additional support to dairy farmers , particularly in disadvantaged areas .
The promotion of investments for dairy farmers without a tied quota throughout the EU should not be scoffed at , as it would reduce the purchasing pressure experienced by businesses .
I have one last personal point : I would like to thank my team for their success in bringing this package to a conclusion by the end of my active period as a Member of Parliament under the French Presidency .
( Applause )


on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Commissioner , Minister , Mr Capoulas Santos , I should like , then , to speak and , as Mr Goebbels said , two minutes on such an important report is not long .
What I would like to say is quite simple .
I would first like to defend the balance of the report proposed today by Mr Capoulas Santos .
It was necessary to update the common agricultural policy , which is the aim of the health check , but , at the same time , it was equally necessary to retain the unity of this policy at European level while allowing it to continue to be a policy that sets agricultural objectives throughout Europe .
It is this balance that I now intend to defend by taking four examples .
The first example is that of milk quotas , which have provoked debate , and , I say this sincerely , in my view the position that was found is the right one .
We need to remain cautious on this issue .
All those who want to act quickly to increase the quantities produced and get rid of market-based mechanisms , run the significant risk of seeing the price of milk fall and letting themselves in for extremely cumbersome restructuring work .
The decoupling of aid : here too , we have found a position that , in my view , is balanced .
Total decoupling jeopardises many kinds of production .
We must protect the different kinds of production in Europe : sheep , cattle , goat and small-scale vegetable production .
With regard to regulation mechanisms , we can in fact go down the road of insurance , but we must also retain public mechanisms that enable prevention and regulation ; this is what is in this report , and that , in my view , is very important .
Finally , with regard to the overall development of aid and the manner in which we go about it , I should like to say that , in modulating and limiting Article 68 , important steps have been taken ; they are a move in the right direction towards a condition , to ensure that our global agricultural production model moves towards sustainability .
We must bear in mind maintaining an operating model that is based on individuals or groups and that takes account of three objectives , namely economic , ecological and social objectives .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , the health check was marketed as a way to provide simplification and to remove bureaucracy .
These were the key headlines when we started our debate .
It was also proclaimed that we would make agriculture within the EU ready for increased free trade - and especially for the new period after 2013 when the current agreement period is due to expire .
At the same time , it was also very important for us in Europe to assume our part of the responsibility for producing quality food - not only for European consumers , but for the whole world , in particular the increasing part of the world 's population that is demanding food .
The milk sector was the sector in which we were actually going to test whether we in Europe were ready to fit in with the requirements of increased production .
In this regard , I think that it is disappointing to be part of the debate on whether we should begin the so-called ' soft landing ' and give the milk producers who want to the opportunity to increase their milk production .
For me this is a signal that we in Europe are not particularly ready for the change that tomorrow and , in particular , the period after 2013 will require .
With regard to simplification and the reduction of bureaucracy - to make it easier to be a farmer - we have to say that it is not particularly easy to find clear or abundant examples of how we have simplified the situation or reduced the bureaucracy .
The whole problem of cross-compliance , where there are currently large differences between Member States , is an area where , in my opinion , we clearly need to bring about an improvement .
The most important point is that this review of agricultural policy should , in my opinion , give a much clearer indication of the direction we want agriculture to take when the agreement period expires in 2013 .
A positive element is the rural district policy , and here it is naturally important that the modulated resources remain in rural districts so that they can actually be of benefit .
Finally , I would have welcomed it - and I also think that it would have benefited European agriculture - if we in Parliament had stuck more closely to the proposal tabled by the Commission quite a while ago .
Madam President , two brothers were given a bag of sweets by their parents .
' Let us share them out fairly , ' said the older brother , to which the younger one replied , ' I would rather we shared them equally . '
This story describes the relations between the old and the new Member States when it comes to agriculture .
Old States receive more , and new ones several times less .
We understand that this is a transition period , but why should this situation persist beyond 2013 ?
Why should the new States continue to receive proportionally two or three times less than the old States ?
We keep hearing that this is fair , and that there are historical reasons for this .
But we do not want fairness , we want equality .
There was some justification for the inequalities under the production subsidies system , which favoured farmers who produced more .
However , now that we have moved to area subsidies , there is no further justification for this discrimination .
It must end after 2013 and there must be no division into old and new members .
We , the new members , want to be old too !
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , these discussions are taking place in unfavourable circumstances .
If the Irish had voted sensibly , we would have had a say on agricultural issues and on agricultural finances as of 1 January 2009 .
At present , our discussions are still taking place under the old dispensation , even though the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Barnier , has agreed to our participation .
This is a kind offer , but remains merely a pious wish because things are as they are .
This is also apparent in the draft documents from the Commission .
The first draft that Mr Goepel edited as rapporteur - he gave us the figures a few minutes ago - provided for a major degression : 10 , 25 , 45 .
We in Parliament digested these figures and added the labour costs subject to special insurance contributions .
This would have involved a redistribution that would have set an example for 2013 .
Our fear now is that in 2013 we will face a linear decrease .
In relation to the figures currently being mentioned by the Commission it must be said that the mountain has given birth to a mouse .
This proposal is lukewarm at best and has nothing to do with the diagnosis you correctly offered and with which I agree .
Earlier , you reiterated the key points : water , climate , genetic diversity , renewable energies and dairy production .
All of these areas must be considered , but the action you propose is quite ridiculous .
Let me deal briefly with the dairy sector .
You will be aware of the situation in relation to the dairy industry .
A milk surplus exists and prices have fallen to catastrophic levels .
Your proposal is to speed things up and to increase production opportunities .
However , a market economy means producing in line with demand .
What you propose would be a bit like the automobile industry reducing or abolishing the Christmas break and organising an extra shift to increase the stockpile of cars .
This approach is misguided and I support what Mr Goepel said earlier , namely that it would make sense not to regulate dairy production now in the context of the health check , but rather when we finally have the market analyses which have been promised for so long , but which have still not materialised , and that we should then come to a reasonable conclusion in the dairy sector that will suit the market and the requirements of farmers .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that today 's debate and the vote that will follow represent an important stage for Community policy on agriculture .
I believe that there is a need , because of what has happened in recent years , and chiefly in the last two years , for an even stronger common agricultural policy ( CAP ) in Europe .
Instead , through this lengthy work and the work that Mr Capoulas Santos has carried out , we have tackled some issues , but we have done so within an old system .
The issues that have become central over these last two years are , for Europe , the following two issues , which I would like to stress .
We started with the health check on the CAP , carried out in 2003 .
Some data should give us pause to reflect whether we are on the right road in our work , even though excellent work has been done over this year and a half .
We are losing a huge number of jobs in employment , approximately - from Eurostat data up until 2005 , so we do not know what has happened in 2007 and 2008 - two million employees , whom we have lost in this stable , seasonal and familiar employment sector .
The number of holdings that we lost between 2003 and 2005 - again according to Eurostat data - is 611 000 .
At a time like this , of economic crisis , it happens that the Member States intervene strongly with the banks and industry , but in no country is a debate going on about the state of agriculture , because everything is expected to be achieved by Community policy and the CAP .
Through the action we are taking , I believe that we are going against the real needs of farmers and the action that they in fact require : namely , to help these businesses to emerge from a situation of subordination to processing and marketing , because the other fact - and I am just finishing - is that the agricultural companies have lost income share over the last two or three years , to the benefit of the transformation of the marketing industry .
These were the issues that we ought to have tackled , and on this point the assessment is very negative with regard to what we will be voting on in the Chamber the day after tomorrow .
Madam President , financial discrimination against family farms and against new Member States are two basic mechanisms of the common agricultural policy which weaken the EU and conflict with its principal aims .
The proposed changes do not do away with those mechanisms .
How can we reform European agriculture fairly if we ignore 95 % of all farms ?
These 95 % are family farms , no larger than 50 ha .
However , they receive only the leftovers of the EU 's agricultural subsidy pot .
The richest farmers , of whom there are only 1 % , receive over EUR 9 billion , in other words , more than 90 % of all farms .
This policy hits at family farms , which are the backbone of European agriculture .
The outcome of the current and proposed agricultural policy will be continued depopulation of the countryside , environmental degradation and loss of food security for regions , states and the EU as a whole .
- ( SK ) The Commission proposals for monitoring the health of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) were formulated under conditions quite different from those under which we find ourselves today .
Today we must pay greater attention especially to steadying the increasing volatility of agricultural markets , accelerating the process of alignment with world prices , emphasising the irreplaceable role of agriculture in society , strengthening the systems of the CAP and above all making better use of the potential of the discriminated agriculture of new Member States .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have unfortunately provided only a partial correction to the Commission 's inadequate response to the acute needs we face today .
For example , the Commission has pushed through the implementation of progressive modulation in an attempt to demonstrate to EU citizens its ability to eliminate high farming support levels .
This is contrary to the increasing need for higher intensity of production factors concentration .
However , it is totally absurd not to be willing to accept proposals to treat farms not as the property of landlords , but as rational and viable federations of small landowners who would not be able to compete with each other .
Hence each individual shareholder has to be accepted as one farmer .
I therefore call on Mr Barnier , President-in-Office of the Council , to make some room in Council debates for a proposed solution to this problem .



Madam President , let me begin by offering my thanks to Commissioner Mariann Fischer Boel ; Mr Barnier , President-in-Office of the Council ; Mr Capoulas Santos , rapporteur ; and also Lutz Goepel , for the cooperation we have had , as well as all members of the committee for their hard work , because we are 27 Member States and , whilst we do not quite have 27 positions on this report , we do still have quite a number , and we came together in committee to reach what I consider is a sensible compromise .
Let me also thank the Commissioner for her cooperation and help and in particular Michel Barnier , because we have had enhanced cooperation , if not codecision .
We have to move forward now and adopt a report and reach a compromise and a position in order that farmers in Europe know exactly where they are going .
There is a need for the production of food - we saw that clearly last year - and we need to free up farmers from bureaucracy ; we need simplification .
We also need farmers to make business decisions for themselves .
So we have to move forward .
Yes , we need some crisis management , but we must not return to the days of having intervention - the balance must be right .
Many of us fly around Europe and when we land we like a soft landing , and milk quotas also need a soft landing .
We do need to free up the market .
The Commissioner said that last year there was a demand for dairy products , this year not so much - but next year there could be a greater demand again and we need the flexibility to meet it .
Agriculture and the rural environment are one and the same and we have to move to make sure that we deal with climate change and the management of water , that we look at biofuels and biogas and that we really put Europe in a good position .
We must not go backwards , because we are in a good position when it comes to the WTO .
Let us go forward and actually reform the agricultural policy .
Madam President , I would first of all like to add my thanks to our rapporteur for all his hard work on this delicate subject .
However , despite his great efforts , I am afraid that I and my national delegation cannot support this report .
I believe that the CAP is in need of radical reform .
It needs to move away from the old direct subsidy route to a system that is market orientated and that values rural sustainability and the environment , and recognises efficient farming instead of propping up inefficient farming .
Whilst this report in itself is not a major reform document , it does set the tone for future reforms beyond 2013 .
That is why I am disappointed in the outcome of the vote in the Agriculture Committee , which yet again - it appears to me - has resulted in that committee turning its back on a fundamental reform of this discredited system .
In particular , I highlight compulsory modulation .
I cannot support a position that will see less money going to rural development and furthermore removes the need for Member States to cofinance new modulation money .
I also cannot support the Committee view that we should also step back from full decoupling , but I reserve my biggest fear for the Commission .
Your position , Commissioner , on compulsory modulation is right .
Your position on decoupling is right .
For once , we have a Commission that seriously wants to reform the CAP , but faces a Parliament that always fails to deliver on this issue and believes that the challenges we face could be solved by sticking to the old discredited system .
Hang tough , Commissioner , you are right and , sadly , I suspect this Chamber will be wrong .
( NL ) Madam President , as you are aware , I am less than enthusiastic about all the health check proposals .
If I was a farmer , and I had calculated in 2005 what to expect up until 2013 , then I could expect - if you will bear with me - an 8 % cut due to modulation , a 10 % cut due to the national reserve and potentially a 9 % cut due to capping high bonuses , so a total cut of 27 % .
How can an average farmer in future rely on a European government that delivers on its promise ?
Mrs Buitenweg said the 27 % was inconsequential , but I think it is a fair chunk out of what was promised .
I am also opposed to this modulation , therefore , and I would prefer the capping of these total bonuses to be much more limited .
As for this national reserve , I think we should seize the one opportunity that we have , namely we should develop an insurance scheme that provides cover against animal and plant diseases as soon as possible across the whole of Europe .
Sooner or later , as a result of people travelling so much , Europe will face another contagious animal disease , and our budgets are not prepared for this .
If this were to happen again , I would not know where the Commission would get the money from .
This is where an insurance scheme would come in .
With regard to milk quotas , we can only note that an increasing number of markets are developing internationally .
It is not a good thing for Europe , I think , if we were to say to the Americans or the Brazilians , for example , that that market would be theirs if they wanted it .
We should take part in it too , which is why a soft landing of the milk quotas is necessary .
We could take three measures : reduce the superlevy , gradually increase the quotas and settlement , every year , of what has not reached full milking capacity among the farmers that have milked to full capacity and have even exceeded capacity .
( LT ) First of all , I would like to thank all those who worked so hard on what are complicated , important and , in my opinion , the most important law-making projects of the year , especially rapporteur Mr Capoulas Santos .
I do not have much time , so I can only touch on the most important questions which concern farmers in my country .
First of all , there is the equalisation of direct payments after 13 years .
This is very important and if we are talking about solidarity , honest competition and the common market , then we must behave accordingly .
We must ensure that support is allocated correctly .
The second very important thing is the necessity to abolish the restrictions on land area according to the condition of 30 June 2003 .
If we are talking about food shortages , world famine and finally biofuels , then let us allow farmers to exploit the opportunities of existing resources .
Most importantly , we must protect the funding of the European Union 's common agricultural policy and not allow the fragmentation of the agricultural budget to the benefit of all sorts of dubious ideas .
Madam President , I congratulate and thank all colleagues in bringing us to a successful conclusion today .
But I would echo colleagues ' disappointment that we could have gone a bit further and been a bit more ambitious , but let us remember that the health check was only ever about a health check : the fundamental reform will come later and that is what we need to focus on today .
As we look towards 2013 there is certainly a lot to do , because we have a common agricultural policy that , like any good compromise , leaves nobody particularly happy .
So I pick up on Neil Parish 's comments , and Mr Pieper 's also , that we need to look towards the future about what the common agricultural policy is designed to achieve .
We need to bring the reform of the Structural Funds particularly into this discussion , because the CAP as it stands is overcomplicated , convoluted and difficult to get public support for , whereas the Structural Funds would be a much cheaper , more effective way to deliver public environmental goods .
We need to remember that the CAP is about the provision of direct support to producers of quality local food .
If we remember that , we will not go far wrong .
That is the big prize and today is a step on the road towards that .
( PT ) It is with some concern that we are participating in this debate on further modifications to the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) as , in essence , these aim to ensure greater liberalisation and subordination to the international markets , without taking into account that agriculture is a strategic sector and that food security and sovereignty are fundamental in guaranteeing quality food for the population of our countries .
Likewise , the lack of social sensitivity with which this whole reform is being pursued , without taking into account the current serious unemployment situation , is unacceptable .
This is threatening to destroy what remains of family-based agriculture , with the reduction in support for small farmers , the announcement of the end of the milk quota system , the renationalisation of the CAP and the continued injustices in the allocation of support being particularly serious .
We therefore insist on the proposals that we have tabled to guarantee support for producing farmers , to combat instability in productive sectors due to price variations and to prevent the decline in the rural world and the desertification of many regions .

( EL ) Madam President , firstly we have a debt of gratitude to our colleague Mr Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos and to everyone else involved in producing this praiseworthy report .
The Greek rural areas in which people working with tobacco live are the poorest in Greece ; I fear that they are also the poorest in Europe in absolute terms .
The people who live there have no work other than tobacco and they are asking for nothing more than for the tobacco scheme to be extended to at least 2013 .
They are also asking , if at all possible , for the injustice of 2004 to be restored and for the 50 % tobacco subsidy to continue under the first pillar , but only from 2010 , in order to support their income .
This demand is a humanitarian rather than a technical demand .
Madam President , in the time available I will focus on the milk sector because - as the Commissioner knows from our meeting last week - it is in trouble in my constituency in light of the plunge in the price .
That fall in price strengthens me in my view that abolishing milk quotas is premature and imprudent and will do nothing to stabilise the market .
Likewise , reducing the range of available market-management measures seems to me unnecessary and foolish in light of the instability now affecting the market .
We need meaningful market-management opportunities if a bottom is to be put , and to be kept , in this market . Without this , we are headed for anything but a soft landing for milk .
I regret , therefore , that at a time when some Member States are showing flexibility - with France diverting underspend to the sheep sector and Germany talking about a milk fund - the Commission wishes to bind itself by reducing its scope for action by needlessly abrogating market-management measures .
. - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , first let me thank the rapporteur for the legislative proposal and the rapporteur for the own-initiative report .
The 2003 and 2004 reforms were important stages in the reformation of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
The thorough examination of the CAP is not a fundamental reform in itself , but rather another important step in securing a modern , multifunctional and competitive common agricultural policy .
Nothing has changed in relation to priorities .
The first concern is food production , followed by fodder and then the supply of energy .
The significance of milk production , particularly in mountainous areas where grassland farming is often the only option , has already been discussed .
In this case we are preserving jobs , not just the environment , something equally important in my opinion .
I believe that preparing for the soft landing following 2015 is an important issue .
At present I oppose a general increase in the milk quota .
I believe that we should be cautious at a time when we have this high milk surplus .
Anyone who points to food prices as a reason for increasing quotas fails to recognise that a dairy farmer receives less than 30 % of the sale price , while the sale price in the supermarkets - even in my own Member State - is currently the same as it was 25 years ago .
It is important that the second pillar should be stabilised without eroding the first .
We welcome the re-evaluation of Article 68 thanks to the Member States ' autonomy of decision .
I am also pleased that an agreement has been reached on the milk fund , including in relation to production in mountain areas and disadvantaged regions .
Finally , may I say that I hope very much that the Council and Commission will reach a compromise in the coming days .
I am certain that the common agricultural policy will be developed to ensure that we also have multifunctional , sustainable agricultural production in all regions of the EU in the future .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we agree with the aims of this ' health check ' , but not all the proposed measures .
The threats posed by new climate , financial , health and other risks indicate that the common agricultural policy , far from being obsolete , is needed to play a fundamental role in global food security and the preservation of our rural communities .
We naively believed , at the time of the 1992 MacSharry reform , that food self-sufficiency was definitely assured and that the market would put everyone firmly in their place .
However , we have realised that the increasingly globalised market is not responding to the dream of constant agricultural production with safe food at reasonable prices throughout Europe .
The increase in the price of raw materials - now falling again - was a salutary lesson for us , accompanied as it was by the increase in feed and fertiliser production costs , and has dragged a number of sectors , such as the sheep and beef sectors , into deep crisis .
Commissioner , this ' seesaw ' effect seems likely to continue .
I want to particularly mention the sheep and milk sectors .
The sheep sector is in decline .
It needs Community support , as called for by Parliament last June , and Article 68 will not be enough .
As for the milk sector , the soft landing requires a transitional period so that the sector can adjust and adapt without the rigidity currently being caused by the scarcity of quotas .
In addition , Commissioner , the situation is not similar or the same in all Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the excellent , positive and intelligent work he has accomplished .
The subject of the state of health of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is actually a very important one , because it aims to improve the competitiveness of the European farming industry .
I feel it is appropriate to emphasise just two issues : the increase in milk quotas , providing for greater growth for countries in deficit and for those countries where the national quota is being exceeded , and the extension until 2012 of coupled support for tobacco cultivation .
In relation to the latter , despite the strong resistance to reviewing the 2004 agreement , given that a large group of countries considers it morally unacceptable to subsidise tobacco because of its effects on public health , I would like to point out that production of raw tobacco in Europe accounts for no more than 4 % of world production and that the European Union is the leading world importer of raw tobacco from non-EU countries , to cover over 70 % of its own requirements .
Therefore , I believe that we have a duty to find a fair solution to avoid further repercussions in terms of the economy and employment , to avoid causing a wholesale abandonment of tobacco-growing .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the most important tasks which has faced and continues to face the common agricultural policy is to ensure the agricultural self-sufficiency of the individual European Union states .
Reading the conclusions of the review , I see that the changes it proposes include most of the mechanisms intended to improve the situation with production in individual markets .
This is a good thing .
Nevertheless , I am concerned at the lack of agreement on an overall change in the approach to aligning subsidies for all states of the EU at the same level , which would promote healthy competition within the Community and outside it .
Actually , the review has confirmed the fact that protectionist attitudes towards national agricultures by the so-called old EU Member States in relation to those of the newly acceded States still persist in the European Union .
The fact that I am yet another speaker making this point indicates the seriousness of the problem and the Commission 's continued disregard of it .
It is very important that Parliament has also noted the unfairness of the initial allocation of milk quotas .
It is a good thing that , however timidly , we are now attempting to deal with this problem .

- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Barnier , European Development Days have been held over the last three days , during which frequent reference was made to the food crisis that is seriously affecting the poorest countries .
All the speeches emphasised the prevailing need for developing countries to develop their own agriculture by making optimal use of their land and natural resources .
Incidentally , the lyrical musings of those who , yesterday and again today , called for a reduction in state intervention and public spending , all-out liberalisation , privatisation and the relegation of agriculture to an almost prehistoric activity , this U-turn , therefore , in favour of huge public investment in agricultural production and food sovereignty , all seemed simultaneously laughable and scandalous .
The future of agriculture in developing countries is directly linked to our debate today .
Unfortunately I do not feel that this common agricultural policy ( CAP ) health check , which was begun before the food riots and the disastrous disruption of the markets reached their peak , takes account of the situation of the farming community in the South or draws the full conclusions from the serious crises that we now face in ecological , social , economic and financial terms .
I am therefore very sorry that the robust relationship between northern and southern agriculture receives so little attention , both in the Commission 's proposals and in Parliament 's report , and the jeopardising of the EUR 1 billion pledged shows that there is still a long way to go .
( PL ) Mr President , Polish farmers and farmers from Central and Eastern Europe joining the European Union have been treated as second-class citizens , and this applies , inter alia , to subsidies and milk quotas .
We are now seeing a growing tendency to retain this discrimination and unequal treatment beyond 2013 .
Please bear in mind that a large proportion of farms in the eastern part of the EU are family farms .
Those are the families affected by decisions made in Brussels and Strasbourg .
Those are the farmers who voted to join the EU , having been promised equal treatment from 2013 .
Should we now tell them that they have been deceived ?
I appeal to fellow Members to ensure that our common agricultural policy is not common only in name .
Expressions of noble sentiments accompany actions which could harm Polish and European agriculture , and we cannot agree to that .
Farmers from the Solidarity Trade Union are protesting in Brussels today .
They want to draw the attention of EU authorities to the difficult situation of milk and cereal producers .
I support them and think that the protests in Brussels are the best proof that all is not well with agriculture .
There must finally be an end to the unequal treatment of old and new Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , the vast majority of farmers and stockbreeders are waiting on the decisions and agreements that the Agriculture and Fisheries Council will adopt between today and Thursday on this common agricultural policy ( CAP ) health check .
They are waiting because this is not a simple review , but will lead to profound changes , such as the disappearance of many holdings , if the cuts in direct aid proposed by the European Commission go ahead .
Modulation is the central point of this parliamentary report and could be one of the few elements in Parliament 's opinion with some impact on the negotiations being conducted by the EU 's Agriculture Ministers .
For years we have been opposing any increase in what we euphemistically call ' modulation ' because , if the rural development policy lacks sufficient funds , this is not due to a lack of resources within the CAP budget , but rather due to the total lack of political will to provide an adequate Community budget for this essential pillar .
Do we want to liberalise the markets ?
Of course we do , but subject to the same requirements and conditions for all producers , both inside and outside the Union .
At the moment , the European Union is playing with the future of many farmers and stockbreeders .
In particular , I must mention fragile sectors such as the sheep , beef and tobacco sectors , the survival of which in many producing areas will depend on this health check .
Some producers , such as sheep producers , are not asking for aid .
They simply want to be allowed to withdraw from the market with dignity , because they have done their sums and the only way to survive is to reduce the volumes produced .
The abandonment of production is therefore the only way out that we have left for many producers whose place will undoubtedly be taken by imports from third countries , because consumers will not stop consuming and the world will not stop rapidly increasing the number of consumers .
Parliament should give a cautious opinion which the Council must heed .
I must thank the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Parish , for the steps he has taken to ensure that Parliament is heard and not ignored as the Council and the Commission have so blatantly done to date .


- ( FR ) Mr Barnier , Mrs Fischer Boel , I hope that Mr Capoulas Santos 's excellent report can form a sound basis for a compromise within the Council during the French Presidency and I hope that the European Parliament and the Council will both tame the Commission .
Which means , as I have already quoted from Saint-Exupéry , that the Little Prince tamed the fox .
I hope that we will succeed in doing so tomorrow .
Totally scrapping the intervention mechanism is highly dangerous for Europe and for European food safety .
Punishing large-scale farmers will be extremely damaging to European competitiveness , and in the case of livestock farming , it is important to help farmers who have no land .
- ( FR ) Mr President , at the beginning of the 2000s we set the financial framework of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) until 2013 .
Farmers have made investments based on those figures .
Now , will we decide , half-way through the campaign , to reduce the payments that they are entitled to expect ?
This is unfair .
I am against modulation as recommended by the European Commission or the Capoulas Santos report .
The CAP is intended to support and give structure to agriculture .
By way of example , we are seeing a general slump in livestock farming in favour of imports of sheep from third countries .
Livestock farmers need a CAP that supports them .
Ewe premiums are required , then , as well as environmental bonuses for keeping pastures and national reserves to deal with the ravages caused by outbreaks of disease , particularly bluetongue disease .
Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , farmers are counting on us !
Mr President , I am sure the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council would expect me to call for the implementation of the key recommendations of the sheep report , which was passed overwhelmingly here in this Parliament .
On modulation , I would be against the figure of 13 % by 2012 , and I believe that it should not be compulsory and that each Member State should have the flexibility to decide .
On milk quotas , I would like to see an increase of 2 % , rather than the 1 % proposed , and countries that have the capacity to produce milk should be allowed to do so , leading to a soft landing in 2015 .
But , most important of all , at the last CAP reform we were promised simplification and , if there is something that drives farmers crazy , it is bureaucracy and red tape .
There are now more officials representing the Commission , Member State departments of agriculture and local authorities policing farmers than there are police on the streets fighting crime .
This is ridiculous : farmers should be allowed to get on and farm and produce the necessary food that is required for an ever-increasing population .
Let me say from a personal point of view that , in my country , there will be no Lisbon II unless this matter is addressed .
- ( FR ) Mr President , the report that we will vote on tomorrow represents the conclusion of a year 's work and negotiations dedicated to the future of the common agricultural policy and of our farmers .
It was actually on 20 November last year that Mrs Fischer Boel came to give us her proposals regarding the health check .

Now , following the Lutz Goepel progress report , we have the Capoulas Santos report on the Commission proposal .
Both our colleagues should be congratulated for their excellent work .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has managed to stand firm in the face of the Commission 's initial proposals , which we felt were far too liberal .
I shall remain vigilant with regard to the milk sector and particularly the measures preceding the scrapping of quotas .
I am thinking , in particular , of mountain-based milk producers , who must not be the poor cousins of this reform , and we will need to ensure that they are not left out since they will need to be supported more than the others .
I do not wish to play the role of doomsayer for them , but how can we imagine the French dairy industry consolidated into a single region ?
I therefore welcome wholeheartedly the proposal to set up a ' Milk fund ' and the proposal to evaluate , from 2010 , the raising of milk quotas in accordance with market trends .
Calculation , by the Committee on Agriculture , of progressive modulation is , in my view , fair and would enable us to enhance regional development and rurality , and to preserve biodiversity in a sustainable manner .
I also welcome the clarification of cross-compliance , the implementation of which was , up to now , a real headache for farmers .
I also hope that we keep the ' Tobacco fund ' , which allows us to keep our small farms in Europe as well as significant employment in a region where nothing else can be farmed and which allows us to avoid imported products .
Finally , Mr Barnier , we have very much appreciated your involvement throughout these negotiations .
You have managed to show a great deal of patience and determination and you have not rushed things , far from it .
It was a real pleasure to work with you .
Your work with us has been invaluable .
I know that we will be able to count on you .
( NL ) Mr President , in the sixties , Sicco Mansholt , a prominent member of my party in the Netherlands , created European agricultural policy , and we are proud of this .
His vision was to ensure that there was enough safe food for all Europeans and decent incomes for farmers .
These are ideals that I am upholding here again with all my heart .
Much has changed in the last 50 years though .
There is a rapidly growing world population , climate change , globalisation , unfair trade and speculation regarding food prices , with the recent food crisis being a case in point .
The discussion about the health check is mainly about resources , instruments and clever exemptions .
I regret the fact that , in the run-up to 2013 , the bigger picture is fading into the background .
It is time for an intelligent update of our agricultural policy in which we hold onto Mansholt 's ideals , but throw out the obsolete bits , such as export subsidies and product subsidies , for example .
It is high time for fair trade and for more attention to sustainability , health and innovative solutions for the challenges we are actually facing .
We owe this to the rest of the world , our future generations and the European taxpayers .
( FI ) Mr President , the goals of agricultural policy under the Treaty are to develop agriculture , safeguard the income levels of farmers and reasonable consumer prices , stabilise the markets and guarantee supply .
The health check for agriculture , apart from anything else , conflicts with the first goal , and for that reason it would actually mean changing the Treaty .
Aid for farmers would be cut , thus breaking the promises made earlier .
Consumer prices could rise .
A restriction on intervention purchases and the elimination of milk quotas would increase market fluctuations .
Last year we spent more than EUR 500 million on milk export subsidies .
Decoupling aid from production would decrease production , whilst its acceptability would grow more uncertain .
The health check lacks solidarity , more than anything .
The Commission 's proposal in no way reflects the principle whereby people must also be able to engage in sustainable agriculture in those areas which are worst off in terms of natural conditions , even if the European Council has confirmed that three times .
The family farm is too weak a negotiating party when up against multinational food giants and global market forces .
That is why we need an agricultural policy .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our primary aim is to ensure that Europe has a common agricultural policy after 2013 .
We believe that this is a fundamental point , not only in order to protect the agricultural sector and the socio-economic fabric in our Member States , but also because at the dawn of the third millennium it is more strategically vital than ever to guarantee Europe 's food security .
Commissioner , we would like to stress the fact that we need to continue to implement policies of support for each individual common organisation of agricultural markets ( CMOs ) , where necessary , and specifically we believe that :
a ) In the tobacco sector the decoupling of aid must provide for the option to maintain partially coupled aid up until 2013 , in order to avoid the total abandonment of production , because that would jeopardise entire sectors , creating unemployment and also various economic and environmental problems in particularly disadvantaged areas .
I would like to remind the Commissioner and the President that the European Parliament has already expressed its support , by a large majority , on this issue .
b ) In the milk sector , in order to rebalance the market in the short term and to make it possible to exit with a soft landing from the quota system in the long term , it would be advisable to increase quotas by 2 % in every marketing year during the 2009-2010 and 2014-2015 periods .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos , and Mr Goepel , on the excellent work they have produced .


We are debating a common agricultural policy ( CAP ) that was born in the late 1990s and which itself gave birth in 2003 , in a globalised world , in which there was a surplus of production , in which we sang the praises of the excessive assistance given to agriculture .
We came up with decoupling , modulation , conditionality and an excessive amount of red tape in the system for granting assistance , and within a few years we achieved a development that had been imagined , as Mr Barnier said .
This development that we had imagined turned out thus : we entered into production deficit , we had a supply problem , particularly for grains , we went into deficit in Europe in meat production and we are seeing an inconceivable number of jobs being lost .
I therefore believe that the approach that the Commission adopted in modifying the 2003 position should end in the next few days together with the French Presidency , and that we should review the position adopted on these issues , and on modulation , which seems excessive .
In removing resources from producers and then transferring them to the second pillar , we are taking resources from those who are investing and producing daily in agriculture , from those whom we are asking to respect the land and the health of food products , whom we are asking for safety at work , whom we are asking for animal welfare , whom we are asking for high nutritional value and safety in our food , we are taking away their support in an increasingly competitive and globalised world .
We therefore need to think again , particularly in relation to milk quotas , in countries such as Italy which have for 20 years already been suffering this tragedy of a deficiency of production , despite having significant potential .
Coupled aid ought to be maintained : I endorse what my fellow Members said in this regard on tobacco , because there are 500 000 families in Europe living off that sector and removing coupled aid would undoubtedly reduce them to poverty without contributing , if that is the issue , to a reduction in the number of smokers .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very happy to see the evidence of a very positive codecision process in agriculture , which been possible through the enhanced cooperation between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
This is a good omen and I am sure that you will permit me to congratulate Mr Capoulas Santos on his balanced report on modulation , on young farmers and on security in the workplace , as well as in relation to the new challenges .
We are going through a difficult transition : we know about the soft landing and decoupling , and other innovative measures .
As we go through this transition we must protect farmers who will be faced with the removal of milk quotas , as well as disadvantaged areas such as those in the tobacco sector , and we should take the opportunity of this shift to embark upon a serious rethink post-2013 to update the aims and new missions of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and to launch a debate on a way to overcome the dichotomy between the first and second pillars .
Mr President , my thanks to the Council , Commission and rapporteur for all the hard work that has gone into this .
The only thing ' simple ' about the common agricultural policy , which has been ignored in this debate , is that the budget is fixed and declining , and yet the demands we are making on this policy are expanding , including climate change , biodiversity and water management .
Intelligent water management is a very good idea , and local authorities need to fix leaks .
How intelligent is that !
Let me move on to milk .
What is wrong with providing for a 2 % increase in quota and trusting farmers who can produce for the market-place to do that ?
This is not compulsory .
Let the farmers decide .
On sheep , the Aylward report has raised huge expectations which we in this Parliament support .
They cannot be let down when the Council comes to its final decisions .
On modulation and Article 68 , we are talking about recycling funds from agriculture to these new challenges .
It cannot be done and if it is done it can only be done with fewer rules , rather than more rules , which tends to be the case .
The biggest threat to the CAP and to European farmers is in the budget review , the legacy of Tony Blair to this institution , where financing of agriculture is under threat .
In reply to the Lisbon Treaty comment from my colleague Liam Aylward , may I say that , yes , inspections did cause a problem .
I would suggest that farmers in Ireland will now be more supportive of the Lisbon Treaty because they fear that Member States will have more control over agriculture policy and they know the dangers of that from our budget for 2009 when the Irish Government slashed support for agriculture : they trust Europe more than their Member State .
We must remember that .
The biggest problem for farmers across Europe is income volatility and price volatility .
We need market support measures .
They have got to be more flexible and more intelligent and used when we need them , otherwise we abandon family farming and we will destroy what we have created in Europe , which is a supply of good-quality , safe food .
I wish you luck in your deliberations .

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I extend my special thanks to the rapporteur , Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , for the huge amount of work he has completed during the last few months , and for his great ability to find a compromise solution .
The common agricultural policy must retain its Community character by ensuring that the whole of the enlarged European Union can compete on equal terms .
Necessary conditions for the achievement of this objective include striving for uniform subsidy rates throughout the European Union .
I believe that this will happen in 2013 , and that no one will want to think of ways of postponing it further .
As time is short , I will limit myself to one matter only .
New Member States will increasingly be included in environmental protection , food safety and animal welfare requirements .
Compliance with those requirements involves huge expenditure , to be incurred within a short period of time , and for those States it will mean significantly reduced profitability of agricultural production .
For this reason , synchronising full introduction of those principles must be delayed until all payments and subsidies have been equalised .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to congratulate Mr Capoulas Santos on his very fine report and I should also like to thank the coordinator and shadow rapporteur , Mr Goepel .

I shall comment briefly on three points : first and foremost , as far as we are concerned , the existing tobacco aid scheme should be maintained until 2013 and 50 % of financing should be kept under the first pillar and not transferred to the second pillar .
I think this is both unfair and unjust .
Why do I think this ?
Because you only want to apply it to tobacco .
Secondly , I think this will be catastrophic for over half a million families , especially in my country , where most are poor , small-scale tobacco farmers who will abandon their farms and move to the large towns , which is extremely dangerous for the environment and the countryside .
I should like to clarify something here .
We are all against smoking , but we must not confuse two things : for as long as people in Europe smoke cigarettes and the European industry needs tobacco , it makes more sense for us to produce it than to import it .
Secondly , it also makes sense to maintain the existing special entitlements scheme , especially for special fodder rights .
Thirdly , I am against the minimum thresholds for granting direct aid proposed by the Commission , whereby the Commission says that anyone receiving less than EUR 250 a year or cultivating less than one hectare a year should not be financed .
For goodness sake , the European Union wants to support both large and small producers .
We need them all , but most of all we need small-scale farmers .
This being so , I call for this to be revised and for aid to be granted to farmers , however small their farms may be .
( EL ) Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate Mr Capoulas Santos on his report .
Mr Barnier , Mrs Fischer Boel , regardless of the schools of thought , which illustrate that each of you has a different approach to the common agricultural policy and its role in the development of the European Union , we have achieved the unachievable ; in other words , you are generating a lack of trust and disappointment among both small-scale and large-scale producers .
In other words , with the across-the-board cut , with the proposals for further cuts in the value of entitlements in a period in which the cost of production has risen , we have disappointed both large-scale dairy farms and small-scale producers in small and mountainous areas .
A proposal for tobacco in which the Commission is proposing a scandalous 50 % reduction without any justification on the basis of the Treaty or even of the horizontal policies of the common agricultural policy does not inspire trust .
Another distinction is the exemption of small farms of 10 hectares , which for Greece in particular means that the island areas will be excluded .
Commissioner , I am aware of your communication policy and I have the greatest respect for you .
You speak of a soft landing .
Be careful which airport we are going to land at .
There is also an airport in Guantanamo .
( NL ) Mr President , we have already heard a great deal during this morning 's long debate .
Fortunately , I managed to give the Commissioner a portion of school fruit before we started , so hopefully with that snack , we will be able to carry on discussing this important topic for a while longer .
I should like to turn my attention away from school fruit , though , to the subject of milk .
Quite apart from the discussion about all kinds of technical instruments , it is , to my mind , impossible to explain to the European citizen that we have paid EUR 340 million in superlevy , while we all remain nearly 1 % under the European quota .
This lack of logic will in any event need to be addressed in the Council .
Moreover , as I have stated before , the Commission proposal of an annual quota increase by 1 % is very ' skimmed ' , in my view , and this could easily be increased to ' semi-skimmed ' in the Council of Ministers later .
After all , with 1 % , we are leaving opportunities unused within the EU and the world market .
The argument I have heard before in this debate , namely that our quota system would automatically give us a good price , is far too short-sighted .
This is also clearly evident from the price development since 1984 .
Needless to say , mega stores like they have in the United States are unthinkable in our region .
We will need to put safety nets in place for very lean years and for unforeseen circumstances , such as animal diseases .
Also , and I think this is just as important , I would urge the Commission to look at how the returns are divided across the food production chain .
While supermarkets currently work with economic margins of some 20 % and the distribution trade with margins of nearly 10 % , many primary producers - the farmers - without whom none of the food would be there - are working with negative returns at the moment .
Back to the main topic , though .
As I said , we are talking about our daily bread here .
Food security should therefore be paramount in this debate , but mainly also in the debate on agricultural policy after 2013 , because I think the last thing we need is to have to establish in due course that we have become just as dependent on far away countries for our daily bread as we are for energy .


- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely grateful to our colleague , Mr Capoulas Santos , for this tremendous work he has done , and in good humour , it has to be said .
The task of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) has always been to guarantee the supply of food for everyone .
This aim is even more justifiable today , since the crisis we are experiencing leaves both consumers and farmers vulnerable .
It is essential to guarantee consumers access to food products , but also to guarantee farmers a decent income .
We must therefore encourage and help young farmers to establish themselves and to develop their activities since it is they who will help to feed the planet in the future .
I should like to emphasise the difficulties encountered in the sheep and goat sectors , with regard to which Mr Capoulas Santos has been very sensitive .
It is vital to give them support not only in terms of meat , but also in terms of milk , a sector I am very familiar with in Sardinia .

- ( FR ) Mr President , thank you for the work done , and for the conclusions and guidelines that have come out of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) health check and Mr Capoulas Santos 's report .
Agriculture is , indeed , an economic sector that cannot respond to market signals alone .
Agricultural activity certainly affects food self-sufficiency but also , as we see too often , regions and employment .
Scrapping market instruments would be a serious blow to our agriculture .
Decoupling , for example , presents real problems for certain areas of livestock farming , namely suckler cows and sheep , and I am very pleased to have heard Mrs Fischer Boel speak just now on this issue .
What is more , it is clear that strictly adhering to historic references would pose a major obstacle to any possible reform .
I still believe , however , that the issue of the second pillar of the CAP is an essential one since rural territories need to rely on agricultural activity in order to develop employment in rural areas .
We must , therefore , think about this issue of the second pillar without , of course , cutting off the first .
( ES ) Mr President , firstly , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos , on his magnificent work .
I believe he has achieved balance and moderation in his report .
At this stage in the debate , I feel it is vital to send a message of stability to our farmers .
More than ever European farmers need stability and solutions .
They need long enough transitional periods as well as the continuation of specific measures for struggling sectors .
Commissioner , the same solutions cannot be used for all sectors .
You must remember that we have sectors that are experiencing real difficulties .
The common agricultural policy must not be the problem , but rather the solution , and for that we need a strong first pillar .
We believe and trust in rural development , but we do not believe that the modulation proposed by the Commission is the answer .
Rural development should not be strengthened to the detriment of the first pillar .
We agree that the Single Payment Scheme must be simplified by revising the market instruments .
However , this does not mean dismantling them .
If we get this right , we will be laying the foundations for a common agricultural policy continuing well beyond 2013 .
If we get it wrong , we will put many European farmers out of business .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the great efforts made by Mr Capoulas Santos , our rapporteur , to ensure that the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) stays closer to farmers and European citizens , rather than the needs of the market , and to reconcile the various concerns that arise when there are so many challenges in play .
It is therefore vital for the 27 Member States to take a joint approach to the sector , but it is important to maintain the market support and management instruments for key products .
I am thinking , for example , of the dairy sector or aid for tobacco , the elimination of which would certainly not help to cut the numbers of smokers , but instead would lead to the abandonment of an important European product and the social fabric which is linked to it .
Such instruments must , however , always take into account the extreme variety of agricultural circumstances in Europe .
The system of milk quotas currently in force , for example , is a response to criteria that are now obsolete .
The 1 % increase proposed in the compromise is not enough to meet the domestic demand of the majority of Member States .
We therefore need a more flexible system that gives every individual Member State the option to respond to its own needs , and this would also promote European competitiveness in the sector on the international market .

Mr President , I strongly agree with Minister Barnier when he talks about food sovereignty and its importance , and with Commissioner Fischer Boel when she talks about the importance of climate change on the agriculture agenda today .
Can we please marry these two concepts ?
It is expected that the growing worldwide demand for dairy products - which will be up to a 35 % increase by 2020 - will lead to some intensification of Irish dairy production , making it most likely that our suckler herd will be affected if a reduction in our cattle numbers has to be considered to meet EU climate change targets under the effort-sharing proposal .
Ireland 's food production system is accepted as one of the most efficient in the world in terms of emissions per unit of food produced .
Any shortfall of world food markets - if Ireland cut its livestock numbers - would be most likely to be filled by countries with less sustainable farming systems and systems that generate far higher levels of emission , due to the less efficient nature of their herd management or the age profile of their herds and deforestation .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner Fischer Boel , Mr Barnier , a health check should serve to correct those aspects which are not totally right .
In the legislation on agriculture in the outermost regions , there is one aspect which is not right .
This is the regulation of sugar in the Autonomous Region of the Azores .
I want to urge both the Commissioner and the Minister and also all Members to look at the amendments that I have tabled in order to consider what is at stake , as it is easy and simple to solve this problem .
However , if this is not solved , it will result in unemployment and the failure of a sector , with extremely serious consequences for the Autonomous Region of the Azores .
I would insist once again that you give this your utmost attention .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the situation that has arisen recently deserves thanks on our part both to the Commissioner and to the rapporteur .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has accomplished , because when we discuss agriculture we are discussing food , and therefore the issue is an extremely delicate one .
I would like to talk about two key points : the first is the issue of milk quotas .
I welcome the consensus reached on the 1 % level - which could also be increased to 2 % - but the greater problem will arise after 2014 when , if the landing is not a softer one , there will be enormous problems for those who have made investments in recent years , and enormous losses for agricultural companies relating to this sector .
The other aspect or issue relates to controls on agricultural prices .
A year ago , there was a food problem linked to cereals , and now the prices of maize and wheat have halved as compared with last year , while the consumer prices for pasta , bread and feed are still high .
Perhaps there was a mistake in planning or not enough control ...

( PL ) Mr President , the European Commission has proposed common agricultural policy spending limits for the various Member States up to 2013 and beyond .
If we convert these sums into amounts per hectare of arable land , what emerges is a huge disparity in support per hectare between the different States : in Belgium it amounts to approximately EUR 490 , in Denmark EUR 390 , in Germany EUR 340 and in France EUR 260 , whereas in the new Member States it is much less : EUR 210 in the Czech Republic , EUR 200 in Slovakia and only EUR 190 in Poland .
In a situation where the production costs of old and new Member States are rapidly converging , and the European Commission is proposing decoupling financial support from production , retaining these differences not only no longer has any justification in fact , but also discriminates against farmers in the new Member States .
If the position of the Commission and the Council on this issue does not change , we will forever have two common agricultural policies : a richer one , targeted at the old Member States , and a poorer one , which will become the lot of the new Member States .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I want to keep my contribution brief and would like to focus on the fact that we are responsible first and foremost for 500 million consumers in the European Union and then for the farmers in the European Union , who produce food for these consumers .
We are equally responsible for both large and small farms .
We are responsible for farms in disadvantaged areas , in grassland regions , and particularly in all areas relating to dairy and meat production .
Commissioner , I wish to thank you for your positive consideration of the milk fund , something I have been demanding for two years , namely since the debate on the mini milk package and the abolition of support measures in this area .
I am convinced that this mechanism will enable us to provide help if we do not first withdraw the money from other farmers , but rather use the resources that have been freed up by the abolition of the market support measures .
Mr President , in this debate we must speak of food safety , food traceability and , above all , food security .
We cannot decouple these issues from our discussions here today and we cannot ignore the fact that the number of farmers continues to decrease very significantly year on year .
An increase in compulsory modulation is quite simply putting your hand into the pocket of Europe 's farmers .
The value of the single farm payment has fallen by approximately 15 % since 2005 due to inflation and other issues and yet the proposal is to cut it further .
Simplification seems to be the buzzword .
However , in Ireland at least , the numbers involved in policing farmers have escalated .
In recent weeks we had a number of helicopters , flanked by 61 ground inspectors , counting sheep in the hills of Connemara , a small area where the price of sheep would not even repay the investment by farmers .
To some , it more resembled the invasion of Iraq rather than the benign hand of Europe .
This is wasteful and conveys an image of an over-bureaucratic Europe , acting in a totally disproportionate manner .
. - ( DE ) Mr President , while I am unhappy with the compromise , I can live with it , because it may be possible to prevent the greatest damage to our farmers if we do not cut direct payments as the Commission so disastrously proposes .
If this money goes into the milk fund , the cut will hurt even less .
Unfortunately I read this morning that the Commissioner had taken to the barricades again , opposing the milk fund .
It does not matter to Luxembourg 's farmers if we do not cut direct payments up to EUR 10 000 because all full-time farmers are above this limit .
The priority must therefore be to avoid cuts or to keep them as small as possible .
Otherwise there will be no future for full-time farmers in Luxembourg .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that this is neither the time nor the place to enter into substantive debate .
The European Parliament has the authority merely to express an opinion on the only issue where the EU has the power of life and death , and on which half of the budget is spent .
My view is that the health check is conservative ; globalisation , which is a goal the EU also has , is paid for by agriculture : the victim of the endless quest for an impossible role of mediation .
My role as an MEP , however , shows the lack of transparency in the application of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
The Commissioner signed Regulation No 250 in 2008 , but the Member States are ignoring it and this will continue to be the case after 30 June 2009 too .
I would argue that the only way left to us in which to proceed is to apply to the appointed control bodies , but we need to remember that we ought to move the debate on agriculture policy in the direction of citizens , who should be provided with information if we wish to take the right route .
If we do not , we will continue to jeopardise the agricultural world , which is a victim of its continuing isolation .
Mr President , I would firstly like to refer to milk .
I am not in favour of a 2 % increase .
I would support a 1 % increase because , although a lot has been said about soft landings , I do not believe it .
I think the world is changing as we sit here .
Over recent months the milk industry , which 12 months ago was certainly a successful part of our produce , is longer so because of changing world markets .
I would like to say to the Commissioner that I am a little concerned about Articles 68 and 69 .
I believe that you can take the word ' common ' and remove it forever from the common agricultural policy .
I would be very careful about this to ensure that we do not give too much responsibility , and that money can simply go back and Member States can create an uneven playing field .
On modulation , I believe we should stick to single figures , but let whatever we have on modulation be mandatory .
Let everybody throughout Europe pay the same level of modulation from the second pillar .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to add a number of points : firstly , we need a reinforced first pillar under the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) so that producers can meet the market 's current needs and problems .
Secondly , any additional differentiation will create income insecurity among producers .
Thirdly , the recommendation for new support mechanisms , such as the mutual and production security fund , cannot be financed with additional expenditure and , fourthly , cofinancing of the first pillar of the CAP opens the door to future cofinancing of the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work on the CAP health check , as it is important to highlight the increased work of Parliament in this process , and I would also like to welcome the attitude of the Council and the Commission in these negotiations .
I believe that it augurs well for future negotiations when Parliament will enjoy full codecision with the Council on agricultural matters .
Coming from an agricultural area in Ireland , it is sad to see that in recent times farmers have turned against the EU project for various reasons , one of which is the perceived lack of transparency of negotiations in the Council .
However , if and when the Lisbon Treaty is adopted , Parliament will be centrally involved and thus there will be a bigger role for open , transparent debate on CAP-related issues , leading to greater legitimacy amongst the farming community .
The way forward in Europe is for Parliament to be fully involved in the decision-making process , and that will only be finally achieved by having codecision .
( PL ) This is a good report .
What is missing , what needs to be changed ?
The review of the common agricultural policy does not take sufficient account of the new situation which has arisen in the world as a whole as well as in Europe as a result of the food crisis .
Too much has happened for this not to be taken into account in a meaningful way .
Many of the issues contained in the European Commission 's proposals fall short of the expectations of new Member States , which demand a fairer direct subsidy system .
I am convinced that the equalisation of subsidy levels between Member States is inevitable .
Commissioner , the Council of Ministers meeting will be accompanied by an 8 000-strong demonstration of tobacco planters .
I hope that their demands will be met .
On other issues , firstly we need to take a cautious approach to abandoning the milk quota system in 2015 .
We need to develop a way of approaching the situation .
The milk market is unstable and must therefore be monitored .
Secondly , we should retain market intervention instruments , for instance storing ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks for your attention and the questions you have put to us .
I should like to address several points , one by one .
Firstly , I would like to talk about modulation , which was mentioned by Mr Goepel , and by Mr Baco , Mr Sanzarello and Mrs Lulling a moment ago .
The issue of the rate of modulation will be , I can assure you , a key element of any compromise .
I have taken note of Parliament 's desire for a compromise solution to be found .
I would add that progressive modulation that is too severe could certainly cause problems for several Member States , but we must be well aware that the very principle of progressive modulation responds to a highly publicised social need .
We , together with Mariann Fischer Boel , must therefore find a compromise and , in that respect , I believe that the position proposed by your rapporteur will shed light on this compromise .
As for modulation , the issue of the rate of cofinancing for additional modulation is another element that must be included in the package .
You have proposed 100 % , which is to say no national cofinancing .
That is very ambitious , but I believe that it is the right way to go .
Next , I should like to address the issue of new challenges .
I fully understood the position of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , considering de facto support of the dairy sector as one of these new challenges financed by modulation .
I believe that this is one of the avenues on which we will work with Mariann Fischer Boel .
Another key issue , ladies and gentlemen , which is wide-ranging and very problematic , is that mentioned by Mr Capoulas Santos , who would like a prudent and moderate approach , a sentiment echoed by Mr Goepel and Mrs Mathieu , and Mr Le Foll just now .
I have mentioned just a few names , but many of you could speak on this issue , the issue of milk quotas .
There are two problems to be solved : increasing quotas and the rate of increase , and support measures .
With regard to increasing quotas , I have observed that the debates in Parliament have revealed greatly differing positions .
To be honest , the situation is the same within the Council of Ministers .
The solution you are recommending - 1 % per year between 2009 and 2010 - and then to make a decision on the basis of a report on continuing the increase , is a prudent approach , in line with the wishes of your rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos .
At the same time , there is the issue of medium-term visibility for agricultural enterprises , as for enterprises in general .
That requires plotting a course from now until 2015 , and , ultimately , my feeling is that the Commission 's proposal is close to a balance .
We are going to work on it , and on support measures in particular , since everyone agrees on support for sensitive regions .
The recommended solution of using Article 68 to implement more structural measures , would , I believe , give us a useful range of tools to support this sector .
With regard to how the financial instruments to be implemented would work , I believe that a discussion is required to find a solution that is acceptable to everyone .
I am , of course , thinking of the ' Milk fund ' .
I would like to say a word , Mr President , on instruments to regulate the market .
I have noted the requests seeking to retain instruments to regulate the market and effective instruments .
I , like you , believe that , in this new global context that many of us have referred to , for agriculture and for food , this production sector , this real economy that affects people 's food supply , needs instruments for intervention in the event of serious market instability , and from this point of view , intervention is an important aspect of the negotiation .
Many Member States , like many MEPs , want to revise the Commission 's initial proposals and to discuss them again .
We are also going to seek a compromise that allows us to retain a genuine and effective safety net .
Lastly , I should like to talk about Article 68 .
There have been many debates here in Parliament , as in the Council , and a strong demand to open up the possibilities for applying this article , which arouses a great deal of interest , while preserving its commonality .
Opening up the possibilities for applying this article would perhaps -certainly in my opinion - enable a move towards supporting the kinds of production such as those in the sheep sector , which has been mentioned and which needs support .
Here too , we are working with the Commissioner along these lines , just as we are going to look for solutions to improve financing conditions .
I am thinking , in particular , of the demands made by many representatives of new Member States , for more fairness and equity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have paid close attention to and taken great interest in listening to all the many detailed speeches that have been given .
On the basis of the opinion that you are going to give , and I would like to thank once again the chairman , Mr Parish , the whole committee and the rapporteur , for the work that has been done , my task is going to be to secure a dynamic political compromise that enables us to adapt the common agricultural policy , while safeguarding it , in the new global context in which we find ourselves .
That is the task on which we are going to work with Mariann Fischer Boel and all her colleagues , whom I thank for the spirit that we have fostered between us over the past months .
I should perhaps like to say a final word to take up a comment made just now by Mrs Aubert , who mentioned the situation of food insecurity .
The Presidency is fully aware that we cannot discuss the common agricultural policy as if we were in a fortress , turning in on ourselves in Europe .
It was precisely in this spirit that , on 3 July , we organised , at the European Parliament , a conference with the Director-General of the World Trade Organization , the Director-General of the World Bank , the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization , many MEPs and Commissioner Louis Michel , on the question : ' Who will feed the world ? '
In the same spirit , we shall organise on 28 November a working meeting , again with Louis Michel , on the link between agriculture and development .
I , like the Presidency , am therefore paying close attention to what is being said about agriculture in order to preserve the European Union 's agricultural and regional food model , which has supported the common agricultural policy for 50 years , but keeping a clear and empathetic perspective on what is happening in other parts of the world .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have been listening carefully and I think that the record on ' catch-the-eye ' shows clearly that there is huge interest in this Parliament in the agricultural sector and the consequences of the decisions that will be taken .
I should like to pick up a few of the issues that have been mentioned .
Firstly , I would like to stress that I think you have either misunderstood or missed something when you tried to convince me that modulation means taking the money away from the farmers , which is definitely not the case .
We need modulation because we have new challenges and we need to bolster farmers ' possibilities to make investments in order to meet these new challenges .
So I think , on the contrary , you can say in modulation we actually increase the funding available for the agricultural sector because there is cofinancing .
That is what it is all about .
If you continue to say that we are taking money from the farmers , then there is a certain misunderstanding among those of you who have chosen this argument .
Milk seems today to have been the big issue .
Neil Parish said in his first speech that you have 27 Member States - 27 customers - in your committee , but , having listened to the discussion today , I would have thought that you had many more , because listening here you can pick and choose any thing from a 0 % increase to a 10 % increase .
The presidency and the Commission are obliged to try to find the right balance .
To those who talk about a milk fund : it is strange because I still recall the 2003 negotiations where we compensated the milk producers all over Europe .
Let me take Germany as an example : German dairy farmers were compensated by EUR 1 billion every year - money transferred from their milk payment into their single payment scheme .
But at that stage I did not hear anyone talking about a milk fund , and that is the reason why , because we know that the dairy sector is facing difficulties , we have now added to the new challenges a milk line .
I am sure that we will be able to design a very nice package for the milk producers in those areas that are facing difficulties .
I must say that I am surprised that there is so much resistance to increasing the milk quota , knowing that last year we collected EUR 338 million in superlevy from European milk producers .
To me this is definitely not the way I want to go forward .
I want to give farmers the possibility to respond to the markets .
Increasing quotas does not mean an obligation to produce : it is only a possibility for those who are strong on the internal or the external markets .
It has to be kept in mind that some of the competitive ones are paying EUR 338 million every year to stay in business .
Concerning redistribution , it is obvious that there was broad agreement that this health check was not going to be a new reform and that we were therefore building on the 2003 reform .
I think both the presidency and the Commission can admit that there is strong pressure from the new Member States to get a more equal payment , and I know that this will be a discussion that will be strongly defended in the 2013 reform .
We might find some solutions even now for the new Member States in the compromise , and I hope you will be surprised in a positive way .
Finally , could I just say , on the issue of tobacco that was raised , that I was impressed by Mr Gklavakis , who is always trying to convince us that tobacco is important , and we believe that is so in his own region .
But tobacco is not in the health check .
The tobacco reform was made in 2004 and was supported by all countries , including tobacco-producing Member States .
As I have said many times , I am certainly not going to reopen the tobacco reform .
But I will be open to help all those Member States , all those regions , that face problems , because there are many possibilities available in the rural development policy .
I am sure we can create solutions that will soften the consequences of the decisions already taken for the tobacco producers .
I have to keep my remarks short , but my conclusion on the discussion today will be clearly that we need today , more than ever before , a common agricultural policy .
I agree with Ms McGuinness that a situation where renationalisation would be the only answer would definitely jeopardise the European agricultural sector .
Let us keep our common agricultural policy with the flexibility that we have included in our different choices within the rural development policy .
But we do need a common European agricultural policy .
That would be my conclusion from the discussions today .
I want to thank all of you for this dedicated approach .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) The long list of speakers and the resolute and impassioned way in which they have expressed their ideas once again confirms how much this subject means to the European Parliament and the importance that should be placed on agriculture , farmers and the rural world in Europe .
There have been no surprises in this debate because , in the main , this has reaffirmed the positions reiterated during the various debates throughout this long discussion process which has lasted over a year and , in the specific case of my political Group , another six months before that .
However , I feel that it has also been clearly demonstrated that there are no alternatives to the positions which represent the mid-ground allowing a responsible compromise that can be accepted by the majority .
The Commission and the Council have also reaffirmed their positions , but I am delighted to note the signs of flexibility and openness that have been given .
I therefore trust in your political realism , dear Mariann and Michel , and in the spirit of compromise to find a final solution which is very close to that proposed to you by Parliament on these vital issues .
I would reiterate the symbolic importance of this approach on the eve of the European Parliament assuming its codecision powers , because I hope that the problem of ratifying the Lisbon Treaty will soon be solved , given that Europe needs the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr Barnier , as I have repeatedly said , we are not yet using codecision , but we are already entering into the spirit of this .
I therefore hope that the difficult negotiations expected today and tomorrow will prove to be very successful .
I am sure that we will be able to find a consensual solution responding to the concerns of European farmers and agriculture who are watching us closely .
We are all convinced , and this will be the best conclusion to this debate , that a common agricultural policy is needed in Europe so that European agriculture can be competitive and environmentally sustainable .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 19 November 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The common agricultural policy forces British consumers to buy food at inflated prices from continental farmers rather than at lower prices available on the world market .
It is estimated that the CAP causes prices to be at least 23 % higher than those prevailing on the world market .
It is also estimated by economists that the cost of the CAP to UK consumers equates to at least 1.2 % of GDP - which is currently an astonishing £ 16.8 billion per annum .
I represent many people in London who struggle to pay their bills .
They face ever-rising taxes and ever-rising prices .
They do not owe continental farmers a living .
If countries want to subsidise their agricultural industries that is their own business , but it should be paid for by their own tax-payers .
The common agricultural policy is paid for by those least able to afford it : pensioners and those on low incomes , those who pay a higher proportion of their disposable income on food .
The CAP is just one of the many reasons why Britain should leave the European Union .
in writing . - ( RO ) I am pleased to note that , one year after the European Commission launched the consultation process for adapting the common agricultural policy to the current needs of farmers and agricultural producers , we have reached a consensus on certain specific proposals .
I feel that the compromise which has been reached on Article 68 is appropriate , especially the increase from 10 % to 15 % in the ceiling for creating the funds required for any new public policy strategic measures in Member States and the introduction of a clear ceiling for use in forms of specific aid .
I would like to come back to the issue concerning the deadline for the complete application of the cross-compliance package in the case of Romania and Bulgaria .
Both these countries will reach the 100 % direct payment ceiling by 1 January 2016 .
Consequently , it is fair that the deadline for the complete application of the cross-compliance package in both countries should be by then .
I note with dismay that the amendment supported by us to this effect has not been adopted .
Bearing in mind the importance of this issue to the new Member States , I urge my fellow Members to take this into account in subsequent discussions so that we can find a solution beneficial to both States and approved by representatives of all the EU 's Member States .
in writing . - ( HU ) Evaluating the situation does not mean simply a review of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
In reality , we are talking about the reform of the CAP and a significant reduction in support to agriculture .
This is unacceptable from the perspective of Hungary and Hungarian farmers .
The reforms to date have done nothing but harm to Hungarian agriculture .
In Hungary , modulation would even affect smaller 20-hectare farms .
What is needed for these smaller farms is not a reduction but rather an increase in direct support .
Applying modulation in the new Member States before 2013 would , moreover , be contrary to the accession agreement .
In the interest of food security , we continue to need support in aid of production and market arrangements , including grain intervention .
We find it unacceptable that the intervention price should be tied to the price at Rouen port , since transport costs mean prices are lower in the more distant and especially the new Member States , and this constitutes discrimination .
We oppose an increase to the milk quota .
The increase to milk quotas in spring proved to be a flawed decision , leading to a fall in milk prices in several Member States .
Increasing the milk quota is particularly contrary to Hungary 's interests , since we have a significant level of unused milk quota .
Such a step would prevent Hungarian producers from increasing their production .
We agree with maintaining support to tobacco producers .
Several thousand families earn their livelihood from tobacco production , notably in the country 's most disadvantaged , north-eastern regions .
I should first like to commend the remarkable work carried out by our rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos , who has continually sought to find a balanced and stable compromise to enable the European Parliament to speak with one voice in the face of a divided and uncertain Council .
The health check we will be voting on today represents an extraordinary opportunity to substantially reflect on how we can free the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) from the dissatisfaction undermining it and to look ahead to the huge amount of work to reform this policy , planned for after 2013 .
The CAP undeniably needs a breath of fresh air , and particularly in social and environmental terms .
In this regard , I am delighted that we have managed to amend the European Commission 's text in the direction of increased social sensitivity , by proposing , in particular , an increase in aid for small farmers and the introduction of ' work ' and ' employment ' factors in the rules for allocating aid .
I am sorry , however , and it is the only reservation I will mention , that the economic and social criteria are not accompanied more by ecological considerations , since ' sustainability ' must become the hallmark of our agricultural policy .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , more should be done to ensure that agricultural aid is allocated in a way that steers agriculture in the direction of sustainable development .
The existing subsidies are generally regarded as just a way of topping up the income of farmers .
Agriculture in the countries on the shores of the Baltic is the biggest polluter of the sea in that region .
If we pay agricultural subsidies , this actually increases emissions into groundwater and so into the sea .
Any kind of business , including agriculture , has to participate in voluntary environmental work and projects .
That is the only way agriculture can claim a right to its own existence in the future .
Why should taxpayers continue to support an occupation that does harm to the surrounding areas when pollution can be outsourced by buying imported food ?
Clean water is now a scarce commodity .
So it is only reasonable that people should have to pay for making it dirty and that that should not come out of public money .
Agriculture has to make proper use of the countless environmental measures that exist .
The recovery of phosphorus and nitrogen is technologically possible , and will also soon be financially lucrative .
These precious natural resources and raw materials must be recycled as is required of other natural resources .
in writing . - ( PL ) As expected , the health check has created an opportunity for delving deeper into the principles of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) than is the case with other areas of the European Union 's policy and budget .
Agricultural policy , which at one time absorbed most of the budget expenditure and will form one-third of the budget by the end of 2013 , has been strongly criticised .
The crowning argument concerned the disproportion between the role played by agriculture in the economy and employment and its share of the EU budget .
This is a misunderstanding .
The CAP as a whole is a Community policy , and its share of the EU 's aggregate public expenditure , both national and common , does not exceed 0.3 % of GDP .
In addition , international realities have changed , and the disaster of famine in developing countries must make us think again of the principles of support for agriculture in Europe .
The European Parliament has discussed the problem carefully , as evidenced by the many amendments .
From the point of view of a state where agriculture is a relatively large contributor to employment , as is the case in Poland , it would be legitimate to raise milk quotas and to provide national support for sectors that are most disadvantaged .
When considering modulation , which has proved the most controversial of the issues , it is worth remembering that the ' new ' Member States will reach 100 % direct subsidy level only in 2013 , and that modulation may be perceived as a harbinger of re-nationalisation of agricultural policy , which would be a disadvantage .
in writing . - ( RO ) As a representative of a region with a significant agriculture sector in Romania , one of the new Member States , I do not think that the disparities in treatment between farmers from these States and those from the old European Union States are being reduced as a result of the assessments carried out during the common agricultural policy 's health check .
However , it is helpful that national milk quotas for Romania have not been changed , along with the fact that Member States have the opportunity to increase their milk quotas for a certain period of time if these quotas are underused in other Member States .
Bearing in mind the current crisis affecting this sector too , it is important to propose the creation of a milk fund , intended to support restructuring in this sector .
Furthermore , I think that , before applying the new regulations on dairy quotas starting from 2015 , producers must have the opportunity to adapt to market changes and to invest according to market demands , bearing in mind in particular that the deadlines for investment aid applications are relatively lengthy .
In addition , to enable producers to invest according to market demands , the limit on the set quota must be removed .
in writing . - ( RO ) I heard one of my fellow Members talking about the way to share sweets between two children .
Continuing the analogy , I would like to draw attention to the fact that , if the same child were to be a Romanian or Bulgarian farmer in the future , I would say that he was going to receive what he deserved after eight years .
My question is whether he will still be a child in eight years ' time .
When I , as a Romanian MEP , joined the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , my attention was drawn to the phrase ' soft landing ' , which is often used when referring to milk quotas , for example .
I asked then and I am still asking today : how can Romanian and Bulgarian farmers reconcile the ' takeoff ' procedure with the ' soft landing ' procedure ?
When Romania had barely started the accession procedures , a Danish partner said to me that , during this process , the trickiest chapter would be agriculture .
I hope today that , two years after joining , Romanian agriculture will provide an opportunity for a united Europe .
in writing . - ( BG ) Continuing to reform the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is important for allowing Europe to maintain its leading role in this sector .
This , of course , should not be at the cost of producers or the end consumer .
It is a well-known fact that the European Union has turned from an exporter to an importer of agricultural produce .
This shows that the outcome of today 's debate needs to be a balanced one , so that we can be sure that the interests of all citizens have been protected .
I believe that a large proportion of the Commission 's proposals are beneficial to farmers in Bulgaria , particularly as mismanagement on the part of the Bulgarian Government in this sector and the abuses committed resulted in the failure to reach the results envisaged in the pre-accession mechanisms .
For this reason in the past few months we have witnessed protests by agricultural producers , mainly dairy and cereal farmers .
As a result , without jeopardising the full liberalisation of the market for dairy produce , it is important to provide security for those regions that are highly dependent on dairy farming for their livelihoods .
In Bulgaria , there are a large number of dairy farmers in alpine and other areas with specific difficulties .
For that reason I support the idea that more funding should be allocated for their development and a specialised fund for milk producers generated .
School Fresh Fruit Scheme ( amendment of Single CMO Regulation ) ( debate )

The next item is the report by Niels Busk , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulations ( EC ) No 1290 / 2005 on the financing of the common agricultural policy and ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products ( Single CMO regulation ) in order to set up a School Fruit Scheme - C6-0315 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner Fischer-Boel , Minister Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has tabled an extremely constructive proposal for setting up a school fruit scheme in order to reverse the unfortunate trend of increased obesity amongst European schoolchildren .
It is a proposal that I warmly welcome .
The World Health Organization ( WHO ) recommends that children eat 400 g of fruit and vegetables per day .
Unfortunately , there are very few children who do this .
In the EU , 22 million children are overweight and approximately 5 million children are severely overweight .
The worst thing about this is that the number is rising by 400 000 children each year .
An increased intake of fruit and vegetables reduces the risk of a large number of diseases and prevents overweight and severe overweight .
Eating habits are established in childhood and the indications are that children who learn to eat a lot of fruit and vegetables continue to do so as adults .
It is therefore vital that we intervene at an early stage if we are to succeed in influencing our children 's eating habits .
Excessive weight entails a greater risk of cardiovascular disease , diabetes , high blood pressure and certain forms of cancer .
These diseases constitute an ever increasing threat to public health in the EU , and the cost of treatment weighs heavily on Member States ' health budgets .
The Commission refers to its impact assessment , in which two studies were carried out which shed light on the link between health expenditure and too low an intake of fruit and vegetables .
Expenditure on a school fruit scheme should be viewed in this light , and therefore the scheme will represent an actual saving in the Member States ' health budgets .
Thus , it will , overall , have a positive effect , first and foremost on public health , but also on the European economy .
Until we have achieved the objective of getting children to eat 400 g of fruit per day , it will be the case that the more fruit that children eat the greater the savings .
Thus , prevention is cheaper than cure .
As rapporteur , I have proposed that we quadruple the amount that is intended to be appropriated in the Community budget .
The Commission 's original proposal of EUR 90 million would , unfortunately , only stretch to a single piece of fruit once a week for 30 weeks for children aged six to ten years .
This is far from enough if the scheme is to have any appreciable effect on children 's eating habits .
One piece of fruit one day a week is not sufficient to change eating habits or to have an effect on public health .
The optimum solution would be for all children to receive one piece of fruit every school day .
It is therefore necessary to mobilise more funds in the Community budget .
A majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development agreed to mobilise EUR 500 million and dispense with the national cofinancing .
I do not agree with this .
I hope therefore that in the vote today we can sort this matter out , as I have retabled a proposal on behalf of my Group to the effect that we should mobilise EUR 360 million .
This should be supplemented by the Member States ' contribution and therefore will , overall , provide a far higher amount than the EUR 500 million .
A majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also agreed that only fruit and vegetables from EU countries should be distributed under the scheme .
This , for me , is far too protectionist , and will also make the scheme very bureaucratic .
It must therefore be the Member States which decide - from the list compiled by the Commission - which fruit can be distributed and which fruit will be included in the scheme .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , we in the Presidency are very happy to discuss this scheme with the European Parliament , as proposed by the European Commission and brought personally - and I should like to pay tribute to her - by Mrs Fischer Boel .
It is an important scheme for the nutrition of the youngest citizens , and it is a practical and effective step to combat the rise in obesity among young people .
Mr Busk has just stated the figures , and I can corroborate them : one child in five in Europe is overweight or at risk of obesity .
Childhood obesity in Europe is growing by 2 % per year .
We must therefore encourage young people to vary their diet and to consume more fruit and vegetables .
I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that implementing this scheme , which everyone is in favour of , shows the important role that the common agricultural policy can play and does play in encouraging the consumption and , more simply , the production of healthy , quality produce .
Agriculture is naturally suited to meet this dual challenge , which consists of the challenge of quantity - which was also its first challenge , with the first contract drawn up with farmers in the 1960s - but also , the challenge of quality , relating to the quality and safety of products .
That , ladies and gentlemen , proves that Europe can respond and does respond to the specific concerns of our fellow citizens and that agriculture is clearly at the centre of the major challenges faced by our society .
When we talk about this ' fruit and vegetables ' scheme , we are talking about a tangible , people-based Europe , centred on citizens , which Europeans expect .
This programme , ladies and gentlemen , has been very well-received within the Council of Ministers , and the debates we have had , which we will continue today and tomorrow , show that , overall , we are all making progress on this issue .
It is my intention to achieve a political agreement in the Council this week .
That is why I am naturally paying close attention to Parliament 's position on this issue so that I can include your position and your support in the debates of the Council .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to offer my sincerest thanks to your rapporteur , Mr Busk , for the very detailed and impassioned work he has done on this issue , and now I am happy to listen to you , and the Commissioner .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly it feels good to have Parliament behind me on the proposal on the School Fruit Scheme .
I would , as I normally do , thank the committee and the rapporteur , Niels Busk , for the work that has been done .
Before I comment on some of the issues that have been raised here - and in Parliament as well - I would just like to say something about a topic that has recently been discussed at some length in the Council .
A number of Member States have asked to be able , in some cases , to ask parents for a contribution to the Scheme .
The arguments for and against are not straightforward . In the end , the Commission has agreed that Member States should have the freedom to require cofinancing from parents in some cases .
On the other hand , I see no reason to force this on all Member States .
Therefore we would make it possible for Member States to choose whether they want to take this possibility on board .
Then when we review the Scheme in 2012 we would really focus on the end-value to be gained from parental contributions .
I have said from the beginning that what we are now putting on the table is not going to solve the obesity problems among young people in Europe , but I believe that it will be a helping hand and give a clear signal from the Commission that it is important to give our young people good eating habits .
With regard to the overall budget , we have allocated EUR 90 million .
I have seen some different figures , as Niels Busk rightly said - from EUR 500 million down to EUR 360 million - but the EUR 90 million that we have proposed is certainly not written in stone for the future .


I think that we should also take into account in our review of the whole programme to be made in 2012 whether we need to increase the budget .
I think it has been important that we have indicated that we are ready to reallocate the money .
If there is a surplus of money in one Member State , it can be reallocated .
That will hopefully mean that we spend the money in the best possible way .
Regarding the type of fruit and vegetables to be distributed , I feel that it is very safe to leave this in the capable hands of the Member States .
Whether they want to use processed food or to deliver local fruit and vegetables -or even to have the possibility of distributing ACP bananas to their children - the final choice should definitely be made by the Member States .
I think that in this way we will get by far the best result .
I am looking forward to a fruitful discussion on this issue .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Barnier , first of all , I would like to thank our rapporteur for the work he has done and the efforts he has made to reconcile the different points of view .
We all agree on how important this scheme is in terms of teaching children to adopt healthy habits and therefore combat obesity , but also in terms of helping families who cannot afford to buy fruit for their children .
I support the Commission 's proposal , but I think that it absolutely must be improved .
The EUR 90 million proposed in annual funding is not enough .
Supplementing the funds already allocated is one of the conditions for this scheme 's success .
I also think that the proposal made in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to rule out parents having to contribute to this should be introduced at least for the scheme 's launch .
I would also like to encourage , as part of the scheme , the provision of fresh , traditional fruit , produced on the Community 's territory .
I would like to stress the fact that the Member States need to specify which fruit are to be distributed , taking into specific consideration the seasonal fruit and vegetables produced locally .
As required by the principle of subsidiarity , Member States should , when determining the target group , be granted sufficient flexibility to enable them , in keeping with their needs , to supply school fruit to as wide a circle of consumers as possible .
The scheme should equally bring young consumers to appreciate fruit and vegetables and should therefore have a highly positive effect on public health and the fight against child poverty , especially in new Member States .
Provision may be made for joint measures to promote consumption of certain products , to be combined with an additional health and nutrition education component and to provide encouragement to regional producers , especially those in mountain regions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , this scheme has been long-awaited by the fruit and vegetable sector , not only because of the difficulties that it is facing , but also because of the worrying decline in consumption .
This scheme is intended to improve public health and I therefore believe it should be a European scheme , with full Community financing .
I do not agree that parents should have to contribute to its funding because the same thing will happen as always : those children whose parents can afford to contribute will eat fruit and vegetables in school , whereas those who cannot will be left outside the scheme .
This scheme must therefore be financed by the Community so that it can be applied uniformly .
I also particularly want to say that emphasis must be placed on educational measures .
This scheme must not simply involve children eating apples ; rather , they must know what type of apple they are eating and what its nutritional properties are and they must understand the beneficial effects of that fruit on their health and development .
Naturally , the products must come with full quality guarantees , with priority being given , if possible , to seasonal fruit .
Also , where possible , I support the distribution of fruits and vegetables of Community origin .
I believe that the beneficial effects of this scheme , which I applaud and on which I congratulate the Commissioner , will be seen immediately .
They will be seen not only in the present and future health of our children and their food education , but also , and very importantly , in the fruit and vegetable sector .
This is a productive sector which truly forms part of our European cultural heritage and which allows us to enjoy a balanced , healthy and varied diet .
I feel it is worthwhile trusting and investing in this scheme to distribute fruit and vegetables in our schools .
In my opinion , the budget is somewhat limited so I would repeat that I support full Community financing of such an ambitious scheme .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I very much value the positive and intelligent work done by Mr Busk on this proposal , which forms part of the reform of the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables , designed to reinforce the sector 's competitiveness and the way in which it is tailored to the market , and to combat the fall in consumption .
The proposed scheme to promote fruit and vegetables in schools would help to encourage young people to eat fruit and increase consumption .
In addition , the free distribution of fruit and vegetables in schools should be aimed at combating the problem of overweight schoolchildren ; it is a well-known fact , unfortunately , that over 22 million children are affected by obesity .
In order to effectively implement the scheme to distribute fruit in schools , it is vital for Community aid to cover all the associated logistical costs , such as the purchase of the appropriate vending machines , which would otherwise have to come out of schools ' budgets or from pupils ' families .
National funding ought therefore to be of an additional nature , and ought to be restricted to new schemes and the extension of existing ones .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , there is nothing to dislike in this proposal and I commend our rapporteur for coming up with it , especially with an election in the offing .
I think any politician in this room looking to June next year will be in favour of seeing Europe 's children eating better and eating European local fruit .
It is good news for Europe 's farmers as well because this is creating a local market .
It is good news for the health budget of the future and more importantly it is good news for the children themselves .
If we start children eating healthy at a young age , they will keep up the habit .
Finland has demonstrated and proven that aggressive intervention at an early age does make a difference , and that is very much to be welcomed .
If we speculate a little on the agriculture budget now , we will accumulate on the health budget of the future .
Coming from Scotland I am ashamed to say that we have a particular interest in this , in that 21 % - one in five - of our primary school children are overweight .
That is utterly unsustainable .
We cannot look towards a future of increasing obesity , so this is part of the solution to that and I am delighted to commend it to the House .
It is good news all round .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( GA ) - Mr President , this proposal will fulfil the objectives of the Union in relation to the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and will provide a funding framework for initiatives aimed at increasing the amount of fruit and vegetables eaten by children .
This could help to combat childhood obesity and will also benefit our fruit and vegetable farmers in the long term .
Eating habits and patterns are developed during the first few years of life .
As such , it is important that we are able to encourage healthier eating habits among children .
The Member States should be able to choose the best method .
Research suggests that eating patterns tend to be unhealthiest in low-income households .
Therefore , the distribution of free fruit and vegetables in schools could make a large difference to children 's eating habits .
I welcome Mr Niels Busk 's report and thank him and the Commissioner for the work they have done .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this project is being dressed up as all about concern for the welfare of children .
However , the real agenda is a disturbing mixture of Nanny Brussels , control-freakism , sheer naked propaganda and market fixing .
Nanny Brussels likes to be in control of everything , including what we eat .
Putting itself in charge of what children eat at school is the first major step in that process .
The propaganda angle is that each piece of fruit will have an EU label on it and the whole project will be supported by a massive publicity campaign .
In regard to the fruit market , I understand it will create a great many opportunities for mischief such as mandatory rules that all fruit must come from inside the EU .
In the case of bananas , this could at a stroke rule out British suppliers who obtain their bananas from British Commonwealth Caribbean countries , and thus it will provide a lucrative new opportunity for the French islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , we are being bombarded with headlines .
We are told that we are obese , our children are obese , we are eating the wrong foods and we eat too little fresh fruit and too few vegetables .
Five portions per day , or around 400 g of fruit and vegetables , is the recommended daily allowance for a healthy and balanced diet .
It is not always easy to keep to this .
Food needs to be healthy , last a long time , taste good and cost as little as possible .
However , the fast pace of life today means that it is often difficult for us to balance the demands of family and work , so that we sometimes do not have enough time to cook and instead choose semi-prepared or fully prepared products .
There is nothing wrong with this , provided we are aware of the importance of fresh fruit and vegetables .
People who learn to eat a diet rich in fruit and vegetables at an early stage will also maintain a healthy diet later in life .
I therefore expressly support the Commission 's proposal to introduce a school fruit scheme funded to the tune of EUR 90 million .
What a wonderful idea , Commissioner !
However , as you have recognised in your provisions , Member States must be allowed to organise the scheme according to their own national requirements .
It must be possible to provide the relevant regional and seasonal produce .
Member States must also develop a strategy to define the best way in which to implement a school fruit scheme and integrate it into the curriculum .
Healthy eating is part of general education .
Children must learn , for example , that , as well as a hot vegetable , carrots can also be enjoyed in the form of soup , salad , cakes or in baked dishes .
They need to know what a potato tastes like if it is not made into crisps or chips .
They need to have their interest stimulated in the many ways of preparing regional produce .
Information is the only way to lay the foundations for a healthy diet .
Knowledge is the key to a healthy lifestyle .
The school fruit scheme can make a valuable contribution in this context .
( HU ) Mr Barnier , Commissioner , like every initiative , this one too has many masters .
After all , seven towns laid claim to being Homer 's birthplace .
Many people think that this was their initiative .
Based on the report of proceedings , I am proud that on 10 May 2005 , in the debate on the reform of the market in fruit and vegetables , I proposed this scheme , and I am grateful to the Commissioner that it is now to become reality .
Those who have spoken before me have explained why this is very important .
It is important not just from a social perspective but also in order to teach young people about nutritional culture .
This is a French pear , but I will not eat it because it is forbidden to eat it here .
It is very important that , when young people receive school fruit bearing the EU logo , they should know - from childhood onwards - that this is safe and not full of chemicals , but wherever possible organic .
Let us teach children about nutritional culture , as this is a very important task .
I congratulate Mr Busk on this .
I will not eat [ this pear ] , because I will not break the rules , but I think that all of us can be proud of this scheme . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , sometimes it is great to be able to come into this Chamber and support a really positive European proposal and , despite Mr Titford 's attempt to deflate our good humour , today is such a day .
This proposal ticks so many boxes .
It promotes healthy eating habits among young children and adolescents .
It enhances the overall health of young Europeans .
It ensures that EU money is spent on a project that is already being shown to deliver positive results in many Member States , and it is a practical , down-to-earth , workable proposal .
I am very familiar with a similar programme in Ireland called ' Food Dudes ' - because my grandson has kept me up to date .
It has been shown that this programme is effective , with long-standing results across the age range 4-12 and these results stand up regardless of gender , school size and socioeconomic factors .
Therefore , we are building on firm foundations .
I am happy to support increased Community funding and to give particular consideration to organic and locally produced fruit and vegetables .
I want to congratulate the Commissioner and our rapporteur Mr Niels Busk , and I am very pleased to hear the response from the Council .
This proposal will contribute positively to quality of life and health in the EU .
( SV ) Mr President , the fact that fruit and vegetables are important for people is hardly news , nor is the fact that they are important foods for children .
For children to be given fruit at school is a good thing .
It is good for health and provides a badly-needed energy supplement .
However , what does the proposal we are currently debating actually involve ?
It is in fact a pure propaganda proposal from the EU .
The purpose of this initiative is to win cheap political points while presumably at the same time persuading children of the excellent qualities of the EU .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has tabled some absurd proposals , including the claim that European fruit is better than any other fruit .
Only EU fruit is to be provided , for example bananas from remote regions .
This is downright protectionism .
The intention is for children to learn that the EU is good and that fruit from the EU is even better .
The Commission and the European Parliament should be ashamed of themselves .
Mr President , I am eating an apple courtesy of Mr Busk .

He is giving away apples outside so if any Members want to go and get one I am sure Mr Busk will be happy to give them an apple !
I think this is an excellent report .
As Ms Harkin said , we often come to this Chamber and cannot be as glowing and look forward to such a good initiative .
We must , however , provide more funds to ensure that our young people are able to access , partake of and utilise this opportunity to the full , because this is one of those rare occasions when we can offer something .
We complain about the situation and read in the press and the media about how bad the problems of obesity and suchlike are among schoolchildren .
Our young people today are nonetheless excellent people but have lots of pressures on them that maybe we in the past did not have .
I think this is one opportunity where we can give them the possibility of good healthy eating .
I welcome this , support this and offer my congratulations .

- ( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Commission has proposed the allocation of EUR 90 million from the Community budget for a scheme where every child aged between 6 and 10 will receive one portion of fruit or vegetables every week .
I would urge Member States to expand this scheme and its associated financing , both at European and national level , so that all children , including those of pre-school age , can receive a portion of fruit every day .
I hope that we will all approve the increase in the budget to EUR 500 million .
I welcome the fact that the scheme must only involve fresh fruit and vegetables produced in the European Union .
They should be seasonal and come from local , organic farming .
I would like to present a similar initiative launched by the Romanian Government back in 2003 , whereby all children in pre-school and primary education receive a glass of milk and a fresh roll every school day .
Introducing a proper diet for children of school and pre-school age is part of the health education we need to provide for the younger generation .
( PL ) Mr President , providing primary and secondary schoolchildren with fruit is undoubtedly the right idea , since it has not only an economic dimension , but a much broader social one .
This is because it develops healthy eating habits and thus improves the general health of society .
There is no doubt that EUR 90 million is too little to ensure proper functioning of the scheme .
The involvement of national authorities and school founding bodies as well as the community at large would therefore be desirable .
I hope that the School Fruit Scheme will be widely supported and that Mr Busk 's efforts will not have been in vain .
( PT ) We would highlight the importance of setting up a proper scheme for the distribution , free of charge and on a daily basis , of seasonal fresh fruit and vegetables to schools , with priority being given to pre-school and primary-school children .
This scheme is essential given its positive effects in terms of healthy eating , public health , the fight against child poverty and the encouragement and stimulus that may be given to regional products , including those of mountain regions , produced locally by our farmers .
This requires much greater funding than is proposed by the European Commission .
As a result , Commissioner , the proposals tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to which we also contributed , should be taken into account .
I must also congratulate our rapporteur on the work carried out .
Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner 's proposal on school fruit .
It is very important that we get this scheme going .
I also agree with her that it needs subsidiarity , because what we want is a system that is not too bureaucratic so that we can actually get it into our schools .
I also think we need flexibility on the type of fruit that we can provide , because some times of year it will be very difficult to get fresh fruit and we may occasionally need processed fruit .
Let us not have too many prescriptive amendments but , rather , get this scheme accepted .
I also think that one or two of Parliament 's proposals on the amount of funding needed are too much .
Because , if we had codecision powers in this Parliament , we would have to sign up to the budget as well as the process .
If we are to be credible in this Parliament , let us put forward a scheme that is fundable , gives school fruit to the children who most need it and then they will progress to eating fruit in the future .
This is a scheme .
Let me say to Mr Titford that I am not worried whether Europe provides it , whether Britain provides it , France provides it or whatever , but what we have to be sure of is that school fruit goes into our schools .
( DA ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am , in fact , opposed to agricultural aid and any extension of this , but when it comes to improving our children 's health , I think that we should actually do an awful lot .
All organisations fighting against disease have unequivocally recommended the introduction of fruit schemes in schools .
Even small amounts of fruit appear to make a difference to health .
I therefore wholeheartedly support the Commission 's proposal .
However , I think that it is important for fruit and health to be the central issue .
I am therefore opposed to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's proposal that the fruit should only come from the EU .
That is totally wrong .
I think that the focus should be on children 's health and not on agricultural economics .
Mr President , I just want to say a few words to express my feelings on the conclusions of this debate , which has been extremely lively and consensual .
In general terms , I find it reflects the very original initiative of Mr Busk and Mrs de Lange .
The debate shows that there is virtually unanimous support for this scheme proposed by the European Commission to encourage young Europeans to eat more fruit and vegetables .
I can tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that the Council of Ministers also shares this commitment , and we will strive to achieve a consensus based on the position that you will adopt with the Council in broad terms .
I shall just return to four of what I consider to be important points from among your comments .
Firstly , with regard to the issue of the budget allocated to this operation .
The proactive approach taken by Parliament clearly shows that you are committed to this initiative , and I am happy about that .
I shall report on this proposal to the Council and I agree with Mrs Fischer Boel that the sum of EUR 90 million referred to in the proposal is not , as she said , set in stone .
The second point I would note is that the main concern we all have is to give young people wholesome fruit and offer them a range of healthy products , with no added sugar .
The third point relates to the promotion of local products to increase awareness about the quality of Community products .
I would also add , with regard to the concern just expressed by Mr Casaca about the outermost regions , that there are , on the Community market , products that come from these outermost regions - which form an integral part of our European Union - and that are high-quality products .
That is also understood in your deliberations , and this concern is also shared within the Council of Ministers .
Finally , you have a expressed a position that is also in line with that of the Council : a Community framework , like the one presented to you , is required for this kind of action , but we must also give Member States the adaptability and flexibility necessary to implement this scheme as closely as possible to communities , associations and citizens .
To sum up these four points , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to repeat that this timely initiative is , certainly , limited in terms of budget , but that it is an initiative that is symbolic of a Europe that is positive and proactive , a Europe that acknowledges the new challenges of our society and above all , ladies and gentlemen , a Europe that will go into schools and be spoken and thought of favourably by the young people of Europe .
I believe that the image that we are projecting through this Commission initiative is one of a positive Europe that is focused on citizens . That is what the citizens of Europe expect .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank you for the overwhelming support for this important proposal .
Let me say to Mr Titford and Ms Goudin that to say that this proposal is propaganda is pure nonsense .
( Applause )
This was meant - as many of you have mentioned - to give good eating habits to our school children .
I am quite sure that if we manage it in a clever way , building on the experiences that we have already had from the Irish ' Food Dudes ' programme , we can do quite a lot .
Then in 2012 we can see whether we can improve the system further .
I completely agree with Ms Salinas García that we can use this in an educational way , not only to educate kids to eat more fruit and vegetables but also to try to explain where the fruit and vegetables come from , how important it is , etc .
I am looking forward , together with Michel Barnier , to finding the right balance in the Council as well to the benefit to the health of our young people .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for the many positive contributions and , in this connection , I would also like to thank you , Commissioner , for your particularly constructive cooperation .
That is actually to be expected , as we always work well with you and your cabinet .
I would also like to thank you , Minister .
It has been an enormous pleasure to cooperate with you and the French Presidency , because you have taken the time , to an unusual degree , to really talk through the issues in depth .
The Presidency does not always have the time to do this .
I would also like to remind everyone in the House that all of the contributions made here called for more than the EUR 90 million to be mobilised .
I would like to remind you of this with the simple observation that , if we do not mobilise more money , this scheme will become a huge administrative apparatus with very little fruit being distributed .
We cannot allow that to happen if we really want to help change the eating habits of children , which is something that , unfortunately , is very much needed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 18 November 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( NL ) We are convinced that we have to throw our weight behind projects that guarantee all young people up to the age of 12 a piece of school fruit a day .
Schools play a crucial role in teaching them a healthy lifestyle .
Healthy food and sufficient physical exercise help prevent obesity .
Children who learn to like fruit at school will carry on eating fruit into adulthood .
Many schools already make huge efforts to offer children fruit every day , but the funds to do this are too limited .
European financial support for school fruit is therefore important .
We would therefore make an emotional appeal to the European Commission and the Council to support this budget increase .
After all , it is the health of our young people that is at stake , and this cost would be recovered in time .
in writing . - ( LT ) It is important that the principle of subsidiarity is applied in the implementation of this scheme , so that the Member States themselves decide the age of the children that the School Fresh Fruit Scheme is aimed at and which fruit and vegetables should be supplied .
I also think that priority should be given to products of Community origin .
However , we should not refuse products originating from outside the Community , as this would violate competition and World Trade Organization rules .
I think that the administration of this scheme should be as simple as possible , thus I propose that the rules on strategy preparation be dropped .
Preparing a national strategy for the implementation of one measure and with a small budget is too strict a requirement .
Instead of strategy preparation there could be the requirement to prepare national administration rules , incorporating certain provisions set out in the strategy implementation rules presented by the Commission .
I would like to urge everyone to think about the need for strategy organisation when preparing the scheme implementation rules ( this point is important for Lithuania because of the administration ) .
The implementation of the School Fresh Fruit Scheme should involve additional funds from national budgets , as the scheme should be partly funded by the Member States .
However , even in the midst of the current financial crisis , we must look to the long-term prospects of protecting the health of our children and young people .
Let us not cast off the weight of responsibility from our shoulders .
in writing . - ( RO ) The proposal for a regulation concerning fruit for children at school is part of a series of initiatives launched by the Commission with the main aim of combating obesity and promoting a healthy diet .
The budget of EUR 90 million proposed by the Commission would have proved to be insufficient to achieve the scheme 's objective .
The ALDE Group 's initiative to increase Community funding to EUR 360 million is an important step in the right direction .
Member States in turn will make their contribution to give a final budget of EUR 720 million .
I firmly believe that only with such a budget will the scheme prove to be effective .
We will therefore be able to offer an acceptable number of portions of fruit per week to pupils aged between 6 and 10 .
At the same time , I would encourage educational institutions to introduce nutrition lessons as part of the curriculum to explain the theory behind the role of a healthy diet .
It is only by making a joint , coordinated effort that we will manage to change the eating habits of future generations .
in writing . - I am happy to support the scheme to provide school children with fruit in order to encourage healthier eating habits in the young .
Hopefully , this project will go some way towards modifying the eating patterns of the youngest members of European society .
Long-term studies have shown that eating habits acquired in childhood serve as a model for life .
They have the potential not only to influence this generation of children , but also their children .
More interestingly it has been reported that children 's food preferences have an impact on the eating habits of their parents .
Let us hope that this worthwhile scheme goes some of the way towards making us all healthier and fitter .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am pleased that we are setting up a Community scheme to promote eating fruit in schools .
The positive impact of this scheme can be considered on many levels : social , economic and financial .
As a member of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I can see that the scheme will have clearly favourable consequences on European agriculture and fruit farming , in the form of increased demand for fruit and the maintenance of high production levels in Europe .
I am also a father , and as a father I can see a positive outcome which is hard to quantify : the health of the young generation .
Increasing the proportion of fruit and vegetables in the diet of school-age children is of huge importance , as their eating habits are formed during that time .
In Poland , fruit and vegetable consumption is approximately 250 g per person per day .
This level is among the lowest in the Community : only the Czech Republic , Latvia and Slovakia consume less .
The Community average is 380 g , whereas the World Health Organization / Food and Agriculture Organization recommended minimum daily consumption of fruit and vegetables is 400 g .
Countries such as Poland need a major school fruit promotional campaign .
I hope that the School Fruit Scheme will soon be successfully introduced in all educational institutions throughout the European Union and will remain a permanent element of its educational policy .
The European Union 's desire to support the consumption of fruit in school is certainly to be welcomed .
Sound nutrition in childhood offers good prospects for a healthy lifestyle later in life , and a properly educated child will popularise healthy nutrition among his or her family and friends as well .
Those responsible for the scheme also need to look closely at what kind of fruit they are offering children .
It would be a serious mistake if schools were to end up with fruit filled with pesticide residues and therefore difficult to sell .
As a result , the scheme needs to be set up in such a way that schools are provided only with healthy fruit containing pesticide levels well below the maximum allowable limits .
It is likewise desirable , in the interests of healthy nutrition , primarily to use Community funds to provide domestic fruit that contains lower sugar levels and higher fibre , rather than to offer bananas , for instance .
in writing . - ( RO ) The illnesses from which modern man suffers are due to diet , but they can be cured through following the right diet .
I support the distribution of fruit in schools .
I cannot help thinking of the fact that in Romania a glass of milk and a roll have been distributed in schools for free since 2002 .
While , at the start , we were happy to offer this benefit only to children in primary schools , since 2006 this measure has also been extended to pre-school children and since 2007 to secondary school children .
The European School Fruit Scheme will , at least in Romania , supplement the one mentioned above .
There are numerous benefits to this . I would like to mention just two of them :
The World Health Organization recommends that children up to the age of 11 consume at least 400 grams of fruit and vegetables per day .
I am thinking in this case too of the European Parliament resolution of 25 September 2008 concerning the White Paper on diet-related health problems .
Let us not forget that food and the way we eat play a decisive role in helping us to maintain our health as it is .
Disparities will be reduced : children come from different socio-economic backgrounds , with some of them being hugely disadvantaged .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Commission 's proposal to introduce the consumption of fruit in schools will be beneficial to the health of the European Union 's citizens , making a significant contribution to the economic and social development of every Member State .
Eating habits are formed during childhood and can last a person 's whole life .
Schools are the most suitable starting point for determining this type of behaviour as the school is the second form of authority , after the family , which has direct contact with children and significant influence over them .
This scheme , combined with the launch of a nutritional education scheme in schools , would produce more results in terms of developing preferences for a healthy diet , which includes fruit and vegetables .
Children need to be , first and foremost , educated and encouraged to eat this type of product with increased nutritional value so that the scheme will achieve its intended objective , in terms of preventing obesity-related illnesses , malnutrition or diabetes , which may occur in adult life .
The amendments proposed by Parliament will improve the Commission 's text considerably by allocating EUR 500 million per year to finance the introduction of the scheme to provide pupils with fruit and vegetables , which will consequently boost agricultural production at European Union level .
Draft general budget for the 2009 financial year ( deadline for tabling draft amendments ) : see Minutes
1 .
Protocol to the EC-Kazakhstan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (
2 .
Joint undertaking to develop the new generation European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) (
3 .
Statutory markings for two- or three-wheel motor vehicles ( codified version ) (
4 .
Company law concerning single-member private limited-liability companies ( codified version ) (
5 .
The driver 's seat on wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified version ) (
6 .
Guarantee Fund for external actions ( codified version ) (
7 .
Convention on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (
8 .
European system of national and regional accounts in the Community (
9 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (
10 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Frank Vanhecke (
- Before the vote :
- ( FR ) Mr President , my request is based on Rule 168 of our Rules of Procedure .
For 10 years , Mr President , I sat on the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I carefully read Mr Lehne 's report and I must express - and I would say irrespective of the political persuasion of the Member in question - my astonishment that , at this point , we are deviating from the established case-law of the committee , which has been to uphold the parliamentary immunity of members prosecuted for political reasons .
However , Mr Vanhecke is being prosecuted as the head of the publication .
He is being prosecuted for an article , whose author is known , and , according to Belgian law , as acknowledged by the report , in this situation , the head of the publication should not be prosecuted .
What is more , the prosecution is based on the fact that the foreign identity of those who desecrate graves has been revealed .
It was brought on the initiative of Belgian socialist councillors .
It is clear , and this is my last point , Mr President ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr Gollnisch , I apologise , but no debate on voting of this type is permitted ; I gave you the floor for one minute to illustrate the request , but you have spoken for longer , and we cannot open a debate .
( The request for referral back to committee was rejected )
11 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Massimo D 'Alema (
12 .
Improving consumer education and awareness on credit and finance (
13 .
Consumer Markets Scoreboard (
14 .
General arrangements for excise duty (
Before the vote on the amended proposal :
Mr President , I would ask all those Members who do not wish to revisit the days before 1992 , that is to say , before the common market was established , to vote against the report , because what Parliament does with the votes it receives is shameful .
The report confuses everything : health , taxation and so on .
Vote against the report ; by doing so you will be voting for the Commission , which has made a good proposal .
( Applause from the right )
It seems to me that the opinion of the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , is clear , regardless of whether it is shared .
We will move on to a roll-call vote on the entire proposal , as amended .
( PT ) I want to protest about the statement made by Mrs Lulling who is trying to condition the vote of Members in this House .
This does not make sense .
The interpretation being given is one that we do not share .
It is only in this sense that I would ask Members , who know what this is about , who know that we defending other interests , namely public health interests and the interests of citizens and countries , to vote for the report .
( Applause from the left )
I would like to remind Members that at this point in the conduct of the voting procedure there is no provision for debate .
Under the Rules of Procedure , the rapporteur is entitled to express her own opinion and therefore I have obviously given her that right , and I did not know whether the next request to speak was on procedural grounds .
Please excuse me , everyone , but there are other requests to speak and I intend not to grant them but to continue with the vote .
15 .
School Fresh Fruit Scheme ( amendment of Single CMO Regulation ) (
16 .
EMU10 : The first 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union and future challenges (
After the vote :
) . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
We have now voted on a large number of joint amendments from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Our voting order lists always contain the abbreviation PSE / PPE-DE .
Alphabetically things are quite different .
Is there some procedural rule that explains the natural pre-eminence of the socialists ?
( Heckling )
Mr Rack , I am pleased to be able to answer you in real time , because the administrative services tell me that the indications of those who have signed amendments received jointly from the political groups are transcribed in the voting list exactly in the order of signing indicated by the groups .
In this case , therefore , there is no discretion in the application of alphabetical order .
17 .
Application of the principle of equal pay for men and women (
18 .
Supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
- ( CS ) Mr President , the extent of the financial crisis shows that neither banks nor consumers have been taking responsible decisions .
I am strongly in favour of investing in financial education and I have also approved the report , but I cannot agree with superficial campaigns and general principles .
I am concerned that we have analysis as the situation may vary between the Member States .
I also know that the education must be narrowly focused on the specific requirements of a range of different groups of citizens in order to be really effective .
I would like to bring to your attention some exemplary practice from the Czech Republic .
For the last three years a single person has been running a website called www.bankovnipoplatky.com.
This website makes a vital contribution to the financial education of those Czech citizens who are on the internet .
This shows that this issue can be solved cheaply and effectively .
What is missing , however , is education for schoolchildren and the older generation and we will not manage this without public funding .
- ( SK ) The financial crisis has provided European consumers with an excellent opportunity to check their knowledge of financial matters .
They have been given a wonderful lesson in the importance of their understanding of personal finance , in savings assessment , in the use of insurance products , and in reading of ordinary bank statements and receipts .
All these subjects require a knowledge of financial terminology and its correct application in the management of their finances .
For this reason I consider the report from the rapporteur Mrs Iotova to be a further important contribution from the EP in the area of consumer protection and I have voted in its favour .
I firmly believe that the education of consumers must begin in primary school .
The Member States should include this topic , especially finance , in textbooks of primary and secondary schools .
The DOLCETA and EURÓPSKY DIÁR websites should receive more promotion .
I appreciate activities of consumer organisations aimed at educating not only schoolchildren but also teachers .
Various competitions , organised with great enthusiasm , attract large numbers of young consumers .
Under my patronage and within the context of consumer education for schoolchildren , the Slovak Consumers ' Association is organising an annual competition called Consumers for Life .
The competition is generating enormous interest and the winners will be awarded a trip to the EP .
Mr President , thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to offer my explanation of vote .
I think there is probably a consensus in this room that the credit crunch and the liquidity crisis that we faced were caused by poor lending decisions taken , not only by banks - and those decisions were forced on them by the Clinton Administration and successive regimes which suggested that banks should lend to communities that were deemed uncreditworthy - but also by consumers making poor decisions .
Having been encouraged to take out loans which they perhaps could not afford to repay , they then found themselves bearing the brunt of being unable to pay those loans .
This highlights the importance of consumer financial education .
However , we seem to be falling into the trap of thinking that , whatever the problem , the EU has a solution .
If you look at the solutions listed here on the Commission website , in the Europe Diary , they actually do very little to address the issue of consumer education .
We should be looking at community organisations - like the Croydon Caribbean Credit Union in my constituency - that help solve these problems at the community level and not the European level .
- ( FR ) Mr President , I asked Parliament to vote against the report since only a small minority voted for guide levels lower than those currently applied .
I should like to point out that the Commission is not in favour of guide levels .
In 2005 , this House voted in favour of the Rosati report to abolish guide levels , and now we are taking a step backwards and reducing what we voted for .
Most Members do not know what they voted for .
Now we are reducing the current guide levels by 50 % , which is to say , instead of 800 cigarettes , you have voted for 400 , instead of 10 litres of spirits , you have voted for 5 litres , instead of 90 litres of wine , you have voted for 45 litres , instead of 110 litres of beer , you have voted for 55 litres .
You are taking a step backwards and halving current levels for purchase by private individuals .
I believe that the message to Commissioner Kovács and the Council of Ministers is , all the same , clear ; there are only five Members who , in the end , are not going to vote in favour of my report .
I would therefore like the Council to know that the Commissioner - as he said yesterday evening - agrees with indicative limits , but those which currently apply .
This must be clear , Mr President ; as rapporteur I must say this because it is essential in order to interpret the vote .
Mr President , it is my privilege to represent the handsome villages , the rolling downs and the bluebell groves of the English Home Counties .
Like every other MEP for South-East England , I have received dozens of heartbreaking complaints from constituents who have suffered from the arbitrary confiscation of legally purchased alcohol and tobacco at the Channel ports .
Labour 's repeated hikes in the excise duty have served to drive income that ought to be coming to retailers in my constituency across the Channel .
In time , jobs have also been pushed from the English Home Counties across the water .
Revenue that ought to be coming to the British Exchequer is instead going to Continental treasuries .
The Government 's response has then been to spend this dwindling income stream on hiring more and more excise officers in a futile attempt to police a system wherein most of our alcohol and tobacco had now become smuggled .
That is the system which , to their shame , Labour MEPs have just voted to go back to .
I think it is a disgrace .

Mr President , I would just like to echo the sentiments expressed by the previous speakers , Ms Lulling , the rapporteur , and my colleague , Dan Hannan , from the South-East of England .
I , too , as a Member of the European Parliament for London - the greatest city in the world and capital of the greatest country in the world - have received a number of letters from constituents complaining about the heavy-handed approach of customs and excise as they have sought to go about their life and purchase alcohol and cigarettes from the continent and bring them back for their own enjoyment or the enjoyment of their family and friends .
What do the customs and excise duty officers do in the United Kingdom ?
They pick on them , they ask intrusive questions , they haul them outside their vehicles , including pensioners , and they question them intrusively trying to find out exactly how much alcohol they drink and how many cigarettes they smoke in some sort of Gestapo-type inquisition .
This is not the sort of behaviour we expect from law enforcement officers or excise officers in the United Kingdom or across Europe .
Voting on the report today in the way we did , we have gone backwards - not only backwards before 1992 but to a period previously where there was no free movement , or very limited free movement , of goods .
- ( SK ) I voted in favour of the report because the occurrence of excessive weight and obesity in the European Union has increased rapidly over the last two decades , with almost 22 million children overweight and this figure growing by up to 400 000 a year .
More than 90 % of childhood obesity cases are caused by poor eating habits and lack of exercise .
These children suffer from serious nutritional disorders as well as joint disorders , lower immunity and an increased frequency of illnesses .
Following the approval of the White Paper on ' A Strategy for Europe on Nutrition , Overweight and Obesity-related health issues ' , the present directive is good news for the fight against childhood obesity .
I consider the scheme to increase the distribution of fruit and vegetables in European schools as necessary .
We should also give more consideration to children in pre-school institutions .
Counselling and creating good and balanced eating habits would contribute more to the development of a healthy population than this distribution scheme alone .
( PL ) Mr President , the School Fruit Scheme as well as the School Milk Scheme and the scheme to distribute food to the most needy in the EU are marvellous EU initiatives which are very necessary and must definitely be supported .
The distribution of free fruit and vegetables to schoolchildren will not only contribute to improving their health and changing their eating habits , but will also produce a positive social impact .
I take a favourable view of a number of the European Commission 's proposals , and consider that they will not cause major controversies .
At the same time , I hope that the Commissioner , and in particular our Agriculture Ministers from the EU-27 , will be slightly more generous .
We must remember that the health of our children is at stake , and we should not economise on it .
- ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in the same way as the other PPE-DE Group MEPs from the Czech Republic , against the Busk report on fruit and vegetables in schools .
Parents should have primary responsibility for the healthy diet of their children .
The European Union has no authority in the areas of either education or health .
These matters must be administered by the Member States in accordance with their own national preferences .
There is no rational reason for the European Union to be using taxpayers ' money to pay for schoolchildren to have one piece of fruit per week .
The EU should have concerns about genuine Europe-wide issues , for example , the removal of barriers to the four fundamental freedoms , and it should not contravene its own principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , we have come a long way from the time when we were trying to keep schoolchildren out of orchards as they stole apples to the position today , where they have no interest in either apples or orchards .
So this fruit scheme is welcome .
The problem is that many parents are not aware of the importance of fruit and vegetables , so it will educate children and parents about the health benefits of fruit and vegetable consumption .
Of course the key to the success of the scheme will be back in the Member States .
We do not want a complicated , rule-based scheme .
We want flexibility and we need to engage with teachers , in particular , who will deliver the fruit and vegetables , and with parents , so that they will ensure that children eat and enjoy fruit and veg and develop healthy eating habits throughout their life .
( PL ) Mr President , teenagers weighing over 150 kg are a frequent sight in American cities .
I do not want us to make the same mistake .
The promotion of healthy eating models and the consumption of healthier , non-fattening products in childhood and in youth are an investment in the health of future generations .
They will also produce savings in the costs of treatment for diabetes and cardiovascular and bone diseases .
For this reason , a scheme which is too modest will in practice be inefficient both in terms of health and in terms of economics .
That is why I supported Amendment 7 , which quadruples the minimum expenditure on fruit for schoolchildren , and thus guarantees one portion of fruit or vegetables at least four days a week , not just once a week .
I am pleased that it was an amendment proposed by the Commission .
The introduction of the scheme should not depend on parents ' agreement to cofinance it .
In particular , the children of poorer parents should have the chance to receive free fruit at school , and therefore the funding for the scheme should be increased .
Mr President , let me explain why I voted against the report by Ms Pervenche Berès and Mr Werner Langen .
There are at least three points I would like to stress .
The very first one is that the report calls for a higher and deeper coordination of economic and financial national policies .
The second is that it will entail a highly coordinated fiscal policy that will need political unification , and the consequence of the political unification is the third reason why I voted against .
I do not share the view that political coordination that eliminates natural differences among Member States will become the remedy and a healing answer to current European problems .
The current European problems are the free movement of labour and the free movement of capital and services .
( PL ) Viewed from the perspective of the 10 years of existence of Economic and Monetary Union , we need to ask ourselves whether we truly associate the euro sign with prosperity and stabilisation .
There is no doubt that there can be only one answer to this question .
While accepting that there have been some negative aspects to adopting the common currency , such as price rises during the initial stage , it must be emphasised that the euro has become one of the world 's leading currencies .
Economic and Monetary Union has contributed to the growth of economic stability in Member States and has also had a favourable impact on international trade , thus benefiting the EU .
The positive impact of the euro became particularly noticeable most recently , when the global financial crisis made us aware of the benefits of a stable exchange rate .
( ET ) I would like to offer an explanation of my vote .
I abstained from the vote on the application to strip Massimo D 'Alema of his parliamentary immunity because , as a lawyer , I have certain reservations about our Parliament 's authority in this matter , and I have no right or desire to interfere in the internal affairs of Italy .
( HU ) As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I welcome the result of the vote .
We are talking about a technology that , if all goes well , can offer a partial solution to climate change , but we must not allow it to distract us from the importance of the entire climate package .
The new Member States , including Hungary , have significantly reduced their greenhouse gas emissions since the end of the 1980s .
It would be a serious indignity if they were now punished by those who until now have increased their harmful emissions .
For this reason , we would like to achieve a proportionate distribution of 10 % of the revenues from the carbon trading scheme among those Member States where the per capita GDP is lower than the European Union average .
Similarly , we would allocate 10 % to those who have reduced their emissions in the past 15 years .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has succeeded in gaining an exemption for long-distance heating systems from the Climate Change Levy , an achievement that must be maintained in the interest of millions of low-income European citizens .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , I join those mentioned above in supporting the report .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting for this measure .
Kazakhstan has embarked upon a process of democratisation which is proceeding more slowly than the extraordinary economic growth that the country has experienced in recent years : there is a huge presence of foreign entrepreneurs investing large amounts of capital in this former Soviet republic .
Within this context , the European Union ought to be constantly encouraging action targeted at increasing spaces of freedom , democracy and social justice for Kazakh citizens , and not just acting as a trade partner with growing interests .
Economic growth and democracy ought to go hand in hand .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted during the consultation procedure for the report which approves the conclusion of the Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Kazakhstan , and which also took into account the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU .
This report will help stimulate cooperation between Romania and the Republic of Kazakhstan .
in writing . - I voted for Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report on a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and Kazakhstan .
I did this despite my continued reservations regarding the human rights record of the Government in Kazakhstan .
It is important that Parliament and the Commission continue to monitor the situation in Kazakhstan and if it worsens or even fails to improve over the following twelve months we should take action to suspend this Agreement .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mr Saryusz-Wolski and , therefore , for the conclusion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and its Member States and the Republic of Kazakhstan .
I endorse the position adopted by the rapporteur , as well as that of the Council , in believing that the existence of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Kazakhstan prior to the accession of Romania and Bulgaria makes it necessary to draw up a Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to allow the new Member States to sign it .
in writing . - ( PT ) The document in question does not fundamentally alter the content of the Regulation adopted by this Parliament in November 2006 , which established a public-private partnership to develop a European air traffic management system .
The amendments now proposed to the Regulation aim to recognise SESAR ( new generation European air traffic management system ) as a Community body and allow the application of the Staff Regulations of the European Communities to its staff .
Amendments are also proposed to the quantification of the Community contribution and its transfer to SESAR , with a maximum of EUR 700 million coming in equal parts from the budget of the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development and from the Trans-European Network programme .
The establishment of this company represents a dangerous precedent in the use of public money for private purposes .
The public sector approach could have been taken to update and improve air traffic management systems , including with regard to reliability , thus guaranteeing the safety of professionals and users of airspace .
We consider that these objectives will not be any better achieved by subjecting them to the interests and pressures of the private sector .
For these reasons , we did not support this report .
in writing . - This proposal will have a substantial positive financial impact on the European air traffic control infrastructure modernisation programme .
I support the proposal , the funds which are saved as a result of which will be invested in research , development and validation activities for the benefit of the entire community .
in writing . - ( IT ) I would like to declare that I voted for the report by Mrs Niebler on the establishment of a joint undertaking to develop SESAR , the new generation European air traffic management system .
It is clear that large-scale Community projects in the sector of research and technological development demand joint efforts by the public and private sectors to produce lasting beneficial effects .
In this case , I believe that new generation harmonised air traffic management is necessary to sustain the future growth of air traffic in European skies in economic and environmental terms .
I therefore believe that we should warmly welcome the establishment of a joint undertaking in this sphere .
I would , however , like to emphasise the need to learn from the past ( I refer in this case to the liquidation of the joint undertaking Galileo ) and to formulate a clearer definition of the status that this legal person ought to have , so that the benefits of scientific and technological progress are not hindered by problems of a procedural or legal nature .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mrs Wallis on the codification of the statutory markings for two- or three-wheel motor vehicles .
As the Directive on statutory markings for vehicles of these kinds has been amended on several occasions , I believe that codification is necessary to achieve better understanding and accessibility for citizens to this Community legislation and , as a result , to the possibility of exercising the rights that are enshrined within it .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mr Mayer concerning the conclusion of the Convention on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters .
I join with my fellow Member in his view that the proposal put forward by the Commission designed to replace the 1988 Lugano Convention can help to make the system for the recognition and enforcement of judgments swifter and more efficient in the areas affected , and in particular as regards the registration and validity of intellectual property rights .
This proposal is particularly important because the application of the regulation control procedure strengthens greatly the European Parliament 's rights to observe how implementing measures are being applied .
The European Parliament is granted the right to control a draft implementing measure .
Moreover , there are additions to the basic regulations , granting the European Parliament the right to oppose a draft measure or propose amendments to a draft implementing measure .
in writing . - ( IT ) I support the excellent report by Mrs Berès on the amendment of the Council regulation on the European system of national and regional accounts in the Community as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission .
Following the introduction of the new comitology procedure , namely the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , which extends Parliament 's rights of oversight over implementing measures , I believe that we need to move forward with the general alignment process recommended by the Commission so that the new procedure can be applied effectively .
in writing . - ( PT ) Between 2007 and 2008 Italy submitted applications in respect of redundancies in Sardinia ( 1 044 redundancies , 5 companies ) , Piedmont ( 1 537 , 202 ) , Lombardy ( 1 816 , 190 ) and Tuscany ( 1 588 , 461 ) , following liberalisation in the textile and clothing sector .
For a total of 5 985 redundancies in 858 companies , Italy is requesting a financial contribution of EUR 38 158 075 .
As we have said before , this Fund cannot be used as a temporary ' cushion ' for unacceptable socioeconomic costs resulting from the liberalisation of trade , particularly in the textile and clothing sector , and for the increasing insecurity of workers .
Given the ( potential ) expiry on 31 December 2008 of the double-checking surveillance system for exports of certain categories of textile and clothing products from China , we need to establish mechanisms limiting imports from any country to the EU .
Given the increasing number of companies closing down or relocating their production , the rise in unemployment and the increased exploitation of workers - particularly in Portugal - we need to halt the policy of liberalising world trade ( instigated by the EU and the Socialist Government in Portugal ) and defend production and employment with rights in the various EU countries .
in writing . - ( PT ) The mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund at the request of Italy offers an excellent opportunity to consider the reactions that will be needed in the future when the combination of the effects of globalisation and the economic crisis becomes even more acute .
The format of this Fund , which is based on principles restricted in their scope , suggests that the European Union regards globalisation as a fact and its negative effects as a reality to which we must adapt and not oppose .
This is a realistic view with significant potential to be effective , in my view .
Understanding global changes and channelling efforts to react to these changes is more appropriate than believing in the possibility of avoiding these changes indefinitely , or even believing that this opposition is in itself virtuous .
Adjustment to globalisation is a more appropriate political option than opposition to globalisation .
in writing . - ( IT ) I support the report by Mr Böge on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I agree that the applications put forward by the four Italian regions comply with the requirements for determining the financial contributions as laid down in the EU Regulation and are in line with the reasons underlying the establishment of the fund .
Today it is more necessary than ever to help those workers who have lost their jobs as a result of changes in the structure of world trade and to assist them to rejoin the labour market .
I therefore support the application for mobilisation of the fund as expressed in my fellow Member 's report .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against the report for various reasons .
There was no serious debate in committee .
Only 7 out of the 28 members were present .
In fact , it was not even possible to have a debate in the plenary meeting .
Even before the vote in committee , when Mr Vanhecke was not allowed to learn the content of the report , it was discussed on Flemish public television .
This is an outrage .
Worst of all , though , is the conclusion of the report .
They recommend that immunity be lifted , although Mr Vanhecke is not the author of the controversial text , and the Belgian Constitution clearly stipulates that only the author can be prosecuted if known .
On account of this crummy dossier , Mr Vanhecke is running the risk of losing his political rights , since the division of power and the Belgian court 's independence only exist in theory .
This matter is a political manoeuvre to single out a Flemish nationalist opposition leader .
It is a disgrace that the EP should let itself be taken advantage of for this purpose .
in writing . - ( FR ) Both the Committee on Legal Affairs and the members of the political groups in plenary today have once again shown just how unimportant they consider impartiality and respect for the law to be , when compared with their obsession with getting rid of all those who are not part of their large family of Euro-federalists .
My colleague , Mr Vanhecke , is the target of a veritable witch-hunt in Belgium , the sole aim of which is to condemn him and force him to step down from the political stage .
The European Parliament has forgotten that , when any request is made by a state to waive parliamentary immunity , it has a duty to apply the rules on the protection of MEPs in full , as laid down in its Rules of Procedure .

Like Mr Gollnisch , who had his parliamentary immunity withdrawn solely for political reasons in 2006 , Mr Vanhecke is himself the victim of what constitutes a very real assault , by the transformation of a legal issue into a political issue .
It is unacceptable for an institution to claim , wrongly , to be democratic .
On 13 October 1981 , in the chamber of the French National Assembly , André Laignel , a socialist MP , issued his famous retort to opposition MPs , arguing that the nationalisation sought by the government was unconstitutional .
In it he claimed that they were changing the debate from a legal one to a political one and , although they were entitled to do so , in this case , they were in the wrong legally , since they were in the minority politically .
The European Parliament has clearly taken this phrase to heart since it is getting rid of all those who dare to bother it with political views that are deemed not to be sufficiently federalist or pro-European for its tastes .
My colleague , Mr Vanhecke , is the target of a veritable witch-hunt within this European Parliament , to which he was legitimately elected .
This institution is totally wrong and disgraced in accepting the unacceptable : lynching one of its members by flouting all the legal principles and legal protections relating to parliamentary immunity that are currently in force .
in writing . - ( DE ) In view of this report and the associated legal proceedings by the Belgian authorities , it must be stated unequivocally that the whole process - in particular the court proceedings - represents a purely politically motivated persecution of the former leader of the Vlaams Belang party , Frank Vanhecke .
Mr Vanhecke received this writ two days after relinquishing the leadership of the party .
It is also clear that , with only six months to go to the European elections , the aim is to blacken the name of the Vlaams Belang candidate for political motives .
According to the Belgian Constitution , it would also have been legally necessary to prosecute the author of the article , as his identity is known , rather than the publisher .
I therefore vehemently stress that a politically motivated criminal prosecution should not be seen as providing cause to revoke the parliamentary immunity of Frank Vanhecke and that this witch-hunt by the Belgian justice authorities should be condemned in the strongest terms .
A similar situation arose in 2003 , when criminal proceedings were initiated against Daniel Cohn-Bendit from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , although this was rejected by the committee at the time because there were suspicions of political motives .
The situation is the same in this case , if not even more clear , which is why I am obliged to vote against the motion .
in writing . - ( NL ) With not one of my illusions intact , I have to say that the European Parliament is turning into the disgraceful accomplice of a political lynch mob staged by the Belgian courts .
In the presence of 7 out of 28 members , I was given 20 minutes in the Committee on Legal Affairs to defend myself in respect of a dossier of hundreds of pages long .
In plenary - contrary to Rule 7 of our own Rules of Procedure - I have not had the opportunity at all of speaking up for myself .
Should this happen in Russia , we would be up in arms .
As for me , I keep my head up and continue to stand up for the free expression of opinion in Flanders and in Europe , not least where the issue of immigrants and the danger of Islam are concerned .
in writing . - ( IT ) We in the Radical delegation , together with Marco Pannella , are voting against the Lehne report on the immunity of Mr D 'Alema because it reaches illogical conclusions that can only derive from grounds - or reflexes - based on self-defence on the part of the Italian and European political class .
The report argues that the request for authorisation to proceed is unfounded because the intercepted material is already sufficient to support the charges against those under investigation .
If the request by the public prosecutor 's office were in fact directed towards charging Mr D 'Alema , then the request would be unfounded , since Parliament does not have to take its decisions in accordance with Italian law .
If the intercepted material is truly useless , however , and the request unfounded and downright unnecessary , then why should the European Parliament have to decide ' not to authorise the use of the telephone interceptions in question and not to waive the immunity of Massimo D 'Alema ' , as the report proposes ?
Why should we not follow the decision by the Italian Parliament , which in the context of this inquiry granted authorisation to proceed against Mr Fassino ?
We willingly give credit to the ALDE Group for deciding , by choosing to abstain , not to align itself with the social unity of the Group of the European People 's Party and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament on this dubious decision .
in writing . - ( PL ) In recent years , many new financial products have appeared on the market .
The increasing complexity of these products makes consumers more and more defenceless , and frequently unable , without expert assistance , to determine which financing offer is best suited to their needs .
This leads to many wrong decisions , especially by those less well off .
In Poland , we come across many instances of fraud , or simply of consumers making poor financial decisions , unaware of their implications .
In these circumstances , financial education is essential and is the best way of protecting consumers from making wrong financial decisions .
in writing . - ( LT ) Financial education is an important matter on the EU 's agenda , especially in the midst of the financial crisis .
Consumers need basic skills to help them choose and completely understand information and offers .
Consumers are confronted with an ever growing supply of increasingly more complex goods and services .
Meanwhile consumer information and advice do not correspond with the level of complexity of financial products .
As a result of this situation , consumer vulnerability as regards financial matters is on the increase .
If gaps in the knowledge and financial competence of financial intermediaries and consumers are reduced , the risk of over-indebtedness , defaulting on payments or bankruptcies will also be reduced .
There would also be an increase in lender competition and the overall efficiency of the market , as consumers with more knowledge can understand how various financial offers differ and can choose the one which best suits their needs .
Knowledge and skills are not currently good enough to ensure that consumers can manage their finances properly .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for fair , unbiased and transparent financial education , as well as for the obligation on service providers in this area to offer proper , correct information .
The information must be clearly distinguished from commercial advice or advertising .
I hope that Member States will pay special attention to the groups most at risk , such as young people , pensioners or workers at the end of their career .
Like many texts by this House , Mrs Iotova 's report is an example of a seemingly good idea with a deceptive title .
A cursory reading could lead one to believe that it is about protecting consumers by informing them of their rights and educating them about financial services ; in short , about enabling them to have a responsible and informed relationship with their bank .
In reality , it is about turning people , from childhood ( from primary school , so it seems ) , into perfect little customers of a financial system that is hungry for their savings but mean when it comes to lending , about foisting upon them all kinds of financial products which pseudo-initiates call complex and which , for the most part , are simply absurd , and about getting them sensibly to do their accounts and to prepare for retirement - with the banks , no less - even though they are also paying into compulsory public schemes .
At a time when the world 's financial system has just shown how perverse it is , when the banks are grudgingly granting credit to enterprises and to individuals despite the hundreds of billions of public aid released , when workers and small and medium-sized enterprises are paying the price for ongoing financial folly and when the world 's ' big players ' pretend to be implementing reforms to prolong the life of this system , that this report is unconvincing is the least that can be said .
in writing . - ( PL ) In this time of financial crisis , this report has assumed new importance .
This is because the mortgage crisis has revealed the dangers which can stem from failing to provide borrowers with appropriate information .
It has also demonstrated consumers ' inability to understand financial and economic information and the impact which changes in macroeconomic indicators could have on the repayment of their loans , and thus their lack of awareness of the risk of insolvency and excessive debt .
The report calls attention to the need to educate consumers and raise their awareness , and thus enable them to use their own knowledge to assess the financial products offered to them .
I therefore support the initiative calling for the development of financial education programmes , especially those drawn up with potential users in mind , which take into account their age , income , education , and the area of their employment or interests .
In addition , financial education programmes must be based on practical and real situations which we encounter in our everyday life .
I hope that the report will help financial institutions , as well as consumers themselves , to understand the need for financial education .
I believe that both can benefit , since insolvency and excessive consumer debt represent a problem for the lending institutions whose clients are experiencing difficulties with debt repayment .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Iotova report on consumer education on credit and finance .
The world is heading into a period of huge financial uncertainty and many of Europe 's citizens are fearful for their jobs , their savings , their pensions and their future .
In such a period of uncertainty , consumer awareness of credit , debt and finance in general is surely more important than ever .
This report calls for financial education to be tailored for specific groups and initiatives of this kind at an EU level are to be welcomed .
in writing . - ( FI ) I voted in favour of Mrs Iotova 's report on improving consumer education and awareness regarding credit and finance .
This is a necessary and welcome committee-initiative report .
The crisis caused by subprime loans ( high-risk housing credit ) has shown that borrowers have been kept too much in the dark .
This lack of information and understanding has led to a situation where they are not properly concerned about the risks of insolvency and over-indebtedness .
It also has to be said that consumer awareness and advice have not kept up with the pace of complex financial products .
An adequate level of financial know-how would , in many cases , reduce the risk of over-indebtedness and defaults on payments .
It would also give consumers more scope for comparing the competitiveness of loan providers , which in turn would boost the viability of the market .
I particularly support the suggestion in the report to include financial education more obviously in the national school curriculum and provide young people with all the financial information they need when embarking on their professional career in the face of new challenges with regard to how to use their income .
in writing . - ( DE ) We need fair treatment of investors and borrowers with long periods of limitation and a shifting of the burden of proof .
Risks and costs must be apparent and comparable from the outset .
In the case of Lehman Brothers in particular , private individuals were massively hoodwinked , for example being told that risky share certificates were secure and even being advised against selling just before Lehman went to the wall .
Citizens are now faced with a wave of enforced conversions of their foreign currency loans or are required to pay up for the increased refinancing costs of the banks , contrary to public policy .
In this situation simply saying our citizens are stupid and calling for a general lesson in ' financial education ' is a real slap in the face , particularly because not even the self-appointed financial gurus were able to see through the various layers of speculation .
By calling for greater market efficiency instead of greater competition between lenders , this report continues to pay lip service to the myth of the self-regulating market .
I cannot express strongly enough my rejection of this report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the report drafted by Mrs Iotova as it encourages Member States to develop educational programmes for pensioners who could be at risk of financial exclusion , as well as for young people starting their professional careers who are faced with the challenge of determining how to make appropriate use of their new income .
Consumers who do not have any financial knowledge have problems in choosing products and services which best suit their needs .
It is hard for them to evaluate the advice given and they may therefore be misled , falling victim to unfair selling practices
I welcome the Commission 's initiatives in the area of consumer financial education , in particular the recent setting-up of the Expert Group on Financial Education .
I think however that this Expert Group on Financial Education should have clear responsibilities and powers .
The website already created by the Commission for educating consumers ( http : / / www.dolceta.eu ) has proved to be useful .
I hope that this online tool will continue to be developed and updated in all the official languages .
in writing . - ( PT ) One of the most significant factors in the financial crisis has been the extreme ease of supply , or the excessive tolerance of debt .
The conclusions that must be drawn from this are , firstly , that it would seem beneficial to impose an obligation on banks to ensure that those to whom they lend have the ability and are likely to repay the debt , given the facts of the crisis and its causes .
At the same time , the lack of awareness among consumers as to the risks associated with credit - starting with the issue of changes in reference rates - suggests that any action aimed at consumers can and must be taken .
Clearly , the pressure from an economic model based on maximum consumption will be difficult to counteract with campaigns of this type , but the effort to raise awareness is necessary and , in our opinion , useful .
In any event , this report should encourage greater transparency and the establishment of clearer rules in the conditions for services to be supplied by lenders .
As for education on credit or any other type of consumption , the most important element is education in general which equips people with the tools to make daily decisions .
in writing . - ( LT ) The trust of Europe 's consumers is essential for the internal market to work efficiently and thrive .
The common market encompasses almost 500 million consumers and an abundant variety of goods and services .
Since 1997 the Commission has been using the Internal Market Scoreboard to monitor and draw attention to the way Member States are implementing internal market legal acts .
The Consumer Markets Scoreboard determines problem areas , so it can be a universal and flexible means of reporting shortcomings worthy of attention to society , market subjects and institutions .
In spite of this , the Consumer Markets Scoreboard has never been aimed at reporting to the consumer on the internal market and it is very important to rectify this .
We must ensure that the market works as well as possible and that consumers are offered services whose price and quality match their expectations .
For this it is not necessary to adopt more or stricter legal acts .
Sometimes a more appropriate and more effective method may be the supply of information , education or self-regulation .
The single market serves not only businesses , which thanks to the successive elimination of barriers have the whole European market virtually within arm 's reach .
It was also created with consumers in mind , to enable them to enjoy the same standards in all Member States .
The Consumer Markets Scoreboard provides a tool for monitoring , analysing and identifying single market problems from the consumer 's point of view .
It uses indicators which include prices , complaints , satisfaction and switching .
In spite of the fact that some outcomes shown on the Scoreboard seem questionable - for instance prices , because although simple to communicate and compare , the final price is affected by many variables , not always reflected by the Scoreboard - the indicators undoubtedly represent an extremely useful and appropriate method of assessing consumer outcomes in the single market .
I should like to stress that this is the first version of the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
We can therefore expect a further version which will respond to our concerns .
It is important for the Scoreboard to be written in comprehensible language , easily understood by a range of users , as its results are undoubtedly an interesting source of information about consumer outcomes in the single market .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council directive concerning the general arrangements for excise duty and would especially like to emphasis the importance of the adoption of Amendment 48 on guide levels for importing alcohol and tobacco .
The reduction ( 50 % lower than the previous indicative guide levels ) is a step in the right direction towards a more responsible policy that takes public health seriously .
However , we would like to point out that we only view this as a first step towards a more ambitious policy in this area .
Furthermore , we are pleased that Amendment 60 and Amendment 68 have been rejected .
As a result , excise duty will continue to be collected in the country of destination .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List has chosen to vote in favour of the report , as we are of the opinion that it will go some way to providing the opportunity to unite requirements for efforts at national level with regard to health policy with a free internal market .
However , we have chosen to vote against certain proposals that have strong federalist overtones .
The June List feels that it is very important , for example , that Swedish alcohol policy can be pursued in accordance with the values and decisions of the Swedish Parliament .
This requires the payment of excise duty in the recipient country for distance selling of alcohol , for example .
This would not be the case if the amendments were voted through .
On the contrary , it would mean , among other things , that the provisions concerning goods acquired by private individuals would be extended to apply to distance sellers , whereby excise duty is paid in the Member State in which the goods were acquired .
As the costs incurred as a result of national public health problems , such as alcohol and tobacco-related diseases , are largely funded by the national levying of tax , the proposal concerning freedom from excise duty in connection with distance selling would hamper the prospects of the public sector handling public health problems effectively .
There is also a problem from the point of view of competition , as a distance seller can offer the same product as national players , but considerably cheaper , simply because excise duty is not paid in the same country .
The June List is in favour of competition , but is of the opinion that players should compete on equal terms .
in writing . - I support this directive , which will limit fraud and contraband cases that reduce state revenue .
This modernised and simplified directive will reduce the obligations on operators while enabling them to combat excise fraud more effectively .
in writing . - ( DE ) Our tax systems are very complex and to a certain extent are really only transparent to specialists .
For this reason , every attempt to improve formalities and general conditions and to combat tax fraud is to be welcomed , provided that the taxation sovereignty of the Member States is preserved and no attempt is made to harmonise tax rates by the back door .
It is equally important to have clear rules for tax-free sales outlets and for travellers themselves .
This project seems to have such an objective , which is why I have voted in favour of the Lulling report .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mrs Lulling concerning the general arrangements for excise duty .
The provisions included in the Commission 's proposal are certainly not sufficient to guarantee private individuals and companies in the EU the freedom to make cross-border purchases and sales of goods without encountering unnecessary tax obstacles .
In fact , although the Commission 's proposal contains some improvements and changes , such as Article 37 ( the tax markings that Member States may impose must not give rise to a double tax burden ) , there is a need to extend the provisions governing purchases by private individuals to distance selling , creating a genuine internal market in excisable goods purchased by private individuals for their personal use .
in writing . - ( SV ) I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has finally changed its opinion and taken a more restrictive line with regard to alcohol .
The result of today 's vote on the Lulling report on general arrangements for excise duty will entail a 50 % reduction in the guide levels for the import of alcohol .
The opportunities for tax-free shopping at ports and airports will also be restricted .
Another consequence of the report is that there will be nothing to prevent , for example , the collection of Swedish excise duty on goods ordered from another EU country via the Internet .
On this matter , the European Parliament merely has an advisory role , but today 's results nevertheless represent an important milestone .
in writing . - Far too little fruit and vegetables are eaten in the EU in relation to the WHO 's recommendations of a minimum 400 grams per day .
There is an obesity epidemic among children . This is particularly severe in Malta .
A high intake of fruit and vegetables reduces the risk of a large number of diseases and prevents overweight .
In 2007 , organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables underwent a fundamental reform towards greater market orientation .
Fruit and vegetables are now fully integrated into the single payment system .
Excessive weight entails a greater risk of cardiovascular disease , diabetes , high blood pressure and certain forms of cancer .
A daily intake of 600 grams for people 11 + should be our target .
The Commission proposes an allocation of EUR 90 million in the Community budget .
That corresponds to one piece of fruit one day a week for 30 weeks a year and covers children aged 6-10 years .
To achieve all the positive effects of introducing a school fruit scheme , there must be increased funding .
A school fruit scheme should consist of a portion of fruit per pupil per day and not only be aimed at school children aged 6-10 .
in writing . - I welcome the adoption of the Report on the School Fresh Fruit Scheme .
This proposal will produce real health benefits for millions of children across Europe .
The funding of free fruit for schoolchildren through the Common Agricultural Policy budget will show tangible benefits of the CAP to ordinary European citizens .
The co-financing of the scheme by the EU and Member States will allow the extension of the existing Free School Fruit Scheme in England and the creation of similar schemes in Scotland , Wales , and Northern Ireland .

Although a larger budget than the € 90m envisioned by the Commission would be welcome - as the Parliament has pointed out in its Report through its request for an increase in the budget to € 500m - the creation of this scheme will give children regular access to free fruit and its attendant health benefits , such as a lower chance of developing obesity , diabetes , and other serious diseases in later life .
As well as providing immediate benefits for child health , the scheme will help to shape young people 's views on nutrition , creating a healthier Europe and reducing the costs to State healthcare systems .
in writing . - ( DA ) The June Movement has voted in favour of the report as a whole , despite the fact that , in principle , we are opposed to agricultural aid .
We think that it is important to give children healthier eating habits .
However , we are opposed to the requirement for the fruit to be of Community origin , as this makes it an indirect subsidy for European farmers .
Finally , we would also like the fruit that is given to the children to be organic .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of better financing for this scheme , as well for defining more clearly the products which can be included in this scheme .
The statistics show that there are approximately 22 million overweight children in the EU , with more than 5 million obese children , mainly due to the excessive consumption of products with high levels of fat , sugar and salt .
Against this background , it is more than necessary for the EU and Member States to get involved by creating healthy eating habits , especially by providing a varied range of seasonal fruits .
I also voted in favour of increasing the budget allocated to this scheme from EUR 90 million to EUR 500 million as the initial sum allocated to this scheme is equivalent to offering one portion of fruit to each child aged between 6 and 10 for a period of 30 weeks .
in writing . - Although I believe parents are ultimately responsible for the health of their children , and that any school fruit scheme must be flexible enough to accommodate local , regional and national conditions , I welcome this report .
There is an obesity epidemic among children and it is estimated that there are 22 million overweight children in the EU , 5.1 million of whom are considered to be severely overweight .
Children in the EU are not eating enough healthy food and healthier options need to be made available .
I hope this proposal can go some small way towards alleviating childhood obesity .
in writing . - ( SV ) There is no doubt that children feel better for eating fruit .
Apples , bananas and oranges prevent obesity and keep us healthy .
In a way , therefore , it is understandable that many people have today voted in favour of a proposal in the European Parliament to subsidise fruit for school children in the EU .
The problem is simply that the responsibility for our fruit consumption does not lie at EU level .
It is first and foremost the parent 's responsibility to instil good eating habits in their children .
In second place the responsibility lies with the municipalities and in third place with the State .
As a federalist , I would like decisions to be made as close to citizens as possible .
This is , in fact , something the EU wants too .
According to Article 5 of the EC Treaty , decisions that it would be more appropriate to take at a lower level shall be taken at that level .
I therefore voted against the Parliament 's proposal to increase the fruit budget from EUR 90 million to EUR 500 million .

In the EU , we should work to lower emissions and increase mobility and to combat crime .
More fruit , better exercise and fewer sweets are issues that are much better dealt with by schools , parents and local politicians .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Busk report on the proposal to set up a scheme to distribute fruit in schools because I feel that Community support for the free distribution of these products to children is vital in promoting healthy eating habits in the European Union and , consequently , improving the health levels of Europeans .
The increasing prevalence of obesity and overweight among the European population , particularly in infancy , is the result of combining poor eating habits with a sedentary lifestyle .
We therefore urgently need to develop effective measures for combating this epidemic , not least by promoting healthy eating habits in the early years of life .
In cooperation with families , schools can play a fundamental role in getting children to eat healthily .
in writing . - ( PT ) We support this report to which we contributed several proposals .
Despite opposition from the European Commission , the report defends the distribution , free of charge and on a daily basis , of fresh fruit in schools to improve the quality of health and life of children , particularly children from more disadvantaged backgrounds .
Our support for this scheme takes account of the need to encourage young people to appreciate fruit and vegetables , which will have a very positive effect on public health and the fight against child poverty .
However , in order to be effective , this scheme must be extended to a wider range of children which means that , in the future , it must be extended to other age groups and deprived sectors of society .
This scheme must incorporate Community preference , in other words priority for national and local production , and its financing must come from the Community to ensure greater social cohesion .
This scheme could serve as an example of a policy ensuring true solidarity between countries .
We hope that all this does not simply end up as another propaganda campaign and that agreement can be reached in the Council to make the necessary funds available so that it can effectively applied in all countries .
in writing . - I support the Committee on Agriculture 's proposal for a School Fruit Scheme but along with my British Labour colleagues I want to retain an element of national co-financing to ensure an increased coverage .
Equally I support the reference to organic , local and regional products , but this cannot entirely replace the necessity of best value for money or variety .
In the South West of England I would welcome the exchange of our splendid local varieties of apples and pears for the bananas of Cyprus and the Canaries .
in writing . - I am very pleased that the health of our children is being tackled at European level .
Obesity amongst children is a growing concern in Europe , and even more so in the UK where almost 25 % of the population is obese and 10 % of children are overweight .
This issue is a serious concern to many of my constituents and I welcome an initiative to tackle it .
Addressing eating habits in childhood is key to preventing obesity later on in life , and the consumption of fruit and vegetables is proven to reduce the rate of obesity and cardio-vascular diseases .
In the UK , the appeal of convenience food is leading to the development of bad eating habits , which in turn cost our health service an annual GBP 6 billion .
It is clear , then , that supporting this initiative also makes good economic sense .
This is why I voted in favour of this report and I hope that Member States will make effective use of the funds to fight what is becoming a real problem for our children .
in writing . - ( SV ) An already bad idea from the Commission has been made even worse by the amendments tabled by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , particularly when the committee wants to increase the expenditure ceiling from EUR 90 million to EUR 500 million at tax payers ' expense .
The committee emphasises that this only concerns fruit that originates within the Community .
Fruit originating elsewhere is totally unimportant .
The committee 's proposal , which , in a big brother-like manner , states that seasonal fruit should be distributed , giving preference to a varied range of fruits so as to enable ' children to discover different tastes ' , is completely ridiculous .
Once again , the European Parliament is interfering in education policy .
Member States are to ' incorporate these measures in an educational manner into teaching packages on health and nutrition in schools ' .
The majority in this European Parliament have a distorted view of the common agricultural policy .
According to MEPs , taxpayers have a horn of plenty with money to throw into agricultural policy and rural development .
Thank goodness that the European Parliament does not have the power of codecision in these areas - and that is how it should stay .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am very pleased that we have today adopted the School Fruit Scheme .
In the opinion on health issues associated with nutrition , overweight and obesity , adopted by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I wrote that special importance must be attached to the problem of obesity among children and the young , since overweight is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular diseases , diabetes , hypertension and some tumours .
The School Fruit Scheme aims to promote good fruit and vegetable eating habits and to teach schoolchildren about healthy eating .
Eating habits are formed in childhood , and it has been demonstrated that people who learned in childhood to eat a lot of fruit and vegetables will keep to a similar diet in their adult life .
The distribution of fruit to schoolchildren is certain to contribute to increased consumption of fruit and vegetables among the very young , so that the impact of the School Fruit Scheme on preventing an obesity wave among European children and young people is certain to be significant .
What is more , the impact will be greater if eating fruit in school is more than symbolic .
I therefore note with satisfaction the vote in favour of a significant ( fourfold ) increase in the budget allocated to the scheme .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Busk report and wholeheartedly support this initiative to provide fruit to Europe 's schoolchildren .
My own country , Scotland , has one of the poorest health records in Europe and the government there is actively pursuing a number of policies targeted at improving the health of children in the hope that this will improve their wellbeing in later life .
This EU initiative will complement the Scottish government 's work and is therefore welcome .
in writing . - ( PL ) In my view , the School Fruit Scheme is of more than symbolic significance - ' here is the European Union giving something to children ' - it is an initiative promoting good eating habits .
It seems to me that we should include secondary school children in it as well .
I should like to stress that in this way we would be helping poorer families , which are frequently unable to give fruit to their children .
Naturally , it offers an additional opportunity to farmers and fruit growers .
Fruit and vegetables , and in my country especially apples , are relatively easy to distribute .
However , we must remember that the fruit must be of good quality , clean and fresh .
We must also prepare our schools to put the scheme into effect .
Realistically , it cannot be introduced earlier than the start of the 2009 / 2010 school year .
As far as cost is concerned , it is not astronomical : the Commission 's proposal assesses it at EUR 90 million , and it could perhaps be higher .
This is true , but at the same time we should be aware of the high cost of treatment of diseases associated with overweight and obesity .
Let us not make this scheme a one-off initiative , just for show .
Let us involve in it the national , regional and local authorities responsible for education .
Let us also retain a sensible flexibility when it comes to the details of selecting fruit or vegetables , remembering that it is intended to promote our children 's health in the best possible way .
in writing . - Having decided to vote against the report by Niels Busk , I declare my full support and sympathy for the topic debated - to provide more fruits for the schoolchildren in Europe .
Increased obesity among young people is an ominous problem .
However , I support first and foremost the principle of subsidiarity .
I am absolutely convinced that Member States and their Governments should be trusted in taking good care for their young generation .
It is not the business of the EU to regulate concrete problems like the current one .
The initiative in question is undoubtedly based upon good intentions .
But starting to solve such problems with all-European regulations is neglecting the role and responsibility of the very actors in question : parents , schools , local governments and national governments .
I am sure that they all have the same concerns and motivation to address the need to increase fruit consumption in their schools .
in writing . - I support this scheme which provides funding for free fruit and vegetables for schoolchildren .
This can only produce positive results , helping to reduce obesity among children by moving closer to the ' five a day ' recommendation , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( NL ) In my explanation of vote on the 2009 budget of 23 October 2008 , I drew your attention to the value of the EU 's involvement in providing schoolchildren with fruit .
A school fruit scheme can be useful to prevent children from becoming ever more obese and unhealthy .
The question is why the EU should take care of this , rather than the municipalities that organise education .
Payments are currently made from the EU fund to the Member States , which are obliged to add a further sum , with the municipalities then being responsible for implementing the scheme .
This way of working creates much unnecessary administration and time-consuming red tape .
During the recent budget discussion , the amount was doubled to EUR 182 million , and thanks to the Busk report , this sum will be increased to EUR 500 million in future .
The Dutch Agriculture Minister , who is in favour of the present scheme , has announced in the press that she considers this enormous increase to be of no value and will be speaking out against it .
Since it is not Parliament that decides on this , but the Council , it is to be expected that this increase will not materialise .
Meanwhile , though , school fruit has , in the public mind 's eye , come to represent EU priorities that are wide of the mark .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of Mr Busk 's report , based on the conclusions from healthcare organisations about the illnesses from which modern man suffers , many of which are due to poor diet .
Eating fruit may help to prevent and / or cure these illnesses , thanks to the vitamins it contains .
We need to teach our children how and what to eat .
This is why I believe that this may also involve education about diet , all the more so as the World Health Organization recommends that children up to the age of 11 should eat at least 400 grams of fruit and vegetables every day .
On the other hand , an explosion is being observed in the number of children ' enjoying ' an unhealthy , absurd and unsuitable diet , with the blame for this lying not just with the school or family , but with all of us , society as a whole .
This kind of dietary behaviour needs to be stopped immediately .
School is one of the areas responsible for forming habits , which should allow us to adopt again the habit of eating fruit .
For this reason , I give my total support to the distribution and eating of fruit in schools .
This scheme should be on the list of main priorities in terms of decision-making factors so that it can be implemented as soon as possible .
in writing . - Conservative MEPs abstained on the Busk Report on the Commission 's proposal to introduce an EU-wide School Fruit Scheme .
While very keen to see healthy eating habits promoted among youngsters in the UK and the EU , we have reservations about the budgetary allocations proposed in this report , which are considerably greater than the EUR 90 million proposed by the Commission .
Depending on the result of the votes , the Parliament will call for budgetary allocations of at least EUR 360 million and even as much as EUR 500 million .
We believe that it makes more sense to start the scheme with a lower level of financing and review subsequently the budgetary needs in the light of experience gained - as argued for in the Commission 's Impact Assessment .
in writing . - ( SK ) The market for fruit and vegetables in the EU is currently regulated by demand .
The introduction of the School Fruit Scheme will support the consumption of fruit and vegetables in the EU and will increase the demand which will not only boost public health , but it will also benefit European fruit and vegetable growers .
A high intake of fruit and vegetables reduces the risk of many diseases and prevents the occurrence of excessive weight and childhood obesity .
The health perspective is therefore the most important reason for a School Fruit Scheme supporting the consumption of fruit .
As eating habits are created in infancy , it is my view that it is not enough to start in schools but rather in pre-school institutions .
However , the EUR 90 million which the Commission is proposing to allocate from the Community budget will provide only one piece of fruit per week , which is not enough either to change eating habits or to make an impact on public health .
I consider a realistic budget for this scheme to be EUR 500 million , as proposed by the EP .
Such a sum would provide one portion of fruit per pupil per day and at the same time would enable the scheme to target not only schoolchildren between the ages of 6 to 10 years but also younger children in pre-school institutions .
I firmly believe that the money spent on the School Fruit Scheme to support the consumption of fruit in schools across the EU will bring savings in healthcare costs for the Member States and I have therefore voted in favour of the report by Niels Busk .
in writing . - ( PT ) The merits of the scheme proposed in this report are clear .
Encouraging ( and in some cases simply ensuring ) the consumption of seasonal fruit by the youngest in society has virtuous aims , both immediately , by promoting a diet rich in variety , and in the future , in terms of developing healthy eating habits .
There are , however , two points which must be raised .
Multiplying the guarantee mechanisms to ensure that the fruit offered is produced in Europe makes it feel like the motives behind this action are not just the diet of young people but primarily the promotion of European agriculture .
Furthermore , although the correlation between this issue and the common agricultural policy is clear , as already mentioned , the need to tackle this at Community level is dubious .
Obviously , the choice between distributing apples or Rocha pears should be left to the Member States .
However , we do doubt whether there is a need to establish a Community scheme in this respect .
in writing . - ( FR ) On 1 February 2007 , when my report on promoting healthy diets and physical activity in the EU was adopted , the European Parliament delivered a number of strong messages , including the fundamental role of education in relation to nutrition and health in order to prevent overweight and obesity , which affects more than 5 million children , and the call for the Commission and the Council to take the necessary measures , within the framework of the review of the CAP ( common agricultural policy ) in 2008 and 2013 , to enhance healthy nutrition incentives within the framework of rural development policies .
The Commission seems to have heard the message with this European scheme to distribute free fruit in schools for children aged six to ten from 2009 / 2010 .
Now it is up to the 27 Member States to play the game .
Obviously a lot of time , money and staff will be needed and menus will also need to be changed in many school canteens for the WHO ( World Health Organization ) recommended daily intake of five fruits and vegetables ( 400 grams ) to become more than just an advertising slogan written in small print on television screens .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mr Busk on the scheme to promote the consumption of fruit in schools .
It is clear that the children of the European Union eat little fruit or vegetables , partly because of the bad diets that they have in school canteens .
High consumption of fruit and vegetables , however , would reduce the risk of contracting serious diseases and would prevent children becoming overweight and obese .
Furthermore , eating vegetables from childhood is a good habit that continues throughout life .
I also agree with the rapporteur that the resources earmarked by the Commission for this scheme are totally inadequate .
In fact , the proposed subsidy allows the provision of only one portion of fruit one day a week .
It should also be said that I am , to tell the truth , pleased with the fact that the Commission is in any case taking to heart the various existing experiments with a view to making qualitative improvements to the scheme .
in writing . - ( SV ) In Sweden , we usually tell our children that fruit is nature 's own sweets .
I like fruit very much myself and I think that it is a good thing for Europe 's children to eat sufficient quantities of these wholesome foods .
Thus far , I share the rapporteur 's views .
That said , the responsibility for our schoolchildren eating a sufficient quantity of apples and bananas must , nevertheless , rest with the children 's parents and , possibly , the municipalities providing their education .
The European Union must not play the part of a supranational fruit police .
Let us instead concentrate our energy and our resources on more pressing tasks .
in writing . - I fully support the Commission 's proposals on distributing free fruit and vegetables in schools , as part of the strategy on tackling obesity among children .
Not only do I fully support the use of EU money to tackle a priority public health concern faced by all Member States , but I also support the strong social element attached to the proposals , in that they will allow Member States to support children from more deprived backgrounds who tend to eat less fruit and vegetables and who tend to be more at risk from obesity .
Furthermore , this is the first time that CAP money will be used to tackle a public health concern , a sign of a change in thinking on the aims of the CAP .
I am happy that Parliament has sent a strong message to the Commission and to the Council , in supporting an increased budget enabling more children to benefit from the scheme .
However , I do not agree with Parliament 's position stipulating that fruit and vegetables should only come from the Community .
We should not lose sight of the fact that this scheme is about promoting a wide variety of fruit and vegetables to school children and tackling obesity .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) ) .
in writing . - ( NL ) The battle against the bulge must start from a young age .
The supply of fresh fruit in schools can be a huge incentive to eat healthily .
This is why this scheme , which makes at least one piece of fruit available to each child between the ages of 3 and 10 , is to be welcomed with open arms .
It is estimated that in the European Union , 22 million children are overweight , 5.1 million of whom are obese .
Not only does this create many health problems , it also increases the cost of healthcare in the Member States .
If the Commission endorses Parliament 's proposal to increase the budget from EUR 90 million to EUR 500 million , every child can learn good eating habits from a young age .
This gives them more chances of sustaining these habits and preventing obesity as a result .
This report also comments on the composition of the fruit supply .
The Member States should give preference to locally produced and seasonal fruit .
The report calls for health and eating advice for children , together with information about the characteristics of organic farming .
I am pleased with the content of the report , and for that reason , I voted in favour .
in writing . - I support the principle of trying to make fruit more accessible to young people in schools .
The successful Scottish project of trying to get more fruit and vegetables available through schools has seen record numbers of children eating more healthily .
The programmes have been targeted at those most in need and I would hope that this scheme would target the poorest and most vulnerable children first .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament agree with the analysis of the situation in the euro area .
We appreciate the fact that social aspects of the cooperation have been highlighted and that the problems with growth are emphasised .
At the same time , we do not support paragraph 40 of the report , which states that Member States outside the euro area that fulfil the Maastricht criteria and have no derogation in the Treaty should adopt the common currency at the earliest possible opportunity .
We are of the opinion that this lies outside Parliament 's competence to comment on .
We respect the decision taken by the Swedish people in a referendum and would like to emphasise that this is a matter that should be dealt with in the respective Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) We all voted against this report which deifies the Stability Pact , fails to see the consequences of the current serious economic and social situation , ignores the worsening social and regional inequalities and forgets the rise in unemployment and poverty .
It is unacceptable that this report insists on the false independence of the European Central Bank , instead of defending its democratic scrutiny and the alteration of its objectives to take account of the need to concentrate on production , creation of employment with rights and improvement of people 's purchasing power , particularly among workers and pensioners .
Regrettably , the proposals tabled by our Group were rejected , specifically those criticising the fiscal and competition policies and drawing attention to the growth in job insecurity and low pay and to the consequences of deregulation and liberalisation .
It is also regrettable that our proposal to repeal the Stability Pact and replace it with a new Strategy for Solidarity , Development and Social Progress was rejected .
The least one can say is that the ' generally positive ' assessment drawn up by the rapporteurs on ten years of Economic and Monetary Union does not seem completely objective .
Not surprisingly , the few problems identified are analysed as being the fault of the Member States and of a lack of European integration .
The truth is that the introduction of the euro automatically led to an explosion in the prices of convenience goods and to a fall in the purchasing power of workers .
The truth is that the Stability Pact is a budgetary and social Malthusianism .
The truth is that the lack of an exchange rate policy and the overvaluation of the euro have undermined the international competitiveness of the euro area .
The truth is that a single monetary policy and a single key interest rate for 11 or 15 economies with very different structures and levels of development are inevitably as ill-suited to the needs of each individual one of these economies as they are to those of the whole .
The euro has failed to bring the promised prosperity to its members , who , for the most part , are now in recession .
This is because the euro , in its conception and in its operation , is not an economic tool .
It is above all a powerful political tool for destroying the independence of nations .
in writing . - I support this report , which calls for improved economic coordination in order to try to prevent a prolonged , deep recession .
This roadmap should improve the monitoring of the financial crisis , and should provide valuable support to the economy .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mrs Berès and Mr Langen which takes stock of a decade of Economic and Monetary Union .
I fully agree with the fact that the European Parliament , the only European body directly elected by the people , has played a very important role over the first decade of Economic and Monetary Union .
Parliament acts as co-legislator in the field of the internal market , in particular with regard to financial services ; it conducts dialogue on the coordination of economic policies through the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ; it has a dominant role in monetary policy , with the appointment of the members of the ECB 's Executive Board .
These are only a very few of the primary functions carried out by Parliament over recent years .
I would like to end by congratulating my fellow Members on the report , particularly in light of the emphasis placed upon the enlargement of the euro area as a springboard for the EU 's new economic future .
in writing . - ( PL ) The ' EMU @ 10 : successes and challenges after 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union ' report is one of the most important reports presented to this plenary .
At a time of financial difficulties , it provides a new framework for discussions about the economy .
The report offers a detailed analysis which enables us to see the positive and negative aspects of Economic and Monetary Union . It contains interesting conclusions about the common currency , the euro .
There can be no doubt that the introduction of the euro has been a huge financial success for the EU .
It must be acknowledged that it has withstood a lot of market turbulence .
However , the common currency does not affect all regions in equal measure .
Differences in the development rates of different European Union states are becoming increasingly more pronounced .
Today , at a time of financial crisis , coordination of economic policy has become a necessity .
We must also abide by the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is extremely important to support the independence of the European Central Bank .
Its powers must be limited to monetary issues , that is to maintaining price stability , and its exclusive power to set interest rates .
For these reasons , I support adoption of the report .
in writing . - The Conservative Party has recently published " Fair Play on Women 's Pay : A six-point plan to overcome the gender pay gap " .
The Conservative Party wants to help to stamp out the pay gap once and for all .
This includes compulsory pay audits for employers who are found to discriminate , new measures to help women into work and up the careers ladder , and extending the right to request flexible working to all parents of children aged eighteen or younger .
Equal pay is crucial for a fair and equal society , but national governments and parliaments are generally best placed to act in ways that are most effective for their own societies and economies .
This recommendation by the European Parliament is over-prescriptive at the EU level .
The Bauer report is not one we can support , however , as the request for a new legislative proposal on equal pay is based on Article 141 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty which is covered by the Conservative Party 's pledge to opt out of the Social Chapter .
in writing . - ( SV ) The gender pay gap is a huge problem and something that both individual workers and social partners have a particular responsibility to address .
This type of discrimination violates basic provisions of the Treaty and employers who do not take responsibility for this should even now be prosecuted in court .
However , this is contrary to our fundamental view of the Swedish labour market and the parties ' responsibility , as per current legislation , to create new legal instruments to direct wage formation at EU level or by means of a state wage policy .
Wage formation is not , and should not be , an EU competence .
As our request to remove references to new legal instruments for directing wage formation at EU level was given a hearing , we have chosen to vote in favour of the report as a whole .
Unfortunately , the report still contains a number of undesirable details , such as the proposal for an ' equal pay day ' .
Parliament 's persistent habit of requiring the proclamation of days , weeks and years for various phenomena is placard politics which does not distinguish between different subject matter .
On the contrary , the subject matter itself is viewed in a banal and casual way .
in writing . - ( PT ) The gender pay gap is a problem throughout Europe .
The Community legislation on equal pay for men and women , in force since 1975 and revised in 2006 , is clearly inefficient .
We applaud the rapporteur for asking the Commission to submit a legislative proposal by 31 December 2009 , based on the recommendations contained in the report .
We also congratulate her on the responsible and serious way in which she has presented her recommendations , which are focused on the central issue , unlike some of the amendments tabled by the socialists which do not help to solve this problem as they consist of details from political folklore or recommendations which are unfeasible given that they fall outside the competence of Member States .
In Portugal , between 2005 and 2006 , despite identical circumstances , the gender pay gap increased by 8.9 % under the current government .
The unemployment benefit paid to women in 2007 was 21.1 % less than that paid to men .
The amounts paid to women , including with regard to extended benefits , are below the poverty threshold and actually fell between 2006 and 2007 .
The Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs support this report .
In spite of socialist folklore , we do not confuse the essential with the additional and we will not allow the additional to destroy the essential , namely to change an unacceptable situation of discrimination .
in writing . - The principle of equal pay for equal work helps to remove discrimination against women in the workplace .
But we must go further in protecting women 's rights .
The aim of this report is not only to enhance the value of women 's work but improve the quality of public services also .
More than 30 years after the introduction of equal pay legislation , women in the EU earn 15 % less than men and progress has been slow in closing the gender pay gap with men .
Twenty years ago , the gender pay gap in Ireland was about 25 % and now the gap is 13 % .
Even with this progress , the gender pay gap remains a serious cause of concern .
New challenges arise , particularly in this economic climate , which need to be identified and solved .
Many women continue to be concentrated in a narrow range of occupations , in part-time and low-paid work , and in jobs where their skills and contributions are undervalued .
We need a multifaceted approach .
We need to increase the labour market participation by women .
We need to improve child care services and child benefits to help reintegrate women with children back into the work place .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of abolishing direct and indirect discrimination , social and economic factors , as well as segregation on the labour market .
The report urges a neutral professional evaluation which should be based on new systems for classifying and organising staff , on professional experience and productivity , evaluated primarily from a quality perspective .
It is also being proposed to arrange a European Equal Pay Day to make the general public and employers aware of wage inequalities .
in writing . - I supported this report as we need proper enforcement of existing laws on the principle of equal pay .
However , while the enforcement of existing laws on the principle of equal pay for the same work and for work of equal value is crucial to achieving gender equality , the restoration of choices to all women is also very important .
There needs to be flexibility in the system and a proper work / life balance .
Women must be given : the choice to marry or not ; the choice to have children or not , to have a career , to have further education or not , to stay at home , to go out into the workplace , to start a business or to have access to property .
The challenge is to ensure that economic pressures do not remove these choices .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Bauer report on equal pay for men and women because it is unacceptable that women earn less ( the difference in the EU is 15 % ) , even though they possess more skills ( 58 % of graduates and 41 % of doctorate holders are women ) .
The report suggests ways of revising the current legal framework , including proposing the introduction of penalties for non-compliance and calling for greater dialogue with the social partners .
The principle of equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value is not just a fight of women , but of all society .
Women are needed in all areas of business , particularly in those traditionally regarded as masculine .
This is proven by the fact that women make good managers .
In the current context , and to achieve the growth and employment objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , the active participation of women is essential .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although the report has been adopted with most of the amendments tabled during the debate in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , which made it into a good report , the PPE-DE Group could not refrain from weakening its scope during the vote in plenary , knowing that an absolute majority of 393 votes was needed .
As a result , certain proposals have regrettably fallen and are not contained in the final resolution , including some detailed recommendations on the content of the new proposal requested from the European Commission on compliance with the principle of equal pay for men and women .
However , this is still a positive resolution which we voted for .
We would stress the need for measures which value work , which give priority to employment with rights and a fair distribution of wealth , which help to overcome pay differences and stereotypes linked to certain tasks and business sectors that discriminate against women , and which value the professions and activities in which women predominate .
These particularly include the retail and services sectors , and industries such as cork , textiles and clothing , footwear , food and others where very low pay exists in the professions and categories dominated by women .
in writing . - I am speaking on this today as the gender pay gap is a concern to many of my West Midlands constituents , as well as to most of us here .
The gender pay gap in the UK is wider than the European average and women have recently received the dire news that this gap is now increasing .
Equality between men and women is a fundamental right and a democratic necessity .
Only with the equal participation of all our citizens will we achieve the EU objectives of growth , employment and social cohesion .
Economic arguments to change are compelling : unlocking women 's potential could contribute up to 2 % of GDP .
In times of financial instability , it is crucial to ensure that our economy uses all the resources it has .
It is also crucial to make sure that women do not suffer even more .
Although legislation has been passed and initiatives have been proposed , it is not enough .
Many of my constituents are in favour of stronger action to fight the gap .
This is why I welcome this report and proposals to introduce pay audits and attribute more power to equality bodies .
in writing . - ( SV ) After careful consideration , the June List has chosen to vote in favour of the report .
Increased equality on the labour market , reduced pay gaps between professional women and men and equal pensions are important objectives in a just society .
Thus , the ideas for more statistics , revised legislation and training to counteract common notions in society concerning gender are important .
However , the June List is critical of the EU 's seemingly insatiable need to incorporate more and more policy areas within its sphere of competence .
It is our fundamental view that issues relating to regulation of the labour market should primarily be dealt with by individual Member States and should not be taken up at EU level .
in writing . - The principle of equal pay for men and women is explicitly stated in the Treaty of Rome and it is therefore a scandal that such huge disparities between the genders still exist across the EU .
It is therefore essential that the European institutions take real action in this area and I accordingly voted in favour of the Bauer report .
in writing . - The pay gap , which was one of the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs but which has not been adequately addressed by some Member States , has a serious impact on the status of women in economic and social life .
I support this report , which will address women earning 15-25 % less than their male counterparts in Europe .
in writing . - ( DE ) In today 's vote I voted in favour of the report by my colleague Edit Bauer .
However , I did not find this easy as I have some reservations about the content of some points .
A policy of equality has existed at European level for almost 50 years .
For the last 50 years we have had a clear statutory framework .
Nonetheless , despite all our efforts in the direction of equality , both at European level and in the Member States , we still have not succeeded in fully eliminating the discrimination against women in terms of pay .
The call for new laws as formulated in the Bauer report should be rejected .
It is not possible to achieve a change in attitude in our society through legislation .
Experience in recent years shows that the causes of the pay gap between men and women are mostly outside the ambit of the legal system and that legal regulations cannot by themselves improve the situation of women in the labour market .
New laws simply create more bureaucracy and thus increase the burden on small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
For this reason , I am in favour of a more consistent implementation of the existing regulations to abolish gender-specific pay differences and against additional legal regulations .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of Mrs Bauer 's report , given the gender inequalities which , unfortunately , still exist .
Equality between women and men is a fundamental value of the European Union .
Promoting the principle of equal opportunities between women and men is a relatively recent concern for the European Union - featuring in the Maastricht Treaty or Amsterdam Treaty - although various aspects have been highlighted by many declarations or international agreements , such as the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women of 1967 .
In Romania two of the fields in which the majority of workers are women would be health and social services and education ( 69.5 % ) .
Professions and workplaces dominated by women still tend to be undervalued compared to those where men predominate .
Inequalities and discrepancies in applying gender criteria have a definite impact on pay .
The average wage difference between women and men is 8.5-15 % , and even bigger in the private sector , in the latter 's favour .
This contravenes Directive 75 / 117 / EEC relating to the application of the principle of equal pay for women and men .
in writing . - ( RO ) Unless we have equal pay for women and men , we will find it difficult to achieve the objectives proposed for 2010 : improving living conditions , achieving economic growth and eradicating poverty .
The fact that in the European Union women earn on average 15 % less than men and need to work roughly until February ( 418 days per year ) to be paid the same amount as men sounds an alarm bell .
Specific measures need to be taken to combat this .
Equal representation in the European Commission and European Parliament may be our political signal for a better representation of women in all decision-making bodies and , implicitly , for eliminating these pay gaps .
I voted in favour of this report and I congratulate the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mrs Bauer on the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women .
For years this age-old problem has been under debate : it is disconcerting to note that , in some EU countries , differences in pay are primarily attributable to the high level of job-related segregation and the impact of the pay structure .
We therefore need multi-faceted policies targeting the implementation of legislation that already exists , but which is not very effective .
I applaud the work accomplished by my fellow Member , which is designed to consolidate the legislation in force , but to take into account the fact that it is difficult to influence economic segregation through legislation of this type .
Finally , I support the cause because we need to have pay policies designed to reduce inequalities in pay and to achieve better pay for low-paid workers , among whom women predominate .
in writing . - The creation of a European Equal Pay Day is something I support .
The fact that women are still discriminated against , being paid an average 15 % less than their male counterparts for the same work , is totally unacceptable in 2008 .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Communist Party of Greece voted against the report , because it uses equal pay to reduce working women 's rights to the lowest common denominator .
Working women should not forget that , on the pretext of applying the euro-unifying legislation on gender equality , the EU and the centre-left and centre-right governments of the Member States have proceeded to abolish their vested rights , such as the ban on night work for women .
The EU and the New Democracy and PASOK parties have used the same legislation to engineer an increase in the retirement age for female civil servants in the name of abolishing discrimination and of gender equality .
Not only does the report fail to address the real causes of unequal pay between men and women for the same work , and the fact that women and young people are the first victims of part-time work , flexible contracts of employment and flexicurity , on the contrary , the solutions it proposes move in precisely this direction .
The argument of ' reconciling family life and work ' is used to generalise flexible forms of employment for women and propose hot money from public funds and public works contracts and financing as a reward for ' good capitalists ' who apply what is self-evident : an equal day 's pay for an equal day 's work for men and women .
in writing . - This report makes recommendations to the European Commission on applying the principle of equal pay for men and women , and that principle is the key to ensuring dignity , fairness and equality in pension entitlements .
For years now I have strongly backed the Plymouth Senior Citizens ' Petition calling for the just treatment of older women .
I was proud to submit three amendments to the Bauer report , reflecting the Plymouth campaigners ' demands , and I am delighted that all three have been accepted .
The European Parliament has recognised that many women lose out on earnings as a result of their work caring for children and older people .
It has called on the Commission to eliminate the risk of poverty among pensioners and secure for them a decent standard of living .
And it has set as a goal the equality of male and female pensions , including the retirement age .
Now we need the European Union and national governments to take heed of these words and turn fine sentiments into forward steps .
Pension equality for senior citizens is a worthy goal , and I am proud to support this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to abstain , as we think that it is , in principle , wrong to pre-empt the legislative process that is currently in progress concerning precisely these issues in an own-initiative report .
in writing . - ( PL ) I support Mr Ehler 's report for two reasons .
Lacking its own raw materials , the European Union is becoming one of the largest energy importers in the world , increasingly dependent on external oil and gas suppliers .
These are the sectors associated with the greatest geopolitical risk .
Coal reserves will remain available for longer than oil and natural gas reserves , and may acquire strategic importance for us , in the event that energy supplies are threatened for political reasons .
In addition , producing energy from fossil fuels such as coal can be viable in spite of stringent environmental standards , and this offers good prospects to European and Polish mines .
The introduction of clean coal technologies will contribute to the significant development of Poland 's infrastructure and its economy .
in writing . - ( LT ) The Commission communication on ' Supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels ' is a very important step towards further discussions on political and financial measures .
Today it is obvious that the European Union will only be able to implement its ambitious goals in the area of post-2020 climate policy if it ensures the use of broad CO2 capture and storage technologies at power stations .
We really must make progress in preparing and adopting legal regulations on geological capture and storage of CO2 .
Although at the moment attempts are being made at European level to adopt a directive on geological capture and storage of CO2 as quickly as possible , there is a shortage of appropriate initiatives at national or regional level , which are particularly necessary in the area of transport infrastructure .
in writing . - ( SV ) For as long as fossil fuels are required to meet the EU 's energy needs it is important to support initiatives that aim to alleviate the environmental effects , for example using CCS ( Carbon Capture and Storage ) technologies .
However , we are of the opinion that proceeds from auctioning emission allowances should go to the respective Member State and not be earmarked for different projects .
Otherwise , there is a risk of the emission allowances system becoming ineffective and controlled from the top .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report because it emphasises the importance of increasing the allocation of European funds for research , aimed at implementing new technologies for capturing greenhouse gases , especially CO2 , particularly funds aimed at implementing pilot projects which will raise the profile of this research , along with the opportunities offered by it and the safety of new technologies .
Europe cannot give up yet the biggest energy resource it owns , fossil coal , as many of the Member States still guarantee their energy independence by processing fossil coal .
We need to guarantee future generations that producing electricity from fossil fuels is sustainable and causes as little pollution as possible .
in writing . - I supported this report , as it is in line with the amendment I tabled on the financing of large scale CCS ( Carbon Capture and Storage ) demonstration plants , in my report on the review of the EU 's Emissions Trading System .
Our dependence on fossil fuels is likely to persist for some time and we should be exploring all options in order to mitigate their harmful effects .
CCS extracts and buries the carbon from any hydrocarbon source rather than allowing emissions to enter the atmosphere .
If implemented without delay and given proper financing CCS could reduce CO2 emissions in the EU significantly .
in writing . - This report recognises the need to reduce emissions from fossil fuels which will be used to bridge the gap until we can become reliant upon renewable energy sources , which is why I support it .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the report by Mr Ehler on supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels .
It is clear that the European Union will only attain the ambitious targets in its climate policy if it succeeds in ensuring broad use of CCS ( Carbon Capture and Storage ) technologies in power stations .
The strategic importance of coal must not prevent us from finding a way to use this precious resource in a manner that does not have an impact on climate .
In addition , I agree with the rapporteur on the paucity of measures adopted by the Commission to ensure that such ambitious projects can be completed by 2015 .
Finally , I welcome the assessment made by Mr Ehler , stressing the absence of an appropriate legislative framework that has financial resources available to it .
It is absolutely vital that we remedy this absence .
in writing . - ( DE ) By adopting the Ehler report the European Parliament has decided on a completely outmoded energy strategy .
CCS ( Carbon Capture and Storage ) is intended to make production processes that are damaging to the climate seem ' climate friendly ' .
However , it does not avoid or reduce CO2 production , as would be the case with renewable energies for example .
In the opinion of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , massive public funding of CCS makes little sense at an economic level .
This money would be put to better , more sustainable use if it were invested in research into the more efficient use of renewable energies .
The Ehler report goes further than the Commission : it seeks to use European structural funds for CCS investment , which will deny these resources to disadvantaged regions and their sustainable development plans .
A CDU member who represents Brandenburg , Mr Ehler is seeking to put money in the pocket of Vattenfall , Europe 's fifth-largest power company , enabling it to open more lignite mines in Lusatia ( Brandenburg / Saxony ) , threatening more villages with resettlement .
It is known that Vattenfall intends to generate power from lignite for the next 50 to 60 years , even though this is only possible with an efficiency factor of less than 50 % .
Energy-intensive CCS technology will reduce this by a further 10 % to 15 % .
This is a retrograde step , which is why we do not accept this report , but instead have lodged an alternative proposal .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
EU response to the world financial crisis : follow-up of the informal European Council from 7 November and of the G20 Summit from 15 November 2008 - Commission 's legislative and work programme for 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the EU response to the world financial crisis and the Commission 's legislative and work programme for 2009 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the effects of the financial crisis on the economy are becoming more clearly apparent .
The Commission 's autumn forecasts predicted a significant downturn in growth in the European Union for next year .
Several Member States have already entered into recession , and , in 2009 , economic growth could , at best , remain at zero in the European Union .
Furthermore , financial tensions are beginning to have repercussions on the financing of economic institutions .
Public authorities within the Member States are making every effort to ensure continuity in the financing of businesses and households facing the growing risk of credit restrictions .
Europe and its international partners are therefore facing the worst financial crisis since 1929 and they must face up to an economic slowdown on an exceptional scale .
As you know , since our last debate on 8 October , the Council Presidency has pursued only one objective and held only one conviction : the essential unity of Europeans in the face of the global financial crisis .
Faced with the threat of a real breakdown in the European financial system , the French Presidency has succeeded in promoting a European action plan to support , as a matter of urgency , financial institutions threatened by the crisis , and together the Member States have decided to guarantee interbank financing and to recapitalise the banks .
The effectiveness of this joint European action was also demonstrated last weekend at the G20 summit meeting of Heads of State or Government in Washington , attended by President Barroso .
Europe , represented by the President of the Council , President Sarkozy , and by the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , initiated this historic summit .
It demonstrated great unity in giving the Council Presidency , on 7 November , clear positions to defend with our major partners .
We can now feel very pleased about the outcome of this approach , since the summit 's conclusions keep the main issues that Europe upholds - that is , transparency and responsibility - central to the functioning of the international financial system .
We have also achieved positive decisions in line with the European Union 's proposals , such as registration of rating agencies , the principle of monitoring or regulating all the activities of financial institutions , and linking remuneration with the avoidance of excessive risk taking .
For the first time all the major economic and financial institutions have agreed to respond strongly in order to avoid a recurrence of a crisis of this magnitude .
They have all agreed on an ambitious plan of action , which the Finance Ministers will have to spell out in detail in the weeks to come .
The European Union will obviously have to continue to bring all its weight to bear in international discussions .
You know that you can count on the French Presidency to promote European unity and thereby to offer a common ambition with regard to fundamental reforms on all the issues identified in Washington .
We are counting , of course , on the Czech Presidency to take these initiatives forward .
With regard to rating agencies , accounting standards , monitoring of hedge funds , the fight against tax havens , the accountability of private institutions and the reform of multilateral financial institutions , the European Union must continue to speak out strongly in order to achieve definite results .
It must also , in terms of Community legislation , quickly take up its responsibilities by speeding up the adoption of the measures proposed by the Commission regarding the supervision and regulation of banks and rating agencies .
The French Presidency knows that it can count on the full and active involvement of your Parliament and its groups , and for this I am grateful to their chairmen .
Europe will thus be able to assume a position of strength at the next international meetings scheduled for 2009 .
These initial results in the financial sector are evidence of the effectiveness of Europe 's united approach .
Nonetheless , they are only one part of the European response to the crisis .
Indeed , this united approach must also inspire the European Union and its Member States to respond to the effects of the crisis on economic growth .
The Council Presidency stands firm in its conviction on this issue .
Just as in the financial sector , the Member States will not achieve any concrete results in supporting growth unless they cooperate closely with each other , and , beyond that , with their major international partners .
The G20 summit delivered a strong message in this respect .
We have to involve , on a global scale , all the macroeconomic instruments in order to avoid a long-term slowdown of the economy .
As the situation has developed , the central banks have reacted quickly by reducing interest rates .
The Presidency welcomed the European Central Bank 's robust decision , at the beginning of November , to reduce its interest rates by 50 basis points , and on several occasions we have applauded the ECB 's action in response to the financial crisis and its active participation in the deliberations of the Eurogroup and the European Councils .
With regard to budgetary matters , the G20 has indicated that significant room for manœuvre should be used wherever it exists .
The Member States of the European Union have responded to this call by saying that we should use all the room for manoeuvre permitted by the Stability and Growth Pact when there is a sharp turnaround in the economic cycle .
The French Presidency , working closely with the Commission , intends to do everything possible to ensure that national plans in support of the economic cycle are closely coordinated with Community initiatives so as to maximise the economic effects as a whole .
We are expecting , Mr Barroso , new proposals by the end of the month .
It is a matter of finding responses that can be applied at Community level and of harnessing all instruments with the capacity to help support the European economic cycle .
Certain European budget appropriations - I say this because I was present at the debate in this House - could be rapidly mobilised to respond to the slowdown .
Furthermore , while ensuring the proper functioning of the internal market , we should also ensure that all the flexibility of European state aid rules is used so that the Member States and the European Union give effective support to those economic institutions that are most threatened .
We also want the European Investment Bank to be fully involved in the efforts to support the European economy .
Resources , as you know , have already been made available to ensure financing for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The support measures should be part of a more global plan , making it possible , in particular , to support the sectors most at threat , as the entire EU car industry is today .
These additional efforts at Community level will need to be actively enhanced at Member State level by means of closely coordinated national recovery measures .
Looking ahead to next month 's European Council , the Presidency intends to lead the discussion between the Member States on the priorities for such recovery action .
Several Member States have said that they were considering support measures for certain sectors of industry .
Such measures must be the result of consultation between partners in order to be fully effective and to preserve the integrity of the internal market , and the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs , together with Commissioner Almunia , will prepare the European Council discussion on these themes at their next meeting on 2 December .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has shouldered its responsibilities effectively within a few weeks in the face of an unprecedented destabilisation of the world economy .
Europeans have managed to unite in the face of immediate danger in order to take effective and urgent action .
We must learn all the lessons from this action , which has been crowned with success .
This European unity must be preserved so that we continue to act together , so that , faced with our partners and alongside our partners , we press for a fundamental reform of the financial regulatory system , and so that , together , we deal with the turnarounds in the economic cycle .
In this way , we - Council , Commission and Parliament - shall prove together that the European Union has the means to effectively take control of its destiny and to do what all Europeans expect , that is , to act as a global player .
( Applause )
Thank you to the Council 's representative , Mr Jean-Pierre Jouyet .
I am very pleased to see so many members of the European Commission here .
The vast majority of the members of the Commission are present and I now have the pleasure of inviting the President of the Commission to address us .
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to commend the European Parliament 's excellent decision to organise two debates in one today : on the European management of the global financial crisis , in the wake of the G20 summit in Washington , and on the Commission 's work programme for 2009 .
This double debate perfectly reflects the political reality to which Europe must respond : rising to the challenge of an emergency whilst resolutely continuing with the fundamental work already begun .
You will therefore not be surprised that the Commission 's work programme for 2009 also has a dual purpose : continuity and action in a time of crisis .
I shall come back to that .
First of all , however , I should like to return to the assessment of the Washington summit , which was also given by Mr Jouyet on behalf of the French Presidency .
Allow me to remind you that the political initiative of starting a global process for reforming the financial system came from Europe , and I think we can congratulate ourselves on that .
The European Union was equal to the challenge .
It was also from Europe that the key issues in the debate came .
I am not going to repeat them as we spoke about them together , in this House , last month .
The guidelines laid down by the extraordinary meeting of the European Council on 7 November , inspired by the joint work of our three institutions , served as a platform for the discussions .
The Commission made proposals .
The President of the European Parliament , Mr Pöttering , also took part in these discussions , and we worked out a common position .
I invite all those who are sometimes inclined to criticise to look at the proposals that we , as Europe , have made and at the results of the G20 .
We need , of course , a bit of distance in time to judge whether an event marks a turning point in history , but my feeling - and I should like to convey this to you very openly - is that this first meeting of the G20 Heads of State or Government genuinely marks the beginning of a new era in the collective steering of the global economy , and perhaps more than that , since the crisis has made the protagonists realise the need for a global approach to global problems .
That is my feeling .
The Washington summit also laid the foundations for a new global governance based on the principles of a market economy , but an economy as envisaged by Europe is not just a market economy ; it is , as we say very often in Europe , a social market economy .
That is one of the European Union 's assets .
In fact , the G20 reached agreement on four fundamental decisions .
Firstly , not necessarily in terms of importance , but in terms of the order of the decisions , an action plan for the short and medium term to reform the financial markets , to avoid further crises and to protect consumers , savers and investors .
Secondly , the principles of a new global governance to rectify commercial , monetary and budgetary imbalances that are detrimental to the global community .
Thirdly , and this is the question that I believe needs to be discussed most urgently , the need for coordinated action to stimulate the global economy and minimise the consequences of the crisis for the jobs and purchasing power of our fellow citizens .
Fourthly , the need for open markets and the rejection of all protectionism .
That , moreover , is why we shall endeavour to reach a consensus by the end of 2008 on ways to conclude the Doha Round for trade and development .
At the same time , the summit has sent out a clear signal , which will , I believe , be very important to Europeans .
Economic and financial issues must not be dealt with in ways that are detrimental to the other global challenges , which also call for a collective effort , namely , achieving the Millennium Development Goals , energy security , combating climate change , food safety , the rule of law , combating terrorism , poverty and disease .
I personally emphasised this point .
I even said that , in my opinion , it would be obscene to discuss major issues of global finance and ignore the needs of those who do not have enough to eat or do not have access to clean water .
( Applause )
A new chapter in politics is now beginning , and we must write it rapidly and in practical terms .
In this sense , we must make matters clear .
If Europe has played a major role with its proposals to the G20 and if it has made itself heard , it is because it was united .
I should like to say once more how proud I am of the excellent cooperation we have achieved between the French Presidency and the Commission , and also with your institution , the European Parliament .
The European Union now faces a real challenge to continue to speak with one voice .
Sometimes it will be difficult , but it is the condition that is vital for our success .
Be that as it may , in Europe we have not been slow to take some very important decisions already .
After successive European Councils and debates with the European Parliament , the Commission has already made some important legislative proposals , which are now before the co-legislators .
On 29 October we also outlined an economic recovery programme that we are going to formalise with a document that the Commission is to adopt next week .
This is where the Commission 's work programme for 2009 comes in .
Of course , we have already covered much ground over the past few months .
Of course , we are still going to make headway with certain elements by the end of the year , but there will be many things left for us to do next year , too .
This programme contains four priorities on which we were , moreover , broadly in agreement with the views of the European Parliament during the September debate on the annual political strategy for 2009 .
The first of these priorities is self-evident : growth and jobs .
In 2009 , we will initially strive to achieve two things : limiting the consequences of the economic slowdown on jobs and businesses in Europe , and continuing with our reform so as to be better prepared for the post-crisis period .
We must apply to the real economy the same approach that we used successfully when the financial crisis erupted : defining clear principles and coordinated measures at European Union level .
I think , in fact , that our citizens would not understand if the governments of the 27 and the European institutions , having been able to agree on a common platform to respond to the financial crisis , were not now capable of working out a common platform to respond to the economic crisis .
The least we can do , therefore , is to accept the principle of coordination between all the Member States and , of course , with the European institutions .
Such is the framework of the recovery plan that the Commission will present on 26 November under the umbrella of the Lisbon Strategy .
We have the instruments in Europe , we have the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment , we have the Stability and Growth Pact , and we can demonstrate that these instruments , with political will , and especially with European will , can respond to the crisis that we are currently going through .
We are living in exceptional times , and they call for exceptional measures .
We need a genuine common strategy to bring together the conditions for an economic recovery , a programme that seeks , above all , to limit the impact of the crisis on citizens - households , workers , entrepreneurs - a programme that uses all available levers - fiscal , structural or regulatory , both at European level and at national level - in a coordinated effort , and on this point also , I want to say how much we have appreciated the cooperation of the European Central Bank up till now .
No Member State , in fact , could emerge from this crisis by means of national measures alone .
Our economies are much too interdependent for that .
One of the most interesting results of this summit in Washington is that everyone understood that , with globalisation , even those who had been least exposed to financial market integration now know the effect of interdependence .
If the entire world is ready to accept the effects of interdependence , we in Europe must not only recognise this interdependence , but must also be able to respond in coordinated and consistent ways .
That is why we believe that we need a budgetary stimulus programme in order to sustain demand , to exploit synergies and to avoid negative chain reactions , a programme of measures that are timely , targeted and temporary : the three ' t 's ' .
We need these measures urgently , and that is what we shall propose to our Member States .
I am thinking above all about efforts to encourage training and retraining , to invest more heavily in innovation , interconnectivity and in transforming Europe into a low carbon economy .
I am thinking above all of the need to adapt certain sectors of our economy to our other goals of combating climate change .
This will be a splendid opportunity to show that the agenda to combat climate change is not an agenda against economic growth .
On the contrary , it will perhaps be an agenda that encourages modernisation of European industry .
I am also thinking about increased efforts to reduce administrative costs for businesses and thereby unlocking the potential of SMEs in particular , a central feature of our Better Regulation Review in January 2009 .
We are increasingly committed to the goals of better lawmaking , that is , ' better regulation ' .
We must reduce all unnecessary administrative burdens , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Social Agenda for opportunities , access and solidarity is also part of the European response to the economic crisis , because there will be social difficulties to be dealt with , we are not denying it , particularly as a result of an increase in the rate of unemployment , which now seems more than likely .
That is why we must move forward the Social Agenda .
I would emphasise , in particular , the measures to promote consumer interests and to open up the job market to young people , but there will no doubt be many other issues that we shall want to discuss with the European Parliament .
With regard to finance , I am relying on the Members of this House to swiftly adopt the Commission 's proposals on capital adequacy , deposit guarantees and rating agencies .
It is essential to re-establish a climate of confidence .
In 2009 , the Commission will take concrete measures to strengthen the regulatory framework of the European financial system .
It will look into the regulation , supervision and transparency of financial markets , including the areas mentioned in the Rasmussen and Lehne reports .
It will let you have , before the spring Council , the first analyses of the high-level group responsible for financial supervision , which we have set up .
To conclude this first part of the debate , I think that , in spite of their negative effects , crises always have one virtue .
They shake up our fixed patterns of thinking and our certainties , giving a certain plasticity to situations and leaving the flexibility necessary for remodelling or reshaping them .
I would like once more to convey to you very sincerely and very openly the feeling that I had in Washington last weekend .
I saw an open-mindedness that , frankly , we would not have had a few months ago .
It is the crisis that has changed many attitudes .
There is now an openness not only among the great powers but also among the emerging powers , towards changing the world and promoting European values : the value of freedom and the value of solidarity .
In the case of Europe , I believe that this is the moment for it to make its mark on the course of events .
( Applause )
Mr President of the Commission , thank you for your contribution .
I am sure my fellow Members will allow me to observe that , in recent weeks , when you have had to attend a marathon number of sessions , you have always - in my opinion - upheld Community law in a clear manner , as is naturally your duty .
This is very important in relation to our governments .
You need to meet the demands of the European Parliament , as well as the demands of the various governments .
This was clearly so in your case and I would like to thank you on behalf of the European Parliament for your efforts at this difficult time .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the current financial crisis does not , as some people have said , constitute the defeat of capitalism but is well and truly the result of a political error , that is , the inadequacy of rules and controls on the quality of financial products in the US since the 1990s .
It is the result of a lack both of market transparency and of an effective financial markets monitoring body .
The centre-right political family is not and never has been in favour of a financial system without rules or arbitrators ; we are now paying very dearly for the economic and social consequences of this .
What we , the centre-right , advocate for the global economy is the European model of a social market economy , which has proved itself .
What we , the centre-right , are asking is that , in difficult times , we focus our attention on the situation of people who work and who save , and on that of entrepreneurs , and especially of small and medium-sized enterprises , who take risks every day to create growth and jobs .
We will only guarantee a future for them if we stand up for our model of society and if we maintain the conditions for a free , fair and transparent market , conscious of our responsibilities and faithful to our values .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to express my Group 's great satisfaction that , in this crisis , as in the Georgian crisis this summer , Europe , when it wishes , has a presence in the world , makes itself heard and influences its partners .
What I mean here is that Europe , which supports a model of society that is unique in the world and which puts people at the heart of that model of society , is a major tool in the context of globalisation .

The Council Presidency with Mr Sarkozy , supported by the Commission and its President , Mr Barroso , have shown that there can be a common , consistent approach by the 27 Member States , even on very sensitive and complex matters , and that Europe can have an influence on the world if it tries to stand united .
It was thanks to repeated requests from the Council Presidency and the Commission President that the G20 meeting was made possible .
This meeting of the richest countries and the emerging economic powers was both a symbolic and a historic event , but it also resulted in concrete measures that our Group strongly supports .
The G20 has , indeed , identified the causes of the problem , worked out a strategy and planned a timetable .
Disgruntled people say that it is not enough and that it is too late .
I have some questions myself , such as why in Europe did we not pre-empt the crisis when the warning signs were already there last year ?
Why did our supervisory authorities not monitor more closely the quality of US financial products ?
We have to have an answer to the question of what happened in our big banks , where the top floor did not know what was going on with our computer-game players on the third floor .
It is our duty now to take action to stimulate our economy , to stimulate growth and thus to limit the impact of this crisis on social cohesion .
We must simplify the internal market , invest in research , strongly support our SMEs and help families in difficulty .
We must do all that without putting a strain on public finances , for example , by considering Euro-bonds as an additional source of funding and by keeping up the impetus of reforms undertaken at national level , which are now more necessary than ever .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of a historic crisis , global governance has made an advance that is also potentially historic .
We must go further , while guarding against the danger of protectionism , which is always detrimental to the poorest countries in the world .
It is in times of crisis that we can take brave measures for the future .
Mr President of the Commission , it is in a time of crisis that we can change some rules , and only during a time of crisis because , after the crisis , everyone forgets very quickly .
Europe must not deviate from this path .
Europe , united , showed that it was able to find solutions to the crises and to help our fellow citizens to overcome this crisis , which will continue to pose huge problems for us during the coming months .
I would say to you quite simply that Europe must be united , Europe must be strong , and above all , Mr President of the Commission , that we have felt the symbiotic relationship between the different institutions , Parliament , which I will mention first , the Commission and the Council .
That is how we will succeed and set an example to our fellow citizens .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the G20 states have held a meeting shows that progress has been made .
The fact that they have convened in this way indicates that the world is changing , that we are developing into a multipolar world in which the European Union can , and will , play a central role if it stays united , if we do our homework and if we actually perform the task that we have been set .
Therefore the decisive issue is , President of the Commission , whether we have enough time .
From your speech , I understand that you intend to present the measures , which you are going to develop in the Commission in connection with the report from Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , at the spring meeting .
That is too late .
As far as the hedge funds and the private equity funds are concerned , we want the measures now .
If I have understood matters correctly , Mr McCreevy submitted initial measures concerning the banks to the Commission last week .
It is only a very small package .
If we want credibility , we need to discuss the rating agencies now .
We want to discuss the regulation of these agencies as quickly as possible .
We want measures in connection with the private equity funds and hedge funds now .
We want to discuss managers ' salaries now .
We want to discuss short selling now .
The fact is , people are already getting used to the situation .
We are experiencing a financial crisis and large-scale discussions are taking place but the ladies and gentlemen from the world of finance are already taking up their positions again .
I would like to read you a short quote from a letter from Mr Ackermann , the Chief Executive Officer of Deutsche Bank , to George W. Bush - two very interesting correspondents .
We must prevent , writes Mr Ackermann , the public sector from taking a permanently larger role in the international financial system .
No , this must not be prevented , it is precisely this that is the aim of the action which we are now taking , namely that there is more regulation and more international cooperation to enforce this regulation .
We have now reached a decisive crossroads , a decisive point in time when we have to ask ourselves the following question . In the future , will there be stricter requirements , stricter controls and , I might add , legal prohibition of certain types of speculation and abuse or are we protecting banks , are we protecting funds from collapse ?
They gratefully accept the money and then carry on unimpeded .
It is almost like giving a burnt-out gambler , who has lost everything in a casino , more money just for him to happily carry on just as before .
No , what we have to find out is who owns the casino , what rules are used for gambling , how the winners are taxed and , most importantly , whether the procedures in the casino are transparent and whether those who are responsible for what goes on there can also be brought to account .
That must be our goal .
The goal of the EU must be to define its own rules which the EU itself then enforces within the G20 countries and in the international organisations .
Things cannot go on in the same way as before .
We must also be clear in our minds that we have a responsibility towards the ordinary citizens of the European Union whose money is used to pay for the disasters that others have caused .
I will give you a brief example .
Just imagine , Mr Barroso , that you go to your bank .
You are one of the better paid people in Europe , just like I am .
You go to your bank and say : ' Here is EUR 1 000 and I would like a 25 % rate of return . '
The man in the bank would reply : ' Mr Barroso , are you feeling unwell ?
You are usually such a sensible person .
You actually seem really rather clever . '
However , when Mr Ackermann speaks to his shareholders and says : ' We want returns of 25 % this year ' , he gets a standing ovation .
At long last , we have to close the gap between the philosophy of these people and everyday life .
It is not acceptable that in international business , dealings are done based on these cool , cold considerations of financial returns alone .
In order to achieve this we need the rules to stop this kind of abuse .
( Applause )
If , in the next few months , by the end of this parliamentary term , we have acted sensibly , we will have closed the gap between the business world 's perception and what it views as the real world , and what the ordinary people , the people in the companies , perceive as being the real world .
The real world in companies is the world in which the money that has been thrown away , and the money for the deficits which the community of states now convening is confronted with and which have to be financed by means of rescue packages amounting to billions of euros , has to be taken from taxpayers ' wallets and from the real economy .
Therefore we cannot limit ourselves to just rescuing the banks and the funds .
Investment in the real economy is also of primary importance .
We must secure jobs .
We must protect the economy from collapse .
Yesterday , my friend Mr Steinmeier presented an interesting plan , a plan which aims to revitalise investment in all national economies in the European Union and which , above all , presents the Commission with one particular question .
Can we use the resources that we have already set aside for the next six or seven years for investment in infrastructure , in the Lisbon Process , in research , in qualifications and in setting up a telecommunications infrastructure in Europe ?
Can we invest them now in order to trigger employment and growth quickly ?
In my opinion this issue is just as important as regulation of the international financial markets .
I believe that we have reached a turning point .
Thank you , Mr President . You pointed out that I might have been wrong about when the Commission will be ready .
Be ready before the spring meeting .
Be ready soon , because the horse racing will start again in the spring and so Mr McCreevy will once again no longer be here .
We need the Commission 's measures now , as soon as possible .
I expect you to make the relevant proposals here in December .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to congratulate the President of the Commission : this was the first time the Commission has been represented at such a summit and it is , indeed , very welcome .
I would also like to congratulate the President-in-Office , not only on the excellent work that he has done for the French presidency , but also on his reward , at the presidency of the Autorité des marchés financiers .
If 1989 was a decisive victory for the free market economy , then 2008 must be the year in which we remind ourselves of Adam Smith 's warning that unbridled free markets have their limits .
Adam Smith , in the Wealth of Nations , foresaw many things , and there are many lessons there for us in what he said .
My group welcomes the success of the G20 meeting .
We welcome its commitment to a shared belief that market principles , open trade and investment regimes and effectively regulated financial markets foster the dynamism , innovation and entrepreneurship that is essential for economic growth , employment and the fight against poverty .
After 1929 , countries made the mistake of seeking individual salvation .
This time we have recognised that salvation must come collectively .
Many of the measures proposed in the Commission 's work programme for 2009 will help us on that road .
I congratulate the Commission on that work programme , especially on the plan to ensure regulation and oversight and transparency of financial actors and significant capital market investors .
Free markets thrive on transparency and honesty .
In the current difficulties , some are still seeking scapegoats .
They are arguing that warning bells were not sounded .
But they were !
Otto Graf Lambsdorff and Jacques Delors and others wrote a letter to the Slovenian presidency very early this year warning of the dangers of the overheating of the world economy .
Jean-Claude Juncker reminded us last night , in his excellent speech in our debate on the 10th anniversary of the euro , that the Eurogroup made a number of representations to the Americans and others about the dangers that we were facing .
Liberal Democrats are not going to waste time looking for the guy who failed to spot the iceberg : we will concentrate on getting people into lifeboats .
We are concerned by one aspect , however , of the European Union and the G20 's response .
Our Heads of State and Government appear to believe that we can go back to business as before , that all that is needed is economic growth .
I fear they simply have not understood so many of the lessons of the last 30 years in politics .
The recession should be a good time to take stock .
Even with the recession , world GDP is forecast to double in the next 20 years , and yet that growth is based on finite resources , on failing to factor in the cost of waste , and on another coal-fired power station in China every week .
The Presidency Note of 28 October to inform the EU 's preparatory summit on 7 November had four innovation points .
One of them was about sustainability .
It said that internationally coordinated macroeconomic responses , based on promotion of environmental investments , including in developing countries , are important .
Well , clearly , some minister or official in the French presidency has been doing some joined-up thinking .
But that did not get into the agreed language which passed for the conclusions of the preparatory summit , which talked only about climate change in one sentence in a list of other challenges .
Nor did it get into the G20 conclusions , other than as the penultimate point in the penultimate point , which talked about examples of other critical challenges , mentioning climate change as No 2 .
There is no contradiction between Keynes and fighting climate change .
A modern-day Maynard Keynes would put people back to work installing solar panels and wind generators on every house in Europe , fostering innovation and providing jobs simultaneously .
A modern-day Roosevelt , seeing that we have a global economy of which the contours are drawn in the computer campuses of West Coast America , the factories of China and the coal centres of India , would have us seek a global culture , global governance and a coherent vision of global concern .
That is the way forward .
It will never again be business as before .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission and Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I firmly believe that the European Commission has adopted a strong position by acting directly and decisively to deal with the crisis in the international financial markets .
The bottom line is that the European Union , the United States , India and China must work together to ensure that there are common rules and standards in place to control international financial services from now on .
It is inevitable that , in every crisis or every point of danger , people say that it will never be the same again .
Yet , if we study history - not just economics - it does all go in cycles .
It does all come around .
Even the simplest of fishermen would be able to tell you that the tide comes in and the tide goes out .
That is in no way to excuse the problems that we now find ourselves in or to excuse those who have precipitated this crisis by reckless lending , dubious practices and , most particularly of all , when everything goes wrong , by running to the father and mother countries and saying ' bail us out ' .
The biggest danger there is today - in business , economics , employment and in social life across Europe - is not just the financial crisis , but the fact that banks will not lend money for working capital to small and medium-sized enterprises to allow them to grow and to take opportunities .
There is no point in making solar panels if you do not have the people to put them on the roof .
If you do not have people to put them on the roof - who can pay for them and buy them - you will not have people who will make them .
The reality that we are looking at here today is that the crisis we now face in the current economic turmoil presents us with an opportunity to correct the wrongs of the past and to ensure that we now invest in research and innovation and use that money to find new ways of dealing with problems and finding solutions to the problems that people face in their lives , as well as ensuring that we give hope to people .
Sometimes people forget that what people really need is encouragement , an idea to go forward and a slap on the back saying that they do a good job , because there is a desire for hope .
The G20 and the actions of the Commission and in the presidency in bringing forward this G20 meeting - albeit with a lame duck presidency in the United States -is forcing India and China to come to the table and to say that they now have responsibilities as emerging economies .
China and India have a role to play with regard to what must be done .
My last point is that I would hate people to think that this crisis means that we must put the hindrance of the block on the innovation and creativity of the peoples of Europe .
If we want to feed our people , give them equal rights and certainty and lift them out of the trap of poverty , our first responsibility is to ensure that they have money through jobs , that the countries have money to invest in social services and health services and , most importantly of all , that we give them the tools and the skills of education and training to be able to benefit from those new challenges that come before us .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis is now biting the real economy too , as we might in any case have easily predicted .
We believe that this is the price that the European Union is paying for the delay in constructing or even the refusal to construct a European regulatory system and to establish in good time financial solidarity mechanisms and banking supervision that is worthy of the name .
Those responsible for this delay , and the advocates of this approach , which has placed Europe in a situation of extreme insecurity and recession , include you , Mr Barroso , you and the majority of your Commission .
Mr President , I would like you , when you eloquently debate and talk of possible solutions , to say loud and clear that those who wanted rules and transparency , those who refused the totem of deregulation , were right , and I and a section of my committee - one of whom is even sitting behind you - were wrong .
This is the only way that what you say today can be credible , and I am sorry but it is not true that the majority of the Member States was opposed to all these things .
As I have said to you on very many occasions between 2004 and now , you have systematically chosen to align yourself with the national governments , instead of with Parliament , and with industry rather than with consumers .
If I were somewhat of a moralist , I would even say that you have aligned yourself with the strong rather than with the just .
This approach , put forward by Joschka Fischer in his famous Humboldt speech laying down for the Commission a simple role of acting as secretariat for the Council , is faithfully reflected in the work programme that you are presenting to us today , in the priorities of internal and external policies .
Regarding the priorities in external affairs , I would particularly like to stress a continuing , reprehensible lack of attention to the issue of human rights , starting , of course , with China .
There is also a rather superficial defence of the Doha Agenda , without the realisation that the financial crisis has removed all the assumptions on which it rested .
On internal policies , regarding immigration , once more your Commission has in recent years ceded to the pressure of the Member States , and this is why today , when we talk about legal immigration , in reality we are referring to legislative instruments which remain very weak , and exactly the same can be said with regard to social policy .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , this is certainly not the way to succeed in setting in motion what the Greens have for many months now been calling the Green New Deal , and which today is very much in fashion .
A Green New Deal has a very specific meaning and it is certainly not that confused babble that can be heard circulating and which in fact means ' everything as before with a little bit of green here and there ' .
We are talking about a joint long-term investment strategy to achieve the aims of energy efficiency and an environmental shift in the economy , reductions in CO2 , with an enhanced role for the European Investment Bank , which ought to be , however , consistent in its decisions on who and what to finance .
There should be no ambiguity on useless mega-infrastructures or on nuclear power or on windfall funds for projects that are not good ones .
There should be no public funds or blank cheques for the car industry , as it now is .
This would be like carrying on throwing money down the drain , and we , I believe , do not want to throw any more money down the drain .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , only a few days ago in this very Chamber President Sarkozy told us that the crisis that we are experiencing is structural and that what is needed is a rethink of capitalism itself .
Naturally , I think that rather than escaping from the crisis of capitalism we need to escape from capitalism in crisis ; in other words , we need to start to think about a new future which provides for a genuine transition to an economy which is described in social and ecological terms , an economic democracy based on equity and cooperation rather than on inequality and war .
Above and beyond these substantive differences , however , which do count for something , I can see that very little remains of the solemn statements on the rethinking of capitalism in the rather modest and fairly disappointing outcome of this G20 , for which Europe also bears some responsibility .
Certainly , it has been discovered that laissez-faire dogma can be falsified and that therefore there can be huge public intervention and even nationalisation , but all this will not change the underlying philosophy that created the structural crisis .
Certainly , it is said that we need rules to reduce the risks of speculation , but there is no idea of intervening with regard to this financial speculation - for instance with a Tobin Tax on transactions - and we are not touching the Stability Pact that , in this time of recession , is likely to dramatically worsen lives in this continent of ours .
However , most of all , we are not asking ourselves what lies at the bottom of this crisis and so we are not succeeding in tackling it .
I would point to just two issues : the first is the systematic devaluation of work that has been pursued with laissez-faire policies over recent decades , which has ended up by creating , as well as injustice and suffering , a significant part of the lack of financial liquidity .
In 1929 John Maynard Keynes proposed that we should invest in salaries and jobs , but today this is not being done .
The second is the ecological and energy dimension of the crisis , which calls for decisions that are much clearer and starker than the stammering of the G20 , but on the other hand it is very difficult for those who created the crisis to resolve it .
We need a clear , different signal from the left .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , like other speakers here today , I would like to quote Keynes .
It has seldom seemed more appropriate .
I will quote in English :
' Speculators may do no harm as bubbles on a steady stream of enterprise .
But the position is serious when enterprise becomes the bubble on a whirlpool of speculation .
When the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino , the job is likely to be ill-done . '
The Commission 's proposal for a solution to the financial crisis really beats about the bush .
The EMU structure is not a bulwark against general crises , and certainly not financial crises .
The four freedoms and the restrictive Stability Pact do not make things any easier ; in fact exactly the opposite .
We need to redraft the institutional framework for the economy and economic policy .
It is all very well to suggest that a new financial architecture will be created , but the structure has not been described well enough to have a chance at architectural college , or on an economic course .
This is surely connected to the understanding of the crisis .
Naturally enough , the initial focus was on doing something about the liquidity crisis , to ensure the supply of lubricants .
In this regard , the various countries have chosen slightly different models - that is the way of things - but what does the Commission actually mean when it says that the EU shall ( and I will quote from the programme ) :
' ensure that the restructuring of the banking sector is done in a way which will ensure fair and healthy competition in the sector for the future ' .
Does this mean that the public sector is required to inject capital ?
Is that what this sentence means ?
I would also like to ask the Commission whether new credit rating agencies are to be set up .
Many of the old ones have , in any case , proven to be totally untrustworthy .
What does the Commission mean when it talks about the ' structural reform agenda ' ? Does it mean labour market reforms , ' flexicurity ' , without security ?
Is it the intention that increased job insecurity should be the workers ' contribution ?
In general , it is unclear whether or not the Commission intends wages to be a crucial competitive parameter .
Are wages viewed solely as costs ?
We also need to view wages in relation to the effect they have on demand .
Finally , I would like to ask a question on behalf of my colleague , Mr Blokland , who is the first vice-chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , relating to the environment : when is the Commission going to publish the national emission ceilings ?
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that the preposterous idea of the Council President , Mr Sarkozy , to alter the foundations of capitalism failed at the talks in Washington .
I hope that the European Union will see the return of a rational spirit which respects the freedom of the market as a fundamental value and a precondition of prosperity .
This applies even in times of crisis .
I believe therefore that neither the European Commission nor the Czech Republic , which is taking over the Presidency , will succumb to illusions of their own grandeur and infallibility and that , in contrast to the French Presidency , they will abandon the absurd and above all hazardous attempts to use taxpayers ' money to override the natural economic cycle .
I am also delighted that the G20 rejected protectionism .
After all , it is well-known that those who exchange some of their freedoms for greater security end up losing both .
Ladies and gentlemen , the current crisis was not caused by capitalism but by the greed of irresponsible banks that were unwilling to bear the risk for their own decisions .
This kind of thing represents a threat to the free market just as much as excessive government control does .
Simply to pump money into banks without securing direct influence over how it will be used is therefore a theft of the hard-earned money of our citizens .
We must keep an eye on the banks to ensure that they use the money not only for improving their own balance sheets but also for lending to businesses .
To allow managers to accept financial assistance without the government dictating how the money should be spent amounts to a denial of the principle of political responsibility .
This is tantamount to an immoral payment for losses incurred through the unprincipled operations of financial institutions , with neither the institutions nor the actual managers bearing ultimate responsibility .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , I shall be very brief , because this has been an extremely fertile debate , but I should like to make five observations before ceding the floor to President Barroso .
The first is that we all agree on the historic and highly innovative nature of the G20 meeting .
This global step is innovative and historic , but so was the initiative taken by Europe , as the President of the Commission has emphasised , this being a Europe that acts on the international stage , as Joseph Daul stressed , whenever a common will emerges .
Secondly , we all agree that what is happening , whether we like it or not , marks a break and that , as Mr Watson stated , we cannot go back to business as before but must be imaginative in the ways in which we respond to this crisis .
My third observation is one that several speakers have made , including Mr Schulz , chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and Mrs Frassoni , and it concerns the importance of remaining truly responsive , of maintaining our momentum and rapidly adopting any essential legislative measures , particularly those relating to financial regulation .
My fourth observation is that action is needed to lessen the highly detrimental impact of this financial crisis in terms of both relations between the financial system and SMEs , as Mr Crowley indicated , and the link between social regulation and economic recovery , to which Mr Daul referred .
It is also essential to act on the basis of a broad vision , taking account of the elements of Keynesianism that can be enlisted in the fight against climate change , as Mr Watson , chairman of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , suggested .
Lastly , as you emphasised , Mr President of the Commission , and as several speakers and group chairmen emphasised , the important thing is to consider all the dimensions of the crisis .
As you said , it is a development model which is at stake , and there is a need , as Martin Schulz pointed out , to reappraise the demarcation lines between the role of the public sector and that of the private sector .
As you stressed , and as others have said , including Mrs Frassoni , it would be wrong to focus solely on the financial world and forget the most disadvantaged , the weakest , those who are starving , whom you also mentioned , Mr President .
I also endorse the view that we must re-examine the foundations of the system ; if greed forms part of those foundations , there will be no alternative but to re-examine them .
Lastly , it must be appreciated , and this is my final point , that the crisis should not cause us to slow down or to be faint-hearted but rather to respond more quickly and to remain ambitious in our development objectives and in our environmental aims and our fight against climate change .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , since we have decided that I should now present the whole work programme for next year , I should like to answer Mr Schulz 's specific question before continuing my remarks .
Today the Commission approved its response to the two reports - the Rasmussen report and the Lehne report - and you can see how we intend to monitor the various elements and how we have already initiated such action .
It is a very wide-ranging response and we shall present other proposals , some of which , indeed , we have already presented .
When I spoke about the spring meeting of the European Council , I referred to the findings of the high-level group I set up under the chairmanship of Jacques de Larosière .
As far as the proposals are concerned , Mr McCreevy , the Commissioner responsible for these matters , tells me that those on hedge funds and private equity in particular , which may be the very proposals you had in mind , can be presented soon ; in principle , they will be ready for presentation in December .
Moving on to the Commission 's work programme for 2009 , it is , as I have said , inextricably bound up with a specific political context .
I must tell you that the financial storm is still raging , that it is not yet over , and that we are on the verge of a serious economic slowdown .
This is why we must waste no time in pursuing the efforts that have already been launched to adapt to the globalisation process and to modernise .
It is not a case of our having just discovered the need to respond to globalisation .
I must emphasise that , within this Commission over which I have the honour of presiding , we have been referring for a number of years to a new era .
What this means specifically for Europe is that we must promote our values and defend our interests in the context of the globalisation process .
It is precisely in this context that we must present ambitious proposals .
The present crisis , however , must not distract us from the other priorities of our work programme , which , in fact , are also priority responses to the challenge of globalisation .
I refer especially to the struggle against climate change and the pursuit of sustainable development .
These are priorities for 2009 , which assumes special importance as the year of the Copenhagen Conference .
May I warmly commend the huge volume of work that the European Parliament has been putting into the climate and energy package .
We face exceptional circumstances , and I am proud to see the response of the European institutions , which have risen to the challenge .
I firmly believe that , by working together , we shall achieve our common goal of a political agreement in December .
To be perfectly honest , I am convinced that such an agreement will also serve as a catalyst for a European strategy designed to obtain an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen .
I have no wish to exaggerate what is at stake , but we must all be aware that Europe is putting a great deal of its credibility on the line in this debate , in which it is the main driving force .
It was Europe that launched the global debate on the fight against climate change .
It was we who told the US Government that it needed to do more .
We have said the same thing to the Russians , the Chinese and the Indians , telling them that we must not give up at a time when the prospect of better cooperation with the new US Government is on the horizon .
Let us not give any sign of being about to scale down our ambitions .
I believe that would seriously dent our credibility .
Tomorrow we shall propose a truly golden opportunity , and we have no right not to seize it .
For this reason , our response to the economic crisis must demonstrate that programmes to fight against climate change can also be part of an economic response strategy .
I should not like to see the kind of stand-off that sometimes surfaces between those who champion the economy or industry and those who promote the sustainable-development agenda .
In actual fact , the two things go together , and I must applaud what some of you have said to that effect .
Another priority is a people 's Europe .
In 2009 the Commission will devote itself particularly to the quest for progress in the European area of freedom , security and justice , for example , by establishing the common immigration policy and integrating it into the broadest policies of the European Union , such as its growth , competitiveness and social-inclusion policies , by making the European immigration network operational and finalising the common European asylum system for 2010 , by reinforcing compliance with the rules governing consumer protection in Europe , by improving mutual recognition of certain instruments of civil and criminal law , such as judgments and inheritance settlements , and by combating new forms of criminal activity , such as child abuse and cyberattacks .
The other priority for 2009 - and I am moving on very quickly , of course , because of the time factor - is Europe 's role in the world .
Here , too , challenges await us , namely the enlargement process and reinforcement of the neighbourhood policy , as well as the establishment of closer relations with developing countries , especially those in Africa .
This is a categorical imperative , and I must remind you of the need to approve the Commission 's proposal on agricultural aid in developing countries .
It is a question of credibility .
Once again , we cannot confine ourselves at major summits to the discussion of financial matters .
We must show that we do not hold discussions with the large emerging powers alone but that we are also concerned about the developing countries , especially the countries of Africa .
Our relationships with these countries are also an important factor in the resolution of a number of global issues .
Let us not forget that we have major meetings like next year 's Copenhagen Conference to enable us to engage more effectively with them on common issues such as energy security , the fight against climate change and migration , as well as the completion of the Doha Development Agenda and the pursuit of bilateral trade negotiations .
It clearly emerged from the Washington summit that there is an urgent need for a global trade agreement .
Doha , moreover , besides being a trade agenda , is also a development agenda .
I believe that we are now closer to the right track , for the real alternative to Doha is not the status quo but rather , because of the present financial crisis , the option of turning in on ourselves , the possibility that countries in various parts of the world will take backward steps on tariffs and enact unilateral measures to protect some sectors of their economies .
In that case , economic nationalism would resurface on a grand scale , with a return to protectionism that would damage the global economy and , I need hardly add , the European economy too .
As you know , Europe is the leading power in terms of trade .
Last week 's summit has also strengthened my determination to pursue relations with Russia based on mutual interests .
These relations will sometimes prove difficult .
There are issues on which we have different positions , but I honestly believe that last week 's summit in Nice confirmed that it is better to engage with Russia than try to isolate it .
Russia is also a major partner on the global stage .
Lastly , the intense pressure to which the world has been subjected in 2008 has demonstrated how important it is to share a common vision with the United States .
A fantastic opportunity is now opening up with this new administration in the United States .
During his election campaign , the President-elect made very clear statements on matters such as the fight against climate change and the adoption of a more multilateralist approach .
Let us grasp this opportunity and present ideas for an agenda to deal with globalisation .
We face some very formidable common challenges , and I believe that more active cooperation between Europe and the United States can make the world a better place .
Ladies and gentlemen , in 2008 Europe has provided evidence of unity in the way it has coordinated its actions in major crises .
Georgia and the financial crisis have made the Union more efficient .
A united approach is the only path to pursue if we want to meet the challenges of 2009 .
In a few months ' time , 375 million electors will be summoned to the polls to exercise their great democratic right to choose a new European Parliament .
Let us take advantage of the momentum that recent crises have lent the Union .
They have opened people 's eyes to the merits and the effectiveness of the European dimension as a means of guaranteeing their economic , social and environmental welfare and protecting their interests while reaffirming their values .
I believe that today , in the midst of this crisis , clear opportunities are there for the taking .
For example , there is a far more favourable climate than there was a few months ago for recognition of the importance of our currency , the euro .
Let us therefore seize this opportunity .
I believe it is important , at least for all those who believe in the European project - and I think they are in the majority - to be more upbeat in conveying the European message and not to keep succumbing to cynicism or inertia .
To that end , I do believe it is incumbent on our institutions to work together .
I know that there are times when the Commission , for example , could more easily court popularity in some circles by making proposals that the Member States would be sure to reject out of hand .
That is not the way I look at things .
I certainly do favour an ambitious outlook , but it must also be realistic , for we have to act with the other institutions and with the Member States , which are all democracies , otherwise they would not be members of the European Union .
The Commission will continue to play its part , to perform its role as a driving force and initiator , but in so doing it will not act against the Member States and Parliament but rather with the European Parliament and with the Member States .
I believe it is increasingly necessary to adopt this attitude .
Any other approach would be a form of populism .
Making proposals as a mere publicity stunt is also a form of populism .
Another form of populism involves making proposals under the guise of Europeanism when we know that they have no chance at all of being approved .
Our role in the European Commission , of course , is to act as a driving force but at the same time to seek consensus with the other institutions .
That is how Europe can stay at the heart of the action , where it has managed to position itself .
Interinstitutional cooperation has enabled it to play a key role in setting the international agenda .
We are at a very important political juncture for Europe , perhaps even a turning point .
Europe also carries great expectations .
It is by continuing to take initiatives and to plan ahead together that the Union can best meet these expectations , and that is precisely the spirit which will inspire the European Commission in 2009 .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are three main crises that demand action from us .
The first is the financial crisis - as has already been discussed - which is encroaching on the real economy to an ever increasing degree .
Secondly , we must not forget the crisis involving the Treaties which underpin our Union , reflected in the fate of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Thirdly , there is an EU crisis with respect to its acceptance amongst the public , which is , I believe , an important aspect to mention ahead of the elections .
Mr President , you have presented a work programme for the rest of the term of this Parliament and of your Commission , and I would like to say that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will be happy to follow the main principles of this programme .
We will support you .
However , we will put different emphases on some aspects .
Emphasis will be placed in line with expectations .
These expectations are aimed at the last few months of your term of office and maybe even beyond .
The PPE-DE Group would like to see itself reflected in the Commission 's actions .
We are aware that other groups are making the same request , and rightly so .
We will rely on your political skills for the response .
You have rightly made employment and growth your highest priority .
The response is increasingly linked to the issue of how we should react to the financial crisis .
We support the measures required in connection with the regulation and transparency of the financial markets .
We need extremely specific proposals for reorganising the regulation of the financial markets as quickly as possible .
The implementation of the action plan from the Global Financial Summit is surely first and foremost the concern of the nation states .
However , in view of the globally interconnected markets , close cooperation in connection with all regulatory measures - if only to prevent various different standards from being applied - is imperative .
This represents a broad and important area of activity for the coordination work of the Commission .
Regulation - and we must not forget this - is not an end in itself , but , in a particular crisis , it is a tool used to achieve certain goals .
We need to keep reminding ourselves of this fact .
You mentioned the climate change and energy package which is scheduled to be adopted by December .
I am sure this goal enjoys broad consensus within Parliament .
The PPE-DE Group - and I want to make this absolutely clear - also wants this problem to be solved before the end of this legislative term .
It is a strategic aim .
However , you are asking a lot of Parliament .
Based on the current situation , we can assume that just after the December summit we will be presented with a package containing hundreds of pages in one language and we will be expected to say yes or no to it .
While we respect the goal that we also share , this is a significant abuse of the rights of Parliament and its Members , and maybe we will be able to come up with something more ingenious than this unrefined option .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , at the end of your speech you said that we must send out a clear signal to the electorate .
I totally agree .
However , when I take a look at the programme , the theme often seems to be ' carry on as before ' .
That may be the right thing to do in some areas but in other areas - above all in the area that we are discussing today - it cannot be right .
We have to send out the signal that we have learnt from the crisis and that we are going to act differently to the way we have acted in the past .
If you add the sentence , ' Europe benefits from open societies and open markets but rules have to apply to both of them ' , then it would be right , but perhaps not clear enough .
We need rules so that Europe can benefit from open societies and open markets .
This must be made clear and it has not always been the principle followed by the Commission .
In your composition - if I may put it that way - you mention a ' sudden crisis of confidence ' .
For a long time now , Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen has been pointing out what might happen .
Mr Schultz has also been talking about it for a long while now .
The crisis in confidence was therefore not that sudden .
Yet some people in the Commission were of the opinion that we do not have to regulate anything , that it would turn out alright , that the market would regulate everything .
However , that was not what happened and change must be made .
( Applause )
My second point is this . There is a subject which is still not part of this programme but which is very important for the citizens of Europe , namely the general public and public sector services .
I mention this specifically because a crisis has now developed in some countries in connection with the postal service .
This is not the fault of Europe or the Commission alone .
However , it can be attributed to a particular attitude , namely that the market should rule in all sectors and it should be open in every respect , thus giving some postal services the incentive to acquire higher profits elsewhere instead of providing services to consumers , to the general public .
This is taking us in the wrong direction .
At the very least , I would have liked to have seen an unambiguous statement at the end of your programme indicating that you will speak up for these public sector services and say how they should be dealt with , both regionally and locally , and that the market does not regulate everything after all .
Finally , I would like to endorse one of your points : we have a new US Government .
I would like to ask you , Mr President , the Commissioner and everyone else to use the time and the next few weeks to work with this government to ensure that we create a genuine partnership for a European , and also global , social market economy .
Let us take advantage of the opportunity afforded by a new US President .
( Applause )
Madam President , as regards the world financial crisis and the Commission legislative work programme , in a sense , the latter should be our response to the former .
Now , perhaps some would say that we have not one crisis , but several : financial , of course , but environmental facing up to climate change , confidence in Europe after the Irish vote , and security after the recent events in Georgia .
But perhaps without in any way belittling what confronts us , for ' crisis ' we should probably read ' challenges ' - challenges to Europe to really step up to the mark and fulfil its role .
Europe is surely the best equipped region of the globe , with our institutions really able to get at these issues and challenges which go beyond national reach , beyond the control of any individual Member State .
We , above all , should be able to respond together through a strong and collective response to give confidence to those whom we represent : Europe 's citizens .
Let me give you an example . In respect of the financial crisis I believe this Parliament can rightly claim to have been at the front of the game .
We had a strong foretaste in the work we did in our committee of inquiry into the collapse of Equitable Life .
It was the first warning shot of the financial crisis to come .
This Parliament made a number of recommendations coming out of that inquiry in June last year , recommendations about financial regulation , about administrative cooperation between regulators , about access to redress and compensation - in short , on most of the topics in the financial sector where our citizens need most reassurance at the moment .
Those recommendations would repay attention from the Commission but most particularly from the Member States , particularly the British Government , which has yet to respond to it fully , and more importantly yet to compensate Equitable Life victims , despite pushing its own way to the front of the queue against the Icelandic banks .
The financial and other challenges that face us need us to act together in solidarity , not just with an eye to national protectionism if we are to emerge unscathed as a continent .
Our group , the ALDE Group , intends to respond to the work programme with a positive and progressive resolution .
Many of my colleagues will give details of some of the items , but we will emphasise above all an open Europe , a green Europe , an entrepreneurial Europe and a safe Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr President , the financial crisis and in time also an economic crisis will affect all of Europe , and therefore we must bear responsibility together and make our decisions together .
Since all Member States will be affected by the crisis and will face the task of counteracting it , slowing it down and mitigating its consequences , all Member States must decide together about the joint action to be taken .
A situation such as the one prevailing today , whereby the EU is divided into Europe A - the euro area countries with the addition of only Great Britain - and Europe B - which consists of the new Member States together with Sweden and Denmark - represents a division of the EU , all the more so now that we are facing a crisis .
It represents a negation of one of the basic principles on which the operation of the European Community has hitherto been founded : the solidarity principle .
This is not the way , Mr Barroso .
The Commission 's action plan , put forward 13 days ago , confuses fundamental matters with unimportant ones and with matters which may have been important at one time , but have lost their importance in the face of the economic crisis .
At the present time , economic growth and fighting the increasing threat of unemployment are a hundred times more important than climate change issues .
I am glad that the European Commission regards further expansion of the European Union , that is the inclusion of the Balkan countries , as a priority .
The real issue here is to stabilise this explosive region of Europe , since stabilisation of the Balkans will mean lower costs for European taxpayers : the citizens of our Member States .

- ( FR ) Madam President , it is indeed the task of the European Commission to guarantee transparency , better information and protection for our citizens and consumers , as Mr Barroso rightly said .
There is , however , one domain , Mr Barroso , in which your Commission has been particularly unsuccessful in that respect , namely the authorisation procedures for genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) .
These procedures have drawn criticism from all quarters .
They ought to be reviewed at the next meeting of the Council of Environment Ministers on 4 and 5 November .
There are 44 European regions that have declared themselves GM-free .
Six Member States have invoked the safeguard clause for Monsanto maize .
In the face of opposition from a large majority of Europeans , what are you doing , Mr Barroso ?
You are fast-tracking marketing licences .
You are issuing approvals , meekly following the advice of the European Food Safety Authority , whose opinion is itself based on toxicity studies conducted by bio-engineering companies .
European procedures in their present form are a veritable sieve through which the commercial interests of agribusiness can percolate freely .
People want to know about the toxic effects of GMOs , and they must be told .
Do you yourself know how toxic they are , Mr Barroso ?
Do you know ?
What effects does the toxicity of GMOs have on public health and the environment ?
Why is there no requirement to publish the raw data on which the findings of studies are based ?
Why are tests not compulsory after three months ?
Why make do with studies conducted by the companies themselves ?
The public are entitled to transparency , to information , to discussion .
These should be the aims of the Commission when it comes to approving GMOs .
What we want , Mr Barroso , is the publication of raw data .
We want to see dissenting studies , we want public debate , and we want long-term testing .
We want to know the health impact of GMOs .
Your initiative , Mr Barroso , to create a group of sherpas from the 27 Member States to bypass the Presidency 's ad hoc group and to bypass your own Commissioners who are competent in these matters sows confusion and obscurity in an area where it is your responsibility to guarantee the clarity and reliability of procedures .
You want the public to have confidence in Europe , do you not , Mr Barroso ?
Then prove it !
( DE ) Madam President , the result of the G20 summit is a reduction in the lowest common denominator .
Regulation and transparency are supposed to prevent another financial crisis .
However , the specific measures to be implemented are still undecided .
The International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , which plummeted people throughout the world into poverty and despair due to its neo-liberal structural adjustment policy , is now due to become the overseer of the global financial market .
A departure from the system of global redistribution , which is primarily responsible for the crisis , is not even being attempted .
It is paradoxical that up to now the inconceivable amount of EUR 2.5 trillion has had to be found in order to rescue banks throughout the world .
However , there has never been such concerted action for any human disaster .
With this amount of money we could have combated the most severe poverty in the world and saved the climate .
What are the consequences ?
A social global economic order must replace the free market economy and the United Nations should play a leading role in this .
A new global financial order must promote social welfare policies , stop the process of impoverishment and make progress with respect to ecologically sustainable economic activity .
The European Union can play a decisive role in shaping this new order , provided that it demonstrates that the recession , as a consequence of the financial crisis , is being combated successfully by united European action .
However , this will only work if the EU puts its own house in order first .
The President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , said earlier , ' Extraordinary circumstances require extraordinary measures ' .
Correct , but then act with courage .
Have the courage to replace the practically obsolete Stability Pact for Europe with an economic and social pact which obliges all the Member States to coordinate their economic and financial policies with each other .
Then have courage and show the Commission 's colours at long last , and , with no ifs and buts , put the subject of social justice at the top of the European agenda .
Once again , social aspects are not given a high enough priority in the legislative and work programme .
Social pressure is only mentioned in a vague manner , as something that one has to respond to in times of economic emergency .
Why do you not mention the grave social problems specifically ?
Why do you not say quite clearly that the ever-widening gap between rich and poor is no longer acceptable ?
Why do you not say quite clearly that profits being privatised and losses being nationalised is no longer acceptable ?
I ask myself when the Commission , faced with the drastic situation with respect to unemployment , poverty and inequality , will finally understand that we cannot keep going on as before , as suggested in the work programme .
Neo-liberalism has plainly and simply ruined the economy and a wind of change in Europe is long overdue .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I am struck - and I believe I am not the only one - by the antithesis between the most cogent contemporary evidence and what I am hearing in this Chamber , particularly from the representatives of the Council and the Commission , but also from my dyed-in-the-wool Europhile colleagues .
In the face of this antithesis , I cannot help thinking of Byzantium , of the balsamic and self-satisfied utterances of the Byzantine administrators at a time when their world was sliding into oblivion .
What we have here is not a mere crisis - surely a ludicrously inadequate term to describe a recession - but the collapse of the very foundations of the globalisation process that left such a mark on the 20th century .
I do not see this as a credit crunch .
It is a credo crunch ; it is your political credo that has been thrown into crisis , and I ask you to have the courage to acknowledge the real gravity of the situation .
I do not have the time to enumerate all the tenets of this credo , but the liberalisation of credit and these stacks of loans are obviously the consequence of blind faith in the invisible hand and perhaps even in the inevitability of progress .
It goes without saying that the answer is government control of credit .
By the same token , free trade - the accelerated spread of free trade - is no solution .
On the contrary , the solution is to revert to protecting our borders , as our peoples are well aware .
Political power should not be usurped by superstructures such as those we have here , and in that respect the failure of the Treaty of Lisbon should set you thinking .
What is needed is a return to the real legitimate authority , namely the sovereign state .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis and the slowdown in the economy underline the central role that the Member States and then the European Union ought to play in ensuring socio-economic welfare , but it should also be stressed that politics ought to take back full control of the economy and combat in every possible way the virtual finance that still controls the destinies of millions of people .
Reducing the impact of the global slowdown on the European economy , in terms of employment and economic activity , ought to mean promoting an approach based on the European social model .
This ought to be the priority for 2009 : employment and social protection for growth .
Finally come practical steps to reform the rules of the European financial system , at last , after the banking and finance system has been allowed to plunder and squeeze public assets and private individuals .
The Commission 's strategy to support those who are losing their jobs seems to me to be too little , too late , just like the support for small and medium-sized enterprises and investment in research .
Above all , I note that the speeding up and implementation of cohesion programmes is distracting attention from other needs .
Before worrying about creating confidence in the markets , governments and commissions ought to re-establish citizens ' confidence in the independence of those who govern them from the influence of off-shore finance .
( ES ) Madam President , I am not really going to talk about the diagnosis of the financial crisis .
We all agree that this started as a crisis of liquidity which then became a crisis of solvency and which has ended up as a crisis of confidence , resulting in a lack of credit which has now damaged the real economy .
The response , contrary to what has been said here , has not been a united European response .
In the best-case scenario , it has been a coordinated response .
You may say that , in the current situation , nothing more can be done .
However , I believe that more can definitely be done .
As regards the financial rescues and also liquidity and solvency , it is shocking that three institutions are assisting the markets and giving loans all at the same time : namely the European Central Bank , the European Investment Bank and the Commission itself .
All three are competing with each other , to everyone 's detriment .
As regards fighting the crisis in the real economy , the Washington Summit announced budgetary remedies but did not say what these would be .
Some countries will opt to reduce taxes , whereas others will opt for a public spending programme in the purest Keynesian style .
We would do well to find out whether , if all these actions are not coordinated , those which work will benefit those which do not .
We would also do well to lay down rules on the Stability and Growth Pact .
In international terms , it is true that my country of Spain and also the Czech Republic and the Netherlands were present in Washington but did not attend the preparatory meetings , and no one can guarantee that they will do so in the future .
I should like the Council and the Commission to tell me how they plan to reform the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund and what they plan to do so that all the countries that should be are represented in the Financial Stability Fund .
I will end with a warning .
Parliament is being asked to cooperate with the Commission 's plan : we always have done .
If the Commission had heeded the warnings that we have been giving since 1999 in repeated reports ignored by the Commission and Mr McCreevy in particular , things would now be very different .
- ( FR ) Madam President , 2009 will go down in history as the year of the second great global economic depression .
In his book on the 1929 crisis , John Kenneth Galbraith wrote , and I quote : ' The singular feature of the great crash of 1929 was that the worst continued to worsen ' .
The subprime mortgage crisis has triggered a deflationary spiral which is not only ravaging the financial system , having wiped out more than 60 % of the global value of shares .
This liquidity and solvency crisis is increasingly affecting the real economy too .
The term ' real economy ' , as opposed to the financial sector , is interesting .
It emphasises the virtual nature of most financial assets .
In the wake of the debacle in the financial markets , we are experiencing the great resurgence of national governments .
We have seen a succession of summits .
The Washington summit produced an impressive catalogue of commendable intentions .
With the gift of hindsight that characterises the leaders , great and small , who govern us , vigorous measures have been prepared with a view to assessing risks properly and avoiding excessive leverage effects .
Supervision is to become more effective without stifling innovation .
' Hear !
Hear ! ' we say , while awaiting details of an appropriate system of regulation that will avoid any excessive risks without falling into the trap of overregulation .
The return of national governments to the role of market regulators has to be welcomed , but the unfortunate thing is that this often means the return of the self-seeking nation state .
In a more open world than that of 1929 , any national action will quickly run out of steam .
The recession calls for action in a spirit of international solidarity .
The European Union must mobilise all its forces , pool all available national budgetary resources to invest them as a matter of priority in infrastructure for growth and bolster purchasing power .
President-elect Barack Obama is said to have the intention of launching an economic recovery programme costing the equivalent of four per cent of US GDP .
The 27 Member States of the Union , which are collectively less indebted than the United States , should make a similar effort in order to pull Europe and the world out of a financial crisis that threatens to bring distress to everyone .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in 2009 , as we all know , there will be European elections .
The year 2009 will also see the appointment of a new Commission .
In 2009 , there will , of course , be changes of presidency .
However , the importance of all these things is only relative .
Life goes on , and our citizens expect our institutions to respond to their concerns , always with an eye to the future , pursuing long-term objectives and able to initiate immediate action to achieve them .
In this spirit , I wish to emphasise two fundamental areas of action for 2009 .
The first , which has been mentioned by every speaker , is to respond to the financial crisis .
I certainly noted , as every one of us did , the gold stars that the Commission and the Presidency were awarding themselves .
I would go so far as to say , Commissioner , that we can celebrate having scored the first goal , but the match is not over .
As a result , if I may make a suggestion , the Presidency and the Council should get a move on and strike while the iron is hot so as to ensure that the 27 Member States come up quickly with effective responses to the financial crisis .
As is often said , however , one crisis invariably conceals another ; unless we wish to be taken unawares by the next crisis too , the programme for 2009 must be able , as President Barroso seemed to indicate that it will be , to respond to the challenges confronting us .
As my colleague Mrs Wallis has said , this is why we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are making a number of proposals .
Some of my colleagues will be speaking about some of these proposals .
I should like to emphasise one of the points that I consider essential and on which we intend to focus sharply , namely the need to ensure that , in 2009 , your Commission takes full account of the Structural Funds , which currently make up 36 % of our budget and which will enable us to take far more effective action , to engender solidarity between our regions and to avail ourselves of the instruments without which we cannot meet the challenges of our age .
Lastly , as winter sets in , let us not forget the housing crisis .
We are counting on you to take action in this domain , Commissioner , particularly in response to our two requests for studies on the housing problem .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , seen from our point of view , this crisis has necessitated a restructuring of our continent 's banking landscape , but has not led to the emergence in Europe , to speak plainly , of a group of serious financial operators genuinely able to plan the future framework of the markets .
This is not apparent , and cannot be seen .
One thing is , however , certain : all the regulations envisaged by the G20 will remain as just many words if tax havens remain inviolable .
That is the major issue which is missing , and which is not mentioned in the official discussions of the Member States ; those tax havens that make it possible to completely circumvent the rules that we wish to put in place , that are being promised on the financial markets .
When he was a senator , President-elect Obama proposed severe measures against tax havens and we may well wonder whether , as a new president , in view of the web of high finance that seems to have controlled movements and , above all , in view of generous multimillionaire funding of the elections , he will have the courage to act on this issue and to convince not only the United States but also Europe and , in particular , Great Britain .
I believe that instead of general declarations of principle we ought to ask for effective , concrete initiatives to be adopted , that are truly capable of bringing about a recovery of the economy and production , as is needed to prevent further economic crises and to escape from the current crisis .
In view of the current situation , featuring general and widespread indebtedness of the market and violent deflation due to insufficient monetary circulation , it is absurd to suggest further indebtedness of the Member States to private central banks to provide liquidity to the credit system itself and to the consumer market .
I would like to end with one remark : it seems to me certain and clear that there is a chance that the crisis will lead to the proposal of a world body for the economy , as well as for politics ; that world order which until a few months ago was feared by all , avoided by all but which today we seem to feel has become inevitable , and to be welcomed as if it were salvation .
No to globalisation !
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to say that everything that the Commission and the Council have said today about a ' New Green Deal ' in the light of the global financial crisis is , in my opinion , incorrect and that as yet no political resolve of any kind is behind the pronouncement of the ' New Green Deal ' .
For several months now , European industrial organisations have been mobilising against our European climate and energy strategy .
The proposals made by Commissioner Dimas , Commissioner Piebalgs and Mr Michel in connection with development policy have been systematically softened up , diluted and delayed .
This attitude has not been abandoned in any way in the light of the financial crisis ; instead industry has begun to use the financial crisis to exert even more pressure against a systematic climate and energy policy .
I believe that this fact has to be recorded at this point as the truth will out and no progress will be made by only claiming to develop a new policy .
If you take a closer look at the current trialogue , the negotiations on climate policy between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , you will be able to see that I am right .
This is because these negotiations are not exactly characterised by ambition , but by precisely that outdated industrial policy that nobody here wants to hear anything about , or so we are told .
The President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , and the Commissioner for Industry , Mr Verheugen , are , in my opinion , responsible for this .
I am in favour of this Parliament finally deciding to show their support for those people , such as Mr Dimas and Mr Michel , who actually do stand for sustainable strategies .

What is needed at the moment is sincerity .
Mr Steiner from UNEP ( United Nations Environment Programme ) presented a very good plan in London the week before last .
Let us get down to business and stop making vacuous speeches as was the case in the first part of the debate .
In the next few weeks we will have the opportunity to bring the trialogue to a conclusion , and then we will be able to assess whether the Commission and the Council have just been faking it today or whether they were serious .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , the world is suffering from ' Mad Money Disease ' .
It is an American disease that has been caused by cheap , loose money .
The value of property was harmonised when investors were collectively drunk on the stock exchange and on heat around real estate .
Spreading through the stock exchanges in the form of derivatives and swaps , the disease became a pandemic .
Now it is time for the hangover .
The United States of America is the fatherland of capitalism , where money is the mother tongue and where power is wielded by the dictatorship of the market .
The government oversees all and , as the writer of the rules , has become satanised : there are no legal barriers or ethical restrictions when it comes to the lust for mad money .
There they had the most colossal growth boom in economic history , which was consumption without saving , and the United States became the world 's biggest debtor .
Then the China Syndrome-like reactor that is Wall Street suffered a meltdown and the system was suddenly full of toxic securities and radioactive debt .
They are killing off the sick banks that have suffered the excesses of speculation .
Whereas the speculator 's profits were once privatised , now the losses are being socialised , and private debt is being replaced with public debt .
The markets were free , and nothing and no one protected capitalism from itself , the totalitarianism of money .
The investment banks were like a swarm of locusts in an open field .
The value of currency trading in the markets is 125 times the practical value of the money itself .
Most of the loose cash is virtual ' funny ' money , which is now returning to the banks ' balance sheets as a series of write-offs .
It is a threat to the credit recession : there is a danger that the debt and bank crisis will become an all-embracing economic crisis , manifesting itself in hunger , unemployment and poor social health .
We know who the guilty ones are : the number of victims remains to be seen .
Madam President , I should like to say to the Commissioner that now and in her coming work programme she will be dealing with the financial crisis .
This crisis has hit different countries around Europe in different ways , but one thing is certain : the financial institutions in all countries have , to some degree or other , bought toxic US mortgage debt based on subprime lending .
Do you know to what extent Europeans have bought devices such as CDOs , which had been represented to them as having a certain rating by the American rating companies , but which , in fact , on subsequent examination after they blew up , proved to be toxic bonds ?
They were found to be dodgy projects .
It seems to me that there must have been wholesale misrepresentation of the quality of the debt by these agencies for such a huge amount of it to have been sold so easily .
I would like to know if the facts about the claims made when selling these devices have been examined yet by the Commission , and , if so , to what extent is it thought they have been misrepresented ?
If this is the case , I would also like to know if the Commission thinks that there is any recourse in law against the rating agencies for those who have suffered from their negligence or worse , since at this stage our whole financial structure has been attacked by them .
( DE ) Madam President , the EU is currently enjoying increasing popularity and greater trust , as the nations and the public are seeking protection behind the walls of the EU , hoping that they are strong enough to combat the financial and economic crisis .
Due to the size of the internal market and due to the euro , the Union has undoubtedly got a better chance of overcoming the crisis .
However the Union also has obligations and it must fulfil its obligations to the sovereign and to the citizens , by protecting them from unbridled greed and the consequences of globalisation .
A response to the crisis must not only consist of many billions of euros worth of loans for the automotive industry ; small and medium-sized enterprises , which , after all , are the largest employers , must also be supported .
On no account must the European workforce be condemned to unemployment in favour of a wave of ' blue card ' skilled labour from third countries .
Therefore it is the EU 's responsibility to ensure that its citizens do not soon wake up to a Europe without the last remains of their national wealth , in a Europe of mass immigration .
Madam President , things rarely happen at convenient times and any crisis , by definition , is going to be inconvenient .
The financial and economic crises currently confronting us are unwelcome in themselves , but they also come in the closing months of the Parliament and the final year of the Commission , when all of us might normally be thinking of the next election and new appointments .
This Commission work programme almost has the feel of a ' business as usual ' exercise , yet the situation demands fresh thought on how to head off what threatens to be a deep recession .
It presents Europe with a big challenge because most measures of fiscal policy need to be taken at national level , yet the EU has a crucial role of coordination .
The magnitude of the challenges facing us makes that particularly important .
In the field of energy , we have a pretty good idea of things that need to be done , but most of them are on a timescale well beyond the next year or two , so perhaps the only area where swift action - which could help - could be taken is in the field of energy efficiency measures .
Specifically , allowing lower VAT for improvements in the energy efficiency of buildings and launching an information campaign to encourage a change in people 's behaviour are two specific ways to help the situation .
Beyond that , it seems to me that there will never be a better time to set up one of the EU 's famous groups of wise people - and in this case I suggest it should be wise men and women - to reflect on the challenge we face and come up with original solutions beyond the short-term remedy of throwing money at tax giveaways .
I hope that Council and Commission will give this idea a fair wind .
Madam President , we are in the middle of a vicious circle now in the sense that , when the economy becomes negative , financial institutions get further losses on their balance sheets , which means that there will be further strains on the interbank market , which leads to further credit constraints , which leads to further negative growth .
People will not be capable of understanding how we can use taxpayers ' money to save the banks and not use taxpayers ' money to create some jobs .
That is why I would focus today on how to reassess this credit crunch , but also - and first and foremost - the recession we are in the middle of .
As I see it we are at risk of negative growth next year in the European Union as such of -1 % - not only -0.3 % , but -1 % .
If we take that prospect - which is not unlikely - our aim and our duty are to avoid that recession . Minus one percent next year will correspond to a Growth and Stability Pact of more than -3 % .
My point is that we cannot save the Growth and Stability Pact by doing nothing .
It will get worse if we do not do something .
Now , what something can we do ?
I know it is not easy .
I know there is disagreement among governments , but I think that the Commission has a duty to try to bring all the governments together to get one easy job done .
I know that in Berlin you are saying ' no thanks ' to coordination because that means further expenditure from the German Government to other governments .
I would say that you do not need to do that , dear friends in Berlin .
We can do things together without having further expenditure from one government to others .
It is about understanding that by investing at the same moment in time in the next couple of years you will have added value .
The International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) has made one simple calculation .
Imagine that the G20 , all of them , invest just 1 % more of their GDP in jobs .
If they do that simultaneously then there will be an extra percent for free .
So what I am saying is that every government in Europe can make it , if they do it together .
If every government in Europe were to invest 1 % of their GDP to counteract the recession , were to do it intelligently , and were to do it socially for more and better jobs , caring for the most vulnerable groups , then they will have an extra percent for free .
That is why I simply must appeal to the Commission , Vice-President Wallström , asking you to present one simple scenario showing what would happen if all our major governments were to do what I am saying here , showing that all of them will be better off , not only in jobs , but also in public budgets and also in the Growth and Stability Pact .
It is a simple exercise .
If you do not have the instruments , I have .
I would willingly advise you how to do it .
( Applause )
Madam President , the crisis is going to have a dramatic effect on the future of the euro .
Denmark and Sweden should become members before they expected , and in Britain , too , it is time for the debate to begin .
In 1997 Mr Brown established five famous so-called tests before we could adjudge sterling 's accession to the single currency .
Suddenly , in this crisis , all these five are met .
The pound has fallen to a competitive exchange-rate level , labour markets are flexible , the City , once so proud , now risks being pushed aside by stronger supervision and regulation inside the euro zone , and the economic cycles of Britain and the euro zone are now completely in sync as we plunge into recession at the same time .
Mr Brown 's cleverly disguised appearance at the Paris Eurogroup summit was a notable achievement of the French presidency .
I appeal to Mr Brown to now change the terms of the debate inside the United Kingdom .
If he fails to achieve that , the pound will be like a permanent ping-pong ball , bouncing in an uncontrolled manner between the big footballs of the euro and the dollar .
- ( SK ) As a Slovak MEP I appreciate very much the entry of Slovakia into the euro area .
We have here clear evidence that predictions and visions from experienced economists often do not come to fruition .
Sixteen years ago European forecasters and economists rejected the idea of an independent , viable Slovak Republic .
Slovakia is currently the leader of the twelve new Member States in terms of economic performance .
I recommend that the European Commission should focus directly on citizens and their needs , instead of producing economically worthless forecasts when setting its priorities .
I am thinking here mainly of health and of high-quality social conditions for a decent standard of living .
At a time of economic stress and social pressure we must not forget people 's health .
The free movement of people within the European Union is not backed up by access to healthcare , especially not in the area of prevention .
Another area is the need to secure the effective implementation of cross-border patient care .
A healthy Union cannot exist without healthy citizens .

( ES ) Madam President , it is clear that the Commission 's work programme for 2009 in the area of foreign policy , as in all other areas , is indissociable from the international financial crisis , as the Commission President , Mr Barroso , has told us .
By this we understand that it is right to support reform of the Bretton Woods institutions , encourage the resumption of conversations on the World Trade Organization and closely follow the attempts to reform the United Nations system and bodies which will begin in February .
It is also clear , Madam President , that we must establish a new relationship with the incoming administration in the United States , a country with which we agree on many issues , but also disagree on others , such as the death penalty , the International Criminal Court and the Kyoto Protocol in particular .
We must agree positions on the next Copenhagen Summit , the laws with extraterritorial effect and other aspects .
It is also important to agree positions on the Central Asia issues : the nuclear crisis in Iran , the announcement of a calm and responsible withdrawal from Iraq , and the US administration 's request for an increased western presence in Afghanistan .
We must also look at how the breakdown in negotiations in the Middle East can be resolved .
Talking about the American continent , Madam President , it is vital to support the efforts of the Commission , and Commissioner Benita Ferrero in particular , to conclude association agreements with Central America , and especially the new direction to be taken in the negotiations with the Andean Community .
Further to the strategic association which the European Commission has initiated with Brazil and Mexico , this process could perhaps also form the approach to be taken in the negotiations on the Mercosur agreement , which have been stalled for too long .
On our continent , Madam President , we must drive forward the association agreement with Russia , but only on the basis of respect for international law .
In this context , we must very clearly emphasise respect for borders and human rights , develop the neighbourhood policy and , at the same time , promote association and stabilisation agreements .
As stated by the Commission President , it is clear that we have much to do with regard to the situation in Africa .
Madam President , I feel it is very important , once the reform ( through the Lisbon Treaty ) and enlargement processes have been completed , for the European Union to adopt or rather resume a basically geographical status , taking into account that , between now and the year 2050 , China and India will absorb 50 % of the world 's gross domestic product , as previously happened in around 1800 .
To this end , Madam President , advance planning is needed and I can say , Madam Vice-President , that our political Group will support the Commission in this work .
- ( FR ) Madam President , with regard to the G20 , I believe that the European Union went to that summit with good proposals .
When one reads the conclusions of the summit , they seem to be somewhat lacking in bite .
How are we going to deal with the issues of rating agencies , hedge funds and tax havens ?
Good intentions abound , but if we rely entirely on self-regulation and codes of conduct , we shall not succeed .
Let us be realistic and ambitious .
As far as the representation of the European Union is concerned , the picture , quite frankly , was less flattering .
We need to make progress .
This is something that the large Member States must recognise , but so must the small ones , which sometimes provide the heads of IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) departments and have no wish to relinquish these positions .
Every country must play its part so that we can improve the future representation of the European Union .
With regard to the real economy , I heard what President Barroso said , and I was quite surprised .
In his view , when the Commission exercises its right of initiative , it is engaging in populism .
This being the case , I invite the Commission to adopt the proposals made by my colleague Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , even though it might regard them as populist .
The fact is that , if we take no action in the realm of the real economy , we shall experience the same collapse and adopt the same strategy for economic recovery that Ireland has launched to rescue its banking sector , an ' every man for himself ' strategy which , at a time of global crisis in a globalised economy , cannot possibly succeed .
That would be a waste of public money and would not in any way help the European Union to catch up with the United States , which has already devised a large-scale recovery plan .
We must think European , we must think global , and our national action must be concerted and coordinated , with scope for the Commission to take initiatives .
That is what we expect from its communication of 26 November .
We expect an ambitious European recovery plan .
Madam President , a crisis should not only be a time for action but also for reflection .
Getting the climate package together will not only save the climate - saving us from disasters and epidemics and avoiding costs - but is also the best preparation for times to come .
In a recession we must prepare for the time afterwards and for new markets .
I think that there is a danger today of us throwing good money after bad .
When we are over this , will consumers really want to buy a big high-consumption car , or will they want a small , smart car ?
I once had a professor in my student days who said : ' when in doubt , leave it out ' .
What we need instead is a green new deal for investments , innovation research and energy smart technology , including in cars .
We need a green new deal for new jobs and new wealth in a sustainable way .
The ALDE Group will work for an open , green , safe and entrepreneurial Europe , and in these areas we will support the Commission 's work programme .
( DE ) Madam President , Madam Vice-President , today I would like to talk about internal security and the work programme .
However , before I do this I would like to mention another issue .
We spend all our time talking about the banks .
A few weeks ago in my local area , a large company with 2 000 employees filed for bankruptcy and the employees are facing ruin because the banks are cutting back the lines of credit .
This shows that the crisis is already hitting the real economy in no uncertain terms and therefore I propose to the Commission that we take a look at one of the responses and investigate the law on subsidies , which we are now abandoning as far as the banks are concerned and that suddenly has no effect any more , and change it in light of the present crisis .
In this way we can also help the medium-sized enterprises .
However , the main topic I want to discuss concerns the Commission 's work programme and the subject of internal security .
On reading the programme I was disappointed , because in addition to the economic issues there are also other major challenges .
I can see that enormous achievements have been made with the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) .
Switzerland is now joining , and even before joining , it has reported significant successes due to access to the SIS .
Nevertheless , the programme does not seem to explain how the Commission wants to finally get SIS II up and running .
It is delayed month after month and no progress is made .
We are also not making any progress in the second area which is of extreme importance with respect to police cooperation , namely the fight against organised crime and practical cooperation between police organisations .
We are lacking a clear legal framework .
Unfortunately , I have also found nothing on this subject in the work programme for 2009 .
I should like to see more commitment in this area .
Thirdly , migration , the migration network , immigration and the blue card , which we will discuss tomorrow , are described in the programme .
The general public would go along with increased openness for immigration if we explain to them clearly that we are fighting against illegal immigration and that we will also bring an end to this illegal immigration .
This is one of the interconnections that we must not overlook .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is good to have a joint debate about the economic crisis , the downturn in the real economy and the Commission 's work programme .
These issues belong together .
It is also good that the Commission is proposing coordinated efforts .
However , in my opinion , this is not so clearly reflected in the work programme .
Voices have been heard within the Council to the effect that we should now cut down on environmental investments and our ambitions relating to the environment .
I totally disagree with this view .
Nor do I share the view , as expressed by a number of others , that we must now cut back in the social area .
In fact we must do the opposite .
What we need is investment in research and development , new environmental technology and a new infrastructure that is much more environmentally friendly than the infrastructure we have today .
We must train the workforce and ensure that young people get the right training so that we maintain our competitiveness , but also strengthen individuals for the future .
If I then turn to the work programme and look at the social area , I can see that this is not a Commission that has prioritised the social area .
Allow me to give two examples .
We have listened to Mr Rasmussen ; now I think we in the social area should also be heard .
The report that I was responsible for dealt with equal treatment on the labour market within the EU and the right to take industrial action for equal treatment .
The Commission must now respond to this with concrete measures for equal treatment on the labour market in the EU by amending the Posting of Workers Directive and by means of a social protocol .
That is the first issue .
The second is what is happening in the area of the working environment , where we are seeing an increase in the number of accidents throughout the EU , at least in certain Member States , because we are giving this area lower priority .
This is also something that the Commission must respond to so that we tie together long-term sustainable development , that is to say economic , environmentally-friendly and social development .
Madam President , I want to talk from the perspective of the Committee on the Internal Market about what is going on in the real economy .
I went to see some small businesses two weeks ago - successful companies supplying aerospace , automotive , energy industries .
Their problem is that they have taken on lots of skilled people but their order book has slowed down or , in some places , collapsed .
They are the people that we need to be thinking about because if they are not there after this recession , if those skills are not there , then we are in serious difficulty .
These are the companies that we want to invest in new products , in new services , to develop and train those staff that are there .
So I say to the Commission that small businesses are going to be the engines of job re-creation .
We have a Small Business Act going through here now .
The implementation of it is probably in this rather long and tedious document somewhere , but surely you , the Commission , should be looking at the real priorities for bringing in some of the things that we have worked on here that will actually help the real economy .
That is where your priorities lie .
I do not get any sense that this is a real response to the crisis at all .
There are some nice words at the front here but I do not see the programme as changed .
So my message to you , Mrs Wallström - and I hope you will take it back to President Barroso - is that this is not good enough .
And , we need real action on the things that are going to make real differences to jobs out there now and in the future .
Of course , the other people who can help us are those public investors , the people who are keeping and sustaining projects and construction , sustainable building , buying greener vehicles and particularly investing in the next generation of telecom networks .
I will just conclude on this crucial point .
Next week the Council ( and I am sorry the minister is no longer here ) will have the opportunity to sign off a common position on the Telecoms package that will pave the way for that investment .
We hear that some Commissioners are not keen on that .
Well , I hope you will tell them that it is crucial for the future of the European economy that that package is approved by the Council next Friday .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like to make a preliminary observation .
It is true , as has been said by many people , that Europe should play a greater role on the world stage , but Europe should also speak much more with one voice rather than it being fragmented as it is at the moment .
The large Member States will need to conform and recognise that we now have to show a united European front .
After all , the leading role in regulation , re-regulation , supervision and the improvement of the financial markets is not the brainchild of Gordon Brown or Nicolas Sarkozy , but the European institutions .
We in Europe should now defend what has been set out .
Apart from the agenda for the financial markets , all attention should now go to the economic crisis we are facing .
All the alarm bells are ringing .
Here too , while we should act internationally , we in Europe should also act in a more European manner , with a European rescue plan .
This should not just be more of the same ; we would like to see a real U-turn .
The Brueghel economists have really lost their faith and now plead in favour of more spending .
Reserve should turn into thought-provoking policy .
In my view , what they propose , this one percentage point , is far too little and we will not get there with the 1 % reduction in VAT they proposed , because the figures of the decline are much bigger .
In the Netherlands , for example , the building industry is facing a 20 % decline , so I think that we should apply the low VAT rate there to ensure that the housing market across Europe receives a shot in the arm .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for regional policy , I want to help find solutions in a very proactive manner .
Europe should indeed come up with an action plan now .
I endorse Mr Barroso 's position in this respect .
Investment through the Structural and Cohesion Funds - with EUR 60 billion a year from Europe , doubled to EUR 120 billion by the Member States - would make it possible to be active and more flexible and to gather speed .
This concerns specific investments , both through the Lisbon Strategy in terms of knowledge and through the Gothenburg Strategy in terms of energy and ecology .
It is about jobs , as ever .
It is about retraining people who have lost their jobs so that they can find their way in the new economy .
Only with this attitude and with people who have sound qualifications can we , after the crisis , look forward to the future again .
The programme as it stands needs to be finely tuned in a number of areas .
For example , the 2007-2013 regulations can become more flexible .
Funds can be transferred within the operational programmes in the Member States themselves .
Funds that have not yet been allocated - and these involve quite large sums - can be spent more quickly .
We can translate the position adopted by Parliament , namely to use funds not yet allocated under the n + 1 , n + 2 and n + 3 rules in the current period , as well as possibly funds left over from the previous period , into action .
We would ask the European Commission - and I know that Mrs Hübner is on the case - to draft an amendment package to demonstrate our dynamism to the public before next year 's elections .
We are eagerly awaiting these proposals and would urge you to react promptly .
Congratulations to the Commission so far , but more efforts will need to be made in future , something which Parliament is prepared to do .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the G20 Summit has set a very ambitious agenda , which is simply to ensure that financial globalisation is subject to rules .
In Europe this means learning from our experiences and taking advantage of the lessons of capitalism which is an interest-based system in which , without rules , if you are too greedy , you can end up with nothing .
The Commission President has raised certain issues with us so as not to give in to populism , but there are things that can be done .
Mad cow disease taught us that you cannot sell harmful and rotten products in supermarkets or butchers ' shops and that there must be rules .
In Europe we can do things if we learn from our mistakes , as has happened in my country .
For example , we could decide that the banks , building societies and financial institutions must establish funds for times of crisis or also , Madam President , that off-balance-sheet transactions and unproven securitisation processes are prohibited .
This would be a step towards the prudent management that financial institutions should practise and that we have still not achieved in Europe .
I believe that the Commission would do well to also work in this area .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of the financial crisis , enormous amounts of money are suddenly being freed up , including sums to ease the economic crisis .
If I understand my colleagues correctly , we all also want to ensure that this money can flow .
I would like to tell the Commission , at this early stage , that we expect it to do its job .
This means that the issue of regulating this money remains on the agenda .
Therefore it is not possible for us to be satisfied with the work programme that the Commission has submitted for 2009 .
We are disappointed that this aspect of your work has not been the central focus .
The Barroso Commission has achieved a lot with respect to this issue but it also makes it clear to us that it does not consider the subject important for 2009 .
I would like to advise you against this .
We are also disappointed that the Anti-Fraud Office is not being better equipped with a new legal basis .
There is a risk that the Council will reach a deadlock as the 27 Member States can no longer come to an agreement on the subject of combating fraud .
We also have expectations of the Commission in this regard , expectations which , after reading the work programme , do not seem to have been fulfilled .
We are also disappointed not to find more detailed information on the national statements .
If we are exercising more freedom for expenditure on the one hand , we must also make sure that the Member States are subject to appropriate obligations .
What I do not understand is that the Barroso Commission does not want to develop and demonstrate its greatest success : the disclosure of the recipients of subsidies .
Why are you not using this to disclose how EU money is being spent ?
Why are you not analysing whether we are actually achieving our political goals using the information gained from this data ?
I believe that we are right to have high expectations of you , that we should expect more than has been presented in the legislative and work programme .
However , you should definitely use our critical solidarity and our questions for further development .
( EL ) Madam President , prime ministers in the midst of a crisis should be jointly planning their social , not just their economic interventions .
Obviously the banks had to be saved , but Europe should already be focusing on directly rescuing people on low and average incomes and stimulating employment and social cohesion .
The social state and social cohesion cannot be at the tail end of open and uncontrolled markets or of the economic policy of Europe , a survival bait that we throw to all those who are foundering in times of crisis .
On the contrary , they are the core of European economic growth and that is how they should be treated .
Secondly , in order to achieve this , we need to urgently adjust the terms of the Stability Pact ; we need a new social Maastricht , a sustainable pact for growth , employment and social protection based on strict rules and preconditions .
Thirdly , Europe should be at the global vanguard of innovation and new technologies by investing capital in education and research into green development ; this is , of course , something which will mean a huge increase in the European budget .
We need at long last to move forward .
Sun , wind and water will be the oil of the future .
Whoever makes early use of them will create millions of jobs for their citizens and a prosperous society .
If Europe gets left behind , as some people are saying now , the America of Barack Obama , whose election we are all hailing , will take the lead and we shall lose out .
Fourthly , we need new market transparency , control and supervision rules .
The current system which caused the crisis , in which profits are reaped by a few private individuals and society as a whole bears the losses , will result in new crises .
Madam President , at a time when the world is seeing the most important financial crisis that has ever hit us , we are looking at a failure so far on the Doha Round .
It is of crucial importance .
I have just spoken to Baroness Ashton - or Commissioner Ashton as she is now - and I do believe that she is taking us forward in a progressive and futuristic way .
The financial crisis has to be underlined , as has the need to deepen Europe 's relationships with its key partners , including the new US Administration , but probably more importantly when the Director-General , Pascal Lamy , is up for so-called re-election - we will see whether or not he gets the post , but there is a good chance that he will .
We need more action and less rhetoric in this .
Brown has called for leaders to avoid putting up barriers to trade and investment during the times of economic crisis .
This is crucial to the WTO negotiations .
The EU must not be Dickensian in its approach to the way in which we approach trade .
We must open our barriers .
We must not put in place trade defence instruments .
Reform is only going to be successful on the grounds of a free market principle .
That includes , as I say , open trade and investment .
Last week Pascal Lamy met with the G20 to work with a proposal that will see a possibility of a settlement coming up in the short term .
We hope to see something even before Christmas .
That is the way the Commission sees it at the moment .
I congratulate the previous Commissioner and the present Commissioner on their approach .
The EU has led for the first time in the trade negotiations and must be congratulated .
( PL ) Madam President , the informal meeting of the European Council and the G20 summit in Washington attempted to respond to the most important current challenge : the financial crisis which , without a doubt , represents a defeat for neo-liberal economic theories .
The declarations issued by those meetings resemble nothing so much as closing the stable door after the horse has bolted , and I was sorry to hear Mr Barroso say that it was only the crisis that has changed their thinking .
They have failed to address the burning issues of how to arrest the recession , how to create new jobs and , finally , how to combat climate change without incurring unnecessary economic costs .
European Socialists have long since been calling for a reform of financial markets and for coordinated action by European Union governments .
It is my view that we cannot concentrate just on financial markets , where financial institutions and greedy managers have brought about the present situation .
We must protect our citizens against food , energy and rent price rises so as to maintain their real income levels and thus to protect their purchasing power : the consumer demand which , together with investments and exports , has such a significant impact on economic growth in the European Union .
We must also protect the profitability of small and medium-sized enterprises .
If the climate and energy package is retained in its present form , especially where the emissions trading scheme and the demands on power plants and heavy industry are concerned , I must warn that in Poland and in other new Member States this will lead to considerable costs and above all a tremendous increase in energy prices .
Fighting climate change is a legitimate objective , but the battle cannot be fought by means which will quickly lead to another crisis , when we have not yet managed to overcome this one .
( ES ) Madam President , as regards the plans for the fisheries policy , certain proposals that we have been waiting for have been so long coming that what we now need is a fixed work programme allowing us to determine with greater certainty those issues that will come before us in this parliamentary term .
Despite our requests in this respect , and aside from the reform of the monitoring policy which has just been presented , we have so far been unable to obtain any better idea of what is to come .
The Commission document tells us that one of the priorities will be the presentation of the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy .
However , in reality , this simply represents the start of a debate which will not end until 2012 .
The promised reform of the common organisation of the markets also appears in the communication , but we are again unsure whether this will reach us in the first half of 2009 .
I want to point out that there is a whole series of issues which , either because of international commitments , such as fisheries agreements , or multilateral obligations , such as the need to transpose the recommendations of the regional fisheries organisations into Community law , should appear in the legislative programme .
There are also other issues , such as the future of European aquaculture or the proposal on discards which appears and disappears like a ghost from the Commission 's work programmes , which we believe should also become priority issues , given the importance attributed to them by both the sector and this Parliament .
We therefore hope , Madam President , that an amended work programme for 2009 will be presented as soon as possible , taking into account these repeated requests from the European Parliament .
( DE ) Madam President , those that are weakest economically are always the ones to suffer the most in times of financial crisis .
Incomprehensible financial services products , the quality of which were no longer assessed by rating agencies , lack of transparency and the erroneous belief that the market regulates itself only added to the casino mentality .
Unfortunately , the Commission also vehemently refused to consider legislative regulatory measures for the financial market and showed itself to be totally resistant to advice from the European Parliament .
However , the task we now face is to put this behind us and to learn political lessons from it .
Employees who are losing their jobs now , and who have to accept substantial losses to their pensions due to the high-risk investments of their pension funds , will have to bear the costs in several ways .
The priorities now , after and in the light of the analysis of the situation , are the introduction of an emergency plan , better control mechanisms and damage limitation , as well as securing access to loans for emerging economies and developing countries , in order to be able to create sustainable growth once again .
Just as important is that the principal sceptics with respect to the necessity for a larger EU budget must have now understood that we have to set up a stronger tool as a precautionary measure in order to be able to deal with crises more effectively .
Madam President , I would just like to make a small and medium-sized intervention on my favourite subject of SMEs .
I was delighted that Commission President Barroso made many remarks about SMEs in his opening comments .
But if I have a concern , it is a concern that he talks words - as one has to when one talks - but we have not yet seen enough action - a comment that Malcolm Harbour made earlier on today .
I notice that in section 3 of your Legislative and Work Programme for 2009 , a very important section entitled ' Better regulation - delivery on promises and change of regulatory culture ' , there is a comment that ' a simpler and better regulatory environment without unnecessary administrative burdens will , therefore , remain a key component of the Commission 's legislative work ' .
With due respect , Commissioners - and I speak as a great fan and supporter of the Commission in this regard - I have not yet seen evidence of this being in this legislative programme .
There is a lot of talk of that : yes , we will do it , we will reduce by 25 % - but where is the beef ?
Where is the reduction ?
We have not yet seen it .
So , going back to the heading ' Better regulation - delivery on promises ' , if there is one word that you remember for this legislative programme , Commissioners , that word must please be ' delivery ' .
My final thought is that I do recognise that changing culture takes time and also , speaking as the coordinator for employment and social affairs for the PPE-DE Group , I do realise that the committee on which I have the great good fortune to sit is not always the greatest ally in the cause of better and simplified regulation .
But I have to suffer in this committee , and my invitation is that one of you should come and suffer too - if only briefly - because we may be part of the problem .
But if we could somehow create a new precedent that , ideally , the Commission President would come and address our committee , maybe that would help make our committee help your work , and we could then become part of the solution .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to address one issue that until now has not been addressed very often , namely the role of the state .
We can see that integration into the global economy also means that we have to increasingly learn that the state has to integrate internationally and globally , so that it is at all capable of interceding and exercising the necessary controls .
I think that the European Union has an excellent opportunity to take on this role .
We can see that more and more trust is being placed in it .
We should do everything we can to show that this trust is justified .
This includes the European Union examining its legislation once again .
I can see Commissioner McCreevy sitting there .
I would advise him with great urgency to approach the Volkswagen Law in a different way to what he has planned .
This would be a significant signal that he has understood the sign of the times .
I would also like to express my support for Mrs Gräßle .
She is absolutely right that we have to be much more stringent with the control measures and I wish that the European Union also understood how to organise itself on an international level .
Why not approach the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund with a single voice ?
It works wonderfully with the World Trade Organization , but we have not learnt how to do this in another sphere .
I also hope that you will all give your support to making G20 an organisation that will continue for a long time .
Madam President , I think lots of things have been said about the financial crisis but it is very important to have one viewpoint .
We are too self-critical at the moment in this Parliament and also too self-critical vis-à-vis the EU institutions .
Let us not forget that we have had a very radical overhaul of our financial services legislation during the last eight years .
We have proper laws .
We have proper regulations and the supervisory system has also been improved .
Of course we could not avoid the crisis , but we were not the birthplace of this crisis : it was born in America .
It was born in the United States because of their lack of regulation , their lack of supervision and their lack of proper implementation .
We should avoid over-reacting in Europe .
This is not the proper time to give in , having good impact assessments and a better regulation agenda , as Mr Bushill-Matthews just said .
This is the perfect time to have well-targeted , well-prepared proposals and take them through .
If we react incorrectly it might have serious consequences .
It might even bring a more serious crisis upon us .
For example , if we accept legislation which makes it more difficult for financial markets to recover , it is not to the benefit of European citizens .
We should now take it coolly and we should try to avoid improper , ill-targeted and ill-prepared legislation and not be too self-critical . The Commission should be thanked for bringing through this very important change in European legislation and supervisory regime .
Madam President , we are in the midst of a deep financial crisis that is unique from very many perspectives .
It is unique because it is the first global financial crisis we have seen and we are also in a recession in the world economy .
But it might be good to have some sort of perspective on the events and the developments we are going through , because we have also seen 25 years of unprecedented and unique global economic growth that has made it possible for more than two billion people to leave poverty .
I must say I have heard very little of this from that part of the Chamber here tonight when they are saying that the open economy has failed .
Is it a failure that two billion people have left poverty ?
Of course not .
But we do see a new structure in the global economy today , and the fact that the meeting in Washington was a G20 meeting and not a G7 meeting is an expression of the new reality we are living in .
I think that is good , because the whole dominance of the transatlantic economy is not there any more .
In general , that is a good thing because it means that other parts of the world have been able to develop prosperity .

It has , during this period , created imbalances : huge surpluses in countries such as China , and huge deficits in countries such as the US , coupled with a unique and artificially low interest rate in the US economy which has increased the credit volume more than ever .
It is interesting to note that we have had the same debate in this Chamber with colleagues from that side calling for lowering interest rates even further .
Had we done so , the problems in Europe would have been even bigger than they are .
Now we need to see to it that we can restructure and recover the global economy , and I think that the European Union has an important and crucial role to play in that .
We need to make sure that we do what was said at the Washington meeting , secure free trade and open markets and say ' no ' to protectionism , because that would hinder recovery more than anything else .
We need to make sure that the regulatory framework of the global financial markets catches up with the reality of how the world economy looks today .
That is our task , and we must take a lead in that and develop prosperity even more .
Madam President , there is a grave danger of rushing to excessive misguided regulation and to unintended consequences .
An example in the new capital requirements directive is the proposed 5 % retention of securitisation proceeds .
This will only clog up credit creation .
Lack of securitisation possibilities is the principal reason that credit has dried up now . We need the banks to lend but no , this misguided principle , which lacks an impact assessment , will prevent a restart of securitisation and the credit which our business and industry so badly needs .
Ask the motor car industry how it will prosper if securitisation is snuffed out .
That is only one example .
If we suspend true and fair accounting , if we go out of our way to kill hedge funds and private equity and incentives to innovators , risk-takers and even bankers , as Mr Schulz and the Socialists require , we will only delay and kill altogether that recovery .
Madam President , a number of speakers here - including my colleague , Brian Crowley , from Ireland - have blamed the bankers for acting like bankers , maximising short-term profits to the limits of the law .
This crisis was allowed to develop because governments everywhere abandoned their responsibility to sufficiently govern the economy , including banks .
Most of those in power have ignored history and accepted the ideological mumbo-jumbo which we have just heard now from the last three speakers that the market is a self-balancing natural phenomenon and government has no role in interfering with it .
The fact is that Adam Smith 's invisible hand is a pickpocket .
The pockets that are being picked are the pockets of working people who are losing their jobs , families who are losing their homes , and those who are poor already and who are losing their savings and pensions .
It is not bankers and right-wing politicians who are losing .
This will happen again unless we clearly define a new economic framework which enables us to ensure that banks and industries serve society and enable governments to govern in the public interest .
Madam President , I think Adam Smith has been very successful , especially in Ireland !
I think we are aware of the consequences there .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , I think it is important that , through the G20 summit , the EU and the world have taken action and have said they are willing to continue to act together .
This is something new in world politics .
A European and global system for supervision represents further important steps .
Let us then ensure that we create flexible rules for the future , not in order to solve yesterday 's problems .
I would like , in all humility , to issue three warnings : a warning against over-regulation , which could slow down the world economy even further ; a warning against too large a state aid package to rescue industries in crisis - we have a few examples at home in Sweden , as the Commissioner knows very well - and a warning against protectionism and closed borders .
We must not fall into the same sort of crisis we had in the 1930s .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I shall address myself to the Commission because the representative of the Council is no longer here .
I truly believe that Mr Barroso 's proposals will not resolve the current crisis , because he has forgotten one factor , namely the causes of this crisis .
These are our production-driven system and our concept of development , which destroy and exploit the planet and its people .
The crisis is not over ; I believe we must be aware of that .
Indeed , I think it is only beginning ; our society has been sent reeling , and there is far more to come .
As I see it , while the leaders of this world , with its globalised economy , are failing to recognise the need to change course , our fellow citizens , for their part , are unable to understand how billions of euros can be found to bail out banks today and the motor industry tomorrow at a time when the content of housewives ' shopping baskets is being steadily whittled away .
You propose economic recovery measures , but if it is the same thing that has been tried over these past years and has led to chaos , you are on the wrong track .
I believe we really must reduce our ecological footprint .
That is the issue .
How do you intend to resolve it ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , we talk sometimes about grand designs and great plans and ambition .
I was touched recently by the words of the Canadian finance minister who spoke about being boring , unexciting and prudent .
I suggest that maybe we look carefully at what he had to say , because he said that good regulation begins at home and before we start looking at the world we need to look at ourselves - although I am inclined to the view that excessive regulation is as bad as none whatsoever .
Therefore , we need to be very balanced in this .
But , whatever we do , there are people now in business , on farms and in households who cannot get small amounts of credit to keep themselves going .
I was on a farm in Ireland recently and they could not renew their EUR 25 000 overdraft .
This is a really serious problem and we need to address it .
On the work programme , we will have the budget review , the implementation of the health check and review of fisheries .
It will be a busy year and I wish you luck .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you for all these interesting interventions .
Maybe this is another mission impossible to try to collect and respond in a satisfactory way to all Members ' different views on the legislative and work programme .
They range from GMOs , as we heard , through fish to the WTO and the whole financial crisis .
So I might not have the time or the possibility to respond in a fully satisfactory way to all your detailed questions .
I would first of all say that there has been nothing like ' business as usual ' since we entered this crisis .
By my side you see my colleague responsible also for much of the response , as well as Mr McCreevy behind us here , and they will know better than anyone else that we have had to work on this from the very first moment .
I would also say the Commission has responded to the financial crisis with unusual speed .
I remember that in the past we congratulated ourselves on responding within three months to one of the oil spills that we had and we thought that that was a kind of record , but this time we actually managed in 24 hours to get proposals on the table and to adopt important proposals .
So I think that there has been nothing like business as usual and we will not see anything like business as usual from now on .
We have to continue to respond to a recession that we have already seen the beginning of .
So that is absolutely clear .
I also think that all your interventions have illustrated the need to get the balance right .
To get the balance right in terms of environmental concerns as well as the social issues - all of these have to be covered .
But why do you believe that what you find in the strategic initiatives like the report on the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs and proposals beyond 2010 , a European framework for recovery , financial markets for the future package supervision , will not contain the social issues and cover the whole sustainability criteria ?
Of course it has to reflect that balance , and that is what we will work on , as well , in completing it with the very detailed proposals that will have to come on-stream from now on .
So that balance , and also getting the balance right between regulation and letting the market work , is crucial to us and something that we are fully aware of .
I think that this also will affect our credibility because it is only when we also fill out these strategic initiatives , the things we have listed as strategic and priority initiatives , with the very concrete follow-up and implementing measures that we gain credibility and that we can also continue to play a leading role within the G20 or in the IMF context or affecting the rest of the world on energy and climate as well ; we will get this credibility from delivering what we have promised in this work programme .
We have appreciated very much the dialogue that we have had for a long time now with the different committees in Parliament and the kind of overall political debate that we have engaged in and I want to thank you very much for that .
I think that helps us to deliver .
It helps us to also bring the right details to the lists of proposals .
But , as you know and as is clear also from our work programme , this is a very peculiar time because it is a kind of transition , with a new Parliament , a new Commission ; and , with the elections to Parliament coming up next spring , you have also asked us not to go on delivering when you can no longer receive it and do something meaningful with it .
I must just mention one more thing , and that is SMEs , because several of you have mentioned the small and medium-sized enterprises .
Of course they will be absolutely key to any success in dealing with the financial crisis , so we will deliver , we have already produced a SME business act and of course there is a follow-up , an implementation of the business act .
The same is also true for the social package that we presented .
Now it is a matter of the implementing measures .
So if you do not find every proposal in every area in this particular proposal , that does not mean that we have stopped working on it or that we will not come back with detailed proposals , but the balance is absolutely crucial .
And when we speak with one voice , it helps if we have one message as well or a coordinated message in everything we do and I think that will remain crucial for all of us .
Let me finally say that in this Legislative and Work Programme you will see that we have for the first time identified communication priorities and since this is my portfolio I want to underline this and remind you all that we proposed four items to become joint communication priorities for next year : the EP elections of course , energy and climate change , the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall and growth , jobs and solidarity , meaning that the package also covers fighting the financial crisis .
We are already working together to prepare work on these priorities and I can assure you that we will contribute to the work that Parliament is doing in preparing for the elections ; tomorrow I will talk to your Bureau 's working group on communication to see how we can help and support and back Parliament 's work plans for communicating the EP elections .
So that will be very important work for us .
If we want to keep credibility and legitimacy , we have to mobilise voters to make sure that they cast their vote in June next year .
With a combination of good policies and good communication I think we can actually face the difficult year ahead with at least a little confidence , and if we work together , the confidence will be even greater .
The debate is closed .
The vote on motions for resolutions on the Commission 's legislative and work programme for 2009 will take place during the December session in Strasbourg .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) The recent Washington summit was basically the start of a process to which national leaders must become committed in order to minimise the impact of the global financial crisis .
In an era of globalisation , when the economies of individual countries are closely interlinked , international cooperation aimed at arresting the crisis must be a priority .
What I have in mind is not only a common EU position on many issues , but also specific joint action and practical intervention aimed at mitigating the effects of the financial crisis .
Experts maintain that the Polish economy is one of the few that will be able to withstand a possible economic depression , though no one can predict the scale that the crisis might reach globally .
We must even now be prepared to introduce appropriate crisis prevention measures , with the governments of the various states playing a key role .
Where necessary , they should offer capital support to financial institutions threatened with bankruptcy .
Once again , may I emphasise the important role the state has to play in preventing a global crisis , through intervention in local financial markets .
in writing . - In a way , this is a key part of solving the problem , for unless we can achieve a truly common stance in the EU , achieving effective global rules for the financial markets becomes wishful thinking .
Sensible people would say that a massive failure of both regulation and oversight , as well as the flaws revealed in a highly simplistic economic philosophy , provide a clear answer as to what to do .
Some still argue , however , that soft regulations should be the lynchpin of the new system .
In my view , they are wrong - either if they genuinely think so , or are driven by parochial interests .
The world has changed dramatically in the last couple of decades .
The decline of a misleading paradigm ( which equates free markets with no regulations ) has to be seen in conjunction with a rising multipolar economic world in the attempt to forge a new international financial system .
Arguably , the fate of an open world economic system hinges on the latter .
I hope that the new American administration will be forthcoming in this respect , but we at home in Europe have to rise to the momentousness of this period .
Some of our own bickering and inability to compromise serves as no good omen in this respect .
in writing . - ( HU ) Our first task is to restore confidence on the financial markets , in order to prevent a further deepening of the crisis .
From this perspective , politics bears enormous responsibility .
Not only do we need rapid and confidence-building macro-solutions , but we need to prevent a similar financial crisis from occurring again .
All this is not simply a minor hurdle for blind capitalism , as we have heard it said in recent times , but rather a marvellous opportunity to bring about a much more effective as well as legitimate financial and supervisory regulation .
At last we can now humanise capitalism !
We must also be attentive to the fact that the crisis threatens not only banks and big business , but causes daily problems for citizens as well .
We need a sustainable solution for addressing the crisis , and if this means we have to reshape the world , then we will have to make it much more just , humane and rational .
There are regions in Europe where even before now life has seemed hopeless .
Besides fixing the economy , we need to focus on concrete solutions for the most disadvantaged , that is to say , those who suffer and will suffer most from the effects of the crisis and who face the greatest economic and social hardships .
If we do not do this , the average person will survive the crisis and grow again , but we will entrench destitution for a long time .
The financial crisis has engulfed the whole world .
In my view , this is an economic crisis , while finance , which normally greases the wheels of the economy , is truly in the grip of a typhoon .
René Thom 's catastrophe theory seems to have been validated .
At the same time , its moral aspects need also to be noted , and this has been pointed out by many economists .
At this point , let me quote Ettore Gotti Tedeschi : ' Is it consistent with logic and ethics to create an illusion of development based solely on the growth of private consumption , is it consistent with logic and ethics for the growth of consumption to be absorbing the growth of social costs ( pensions and health services ) , thus provoking tax rises , is it consistent with logic and ethics to transform a society of savers into a society of debt-ridden consumers , and is it consistent with logic and ethics to force the globalised man to seek work far away from home ? '
The cost of this lack of an ethical dimension will be high , because we are paying for greed and for risks taken with other people 's money by irresponsible individuals who have created tax havens for themselves .
It is the taxpayer , both in Europe and in America , who has to pay for this rapacity and dishonesty .
We are becoming poorer .
Banks are becoming less important in the economy which , producing less , needs fewer workers , and thus a domino effect is created .
Today 's markets need certainty and observance of rules .
We need measures to shield the very poorest and at the same time to protect our assets from being bought up for next to nothing .
At least several years will be needed for this emergency treatment to work .
in writing . - ( DE ) A particularly welcome feature of the Commission 's legislative and work programme are the measures planned to combat the economic crisis in Europe .
Next year , European politics must manage to identify long-term prospects for the EU and , in cooperation with the general public , limit the adverse effects that the crisis in the financial market is having on the entire European economy .
The effects of crises such as this are often only felt in the real economy at a later point in time .
In addition to action taken by the individual states , Europe must introduce measures in order to keep the negative consequences to a minimum .
The year 2009 will be decisive in the fight against climate change .
Next year , Europe will have the chance to set itself up as a strong international partner in connection with environmental protection issues .
Establishing the EU 's negotiating position for the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen is not only a high priority as far as environmental issues are concerned , there are also interconnections to other political fields .
The European Union can prove itself to be a pioneering force , not only with respect to the continent of Europe but also in connection with protecting the climate on a global basis .
Nevertheless , next year we must ensure that ongoing work is not forgotten due to the important forthcoming initiatives .
Even though the state of the common agricultural policy has been reviewed this year , the interests of the agricultural sector must continue to have high priority within European politics .
in writing . - ( EL ) The credit crunch , this deep crisis in the capitalist system , is the current scourge of workers , exacerbating the problems of unemployment , undermining social insurance and pension systems and further reducing the income and standard of living of working class families .
Capital and its political representatives are placing the burden of the credit crunch on the shoulders of workers and are attempting an all-out attack on workers ' rights in order to safeguard their profitability .
The Council and the Commission in their statements and the European Parliament are adopting the positions of capital and persisting with the same catastrophic economic and monetary policy by calling for faster capitalist restructurings and reforms at workers ' expense .
They support Economic and Monetary Union , the Maastricht Treaty and the four freedoms , the Stability Pact and the reduction in social spending within the framework of financial discipline .
They are calling for stricter supervision of the Member States by the EU and they welcome and are strengthening its socially uncontrolled role in order to support capital more effectively .
They are calling for faster and more faithful application of the anti-labour Lisbon Treaty and the general orientation of the economic policy of the EU .
The experience of workers and the working class itself is leading them to rebut and counterattack the policy of barbarity .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0484 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Christians in Turkey : Mor Gabriel monastery
What is the Council 's opinion of the situation of Christian minorities in Turkey , and in particular the current state of the dispute about the partial expropriation of the Mor Gabriel monastery in Eastern Turkey ?
Madam President , may I reply to Mrs Harkin by telling her that the Council attaches great importance , as it has demonstrated on several occasions , to the question of religious freedom in Turkey .
The specific case to which Mrs Harkin refers is still under examination by the Turkish courts , and it is not for me to comment at this stage , but we are monitoring this case very closely .
In general terms , your question relates to religious freedom in Turkey .
This is a very important subject , and there is an urgent need for Turkey to make progress and adopt concrete measures with a view to establishing a proper judicial framework .
These matters are constantly being raised by the European Union in the context of its dialogue with Turkey and were specifically addressed at the last meeting of the EU-Turkey Association Council on 27 May 2008 .
On that occasion , while noting the Turkish Government 's declared intention and renewed undertaking to pursue the reform process and tackle the existing shortcomings , the European Union emphasised the need for such undertakings to be translated quickly into effective concrete measures .
Some advances are observable : Turkey has taken action , for example by adopting amendments to the law governing foundations in February 2008 .
Thanks to these amendments , the ban on foreigners establishing foundations in Turkey has been lifted , and the principle of reciprocity now applies .
In spite of these commendable features of the law governing foundations , however , there is still a need to resolve the numerous difficulties that religious communities and minorities continue to experience , particularly as regards their legal status and , I must stress , their property rights .
Accordingly , the question of religious freedom was raised once again in the framework of the political dialogue at the ministerial meeting in Brussels on 15 September , and the Council can assure Mrs Harkin that it will continue to monitor very closely the issue of religious freedom , including the implementation of the new law governing foundations , and that it will raise this matter with the Turkish authorities at every level at which it sees fit to do so .
Unfortunately , I have just learned that Mr Posselt actually asked the question .
That is not what I had on my sheet of paper , and I do apologise , Madam President .
( DE ) I am much obliged to the President-in-Office of the Council .
That was my question .
Thank you for the very good reply .
France has traditionally had a long-standing connection with Christians in the Near and Middle East .
I would like to ask an additional question .
In addition to its religious function , Mor Gabriel is the cultural and economic centre of the Assyrian Christian minority in the region .
What is the Council doing to protect this minority , whose existence is under threat ?
What is the Council 's stance on building churches - which continues to be very difficult in Turkey - as far as other Christian communities are concerned ?
- ( FR ) Madam President , let me begin by offering my sincere apologies to Mr Posselt for my inadvertent error .
I hope he did not take it personally .
In answer to his question , we are extremely vigilant , as I said in my initial remarks , on the exercise of religious freedom in Turkey , as in other countries , and on the guarantees given by national authorities , especially with regard to minorities .
In Turkey , as in some other countries , the minorities happen to be Christian , and , as Mr Posselt indicated , we are particularly watchful in these instances .
The case of the Mor Gabriel monastery is pending , and we shall have to await the judgment regarding that monastery .
As far as our dialogues with the Turkish authorities are concerned , as part of the negotiations on what we call the revised Accession Partnership for Turkey , it is very clear that everything relating to fundamental freedoms , to religious freedom , and to the need to take the measures required to establish a climate of tolerance in which full respect for religious freedom can be guaranteed , has been raised and is at the heart of our dialogue with the Turkish authorities .
I should like to reaffirm that , Mr Posselt .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , problems with Christian churches are not restricted to Turkey itself , but are also to be found in the north-east of the divided island of Cyprus .
Are discussions taking place on this issue at Council level and , in particular , are there any actions involving Turkey in order to ensure that it uses the influence that it undoubtedly has in this area in the correct way ?
I would like to direct the Minister 's attention to the sustained campaign against the very tiny Protestant community in Turkey , epitomised at present by the farcical trial which has been going on for some months of two young men - Turan Topal and Hakan Taştan - who have been on trial charged with insulting Turkishness .
Their crime , apparently , is the practising of their religion .
With such a view of freedom of religion , is it not clear that Turkey has a very long way to go indeed before it meets the basic standards of human rights and of freedom of religion ?
- ( FR ) Madam President , in answer to Mr Rack 's question , we are , of course , well aware of the strong Turkish influence on the northern part of Cyprus , and we shall raise these problems .
As you know , a delegation of elected representatives from Northern Cyprus will be visiting the European Parliament on Thursday , and that will be an opportunity to express our deep concern about these matters .
Let me reassure Mr Allister by telling him that we naturally monitor the fate of all confessions , and I thank him for reporting the case of these two young men from the Protestant community who have indeed been subjected to threats or aggression because of their religious beliefs .
We shall therefore bring this point to the attention of the Turkish authorities , Mr Allister .
Subject : New migratory pressures on Europe
In recent weeks an increase has been felt in the migratory pressure on the Mediterranean countries of the European Union .
Is the Council considering new diplomatic measures or other types of action to help those countries hold back the fresh wave of illegal immigration currently affecting that area ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , in reply to Mr Ortega , if I am not mistaken , but you have already helped me with this , Madam President , the migratory policy that the European Union intends to implement is based on a principle of solidarity , solidarity between the Member States , especially those which would be subject to a strong migratory pressure , and solidarity with the countries of origin , to respond , in particular , to the underlying causes of poverty .
This principle is at the basis of the global approach to migration defined by the European Council in December 2005 .
This global approach to migration aims to strengthen dialogue and cooperation with the migrants ' countries of origin and transit .
It intends that the dialogue with these countries will cover all the dimensions of migration , especially legal migration , the prevention of and fight against illegal migration , and also the link between migration and development .
Subsequently , the European Council has constantly reaffirmed the necessity of pursuing this approach , intensifying it and making its implementation increasingly effective .
It was in this spirit of cooperation between the countries of origin , transit and destination that the first EU-Africa Ministerial Conference on Migration and Development was organised in July 2006 in Rabat .
A second Ministerial Conference on Migration and Development will be held in Paris on 25 November 2008 .
It will be invited to adopt an operational programme , which will last over several years and consist of a series of actions that the partners concerned with the migratory flow along the western African routes will be asked to implement , especially related to the prevention of and fight against illegal immigration and human trafficking .
Border management , including reinforcement of the physical and human resources and operational cooperation with Frontex , is also an area of primary importance in the dialogue and operational cooperation with third countries , especially those on the Mediterranean rim .
Thus , for example , the Joint Operation Hera 2008 , carried out under the aegis of the Frontex agency , has achieved a significant reduction in the number of migrants landing on the coast of the Canary Islands .
In the same spirit , migration issues will form part of the questions addressed in the negotiations that the Commission is going to open this month with Libya , in the light of the mandate given to it by the Council in September , with the aim of concluding the framework agreement between the European Union and Libya .
Finally , as you know , the principle of responsibility was reaffirmed in last October 's European Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
The pact also underlines the need for solidarity with the Member States who are exposed , due to their geographical situation , to an influx of immigrants or whose resources are limited , and invites the Commission to present solutions which , in a spirit of solidarity , will take into account the difficulty faced by these States .
( ES ) President-in-Office of the Council , I agree with the approach taken by the Council .
The question is whether we can adopt concrete measures : time is passing and the problems are getting ever bigger .
In particular , the Mediterranean countries are facing difficulties .
Some have the economic resources to tackle these , whereas others do not , for example Malta which , due to its small size and limited resources , is facing enormous difficulties .
There are also problems deriving from international rules , such as the Hague Convention on Protection of Children which effectively prevents children from being returned to their families of origin .
I do not know whether the Council has taken into account that the rules on protection of children are written in such a way that we find ourselves in this absurd situation where children come to Europe and cannot be returned , even to their families of origin , despite these having been identified .
Finally , I must mention the more specific issues : I know that , at the moment , there are some specific initiatives with African countries , for example Mali , to set up immigration centres so that the countries of origin or transit can manage this problem themselves , in order to avoid the dramatic situation where dozens of people perish in the sea while trying to unsuccessfully reach our coasts .
( FR ) Madam President , I thank Mr Ortega for his constructive , pertinent questions .
He is quite correct .
We have to ensure the reinforcement of states with fewer resources : the case of Malta is perfectly clear , I know .
We need to consider redeployment to strengthen the resources around Malta , and we also need to look at ways of reinforcing the Frontex mechanism in this respect , especially in Malta 's case .

Secondly , as Mr Ortega knows , there will be a second EU-Africa Ministerial Conference on Migration and Development in Paris , on 25 November 2008 , to follow up on the Rabat Conference , and in this framework there will be three technical meetings on legal migration , illegal migration , and migration and development .
I promise that I will ask the General Secretariat of the Council to report more precisely on the standard for the protection of minors , as I am unable at the moment to give an answer .
As for the third element , as regards Mali , Mr Ortega is perfectly correct to underline the significance of these agreements .
What we wish to do as the Presidency , and what we also invite the Council to pursue , is indeed to conclude such agreements with the countries of origin of immigration .
It is in that respect that codevelopment and dialogue with the countries of origin are important and , for me , this agreement with Mali will serve as a reference .
This is what I wished to say to Mr Ortega .
( DE ) My question relates to the Union for the Mediterranean , initiated by President Sarkozy .
Can it be used as an effective tool with regard to this matter ?
I would like to mention two specific issues .
Firstly , the immigrants from North Africa : what is being done to create jobs there ?
Secondly , the transit immigrants from West Africa : is it not possible to create reception centres in North Africa itself ?
( FR ) Madam President , I wish to say that Mr Posselt 's question is pertinent .
The Union for the Mediterranean is , to begin with , a union for practical projects .
It also has an intercultural vision .
It is obviously linked to economic development , and everything related to codevelopment is included in economic development .
Thus , in one way or another , I can confirm to Mr Posselt that these aspects will be dealt with at the appropriate time , in the framework of the projects and discussions on economic development between the two shores of the Mediterranean .
Subject : Opening of dialogue in Cuba
The Council Conclusions on Cuba of 23 June 2008 have been very well received in Cuban democratic circles , which appreciate the fact that the unconditional release of all political prisoners is a key priority for the EU and that it supports respect for human rights and genuine progress towards a pluralist democracy .
In line with the commitments the Council made in its Conclusions , can it indicate what effective measures it is taking to further develop dialogue with the representatives of civil society and the democratic opposition ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Masip , as you have underlined , the Council did indeed decide , on 23 June , to resume relations with Cuba , in light of certain recent positive human rights developments .
The Council first decided to resume a dialogue , without pre-conditions , between the European Union and Cuba , based on reciprocity and dealing with all issues of mutual interest .
This dialogue is seeking concrete results , especially in human rights issues .
In this framework , Mr Masip , the first session of the political dialogue between the European Union and Cuba at ministerial level was held in Paris on 16 October .
Secondly , in its conclusions of 23 June , the Council reaffirmed that it would continue its dialogue with representatives from civil society and the democratic opposition during high-level visits , where questions on human rights will always be raised .
If necessary , meetings with the opposition will be organised in the framework of these visits .
The Council also stressed that the Union would continue to offer , to all sectors of Cuban society , its practical support for peaceful change on the island .
To apply these conclusions , the organisations which represent this opposition will be regularly invited to present their views on the current political developments at the time .
Finally , the Council reaffirmed that the Union stands ready to contribute constructively to the development of all sectors of Cuban society , including development cooperation and , in the context of this commitment , as you know , Commissioner Louis Michel has just been on an official visit to Cuba to agree the outlines of this cooperation and practical projects which may be initiated .
Besides Mr Michel 's visit , you will see that the Council has introduced many measures in application of the June conclusions and , next June , at the end of the Czech Presidency , the Council will begin to assess the political dialogue with Cuba and assess its results .
The dialogue will continue on these bases , if it appears that Cuba is meeting the expectations expressed by the Union , especially on human rights issues .
( ES ) Thank you very much , Mr Jouyet , on behalf of my colleague , Luis Yañez-Barnuevo García , a person of dignity and democracy who supports the Cuban opposition and the Cuban people .
You must keep up with your efforts to maintain these priorities and to keep the focus on this dialogue with the Cuban opposition .
We have to achieve democracy in Cuba and ensure Europe 's commitment to Cuba .
- ( SK ) Despite reports of ' changes ' in Cuba , the facts show that Cuba is still not a free and democratic country .
The reason for imposing political and diplomatic sanctions against Cuba has still not gone away , since 55 of the original 75 dissidents still remain in prison .
In my view , any political decision of the European Union on ending sanctions against Cuba should have been preceded by a transparent assessment of the situation 's development , particularly in the area of human rights and civic freedoms for citizens of Cuba .
What has the Council done and what will it do in order to secure the release of all political prisoners from Cuban prisons ?
( FR ) Madam President , Minister , I was thrown out of Cuba in May 2005 .
On arrival at the airport , I was expelled due to being an MEP .
I recently requested a visa to be sure that I would be able to cross the border and it was refused .
May I rely on you , on the Presidency , to ensure that an MEP is free to visit Cuba ?
( FR ) Madam President , I wish to reply to Mrs Pleštinská and then to Mr Sonik .
The 1996 Council common position remains valid .
It recommends encouraging a transition process towards democratic pluralism and respect for human rights and , to this end , intensification of the dialogue with the Cuban authorities and with all sectors of society .
The European Union declares itself ready to support the process of opening up the country , as the Cuban authorities progress along the path of democracy .
As for your situation , Mr Sonik , I have noted it and it is evident that , for all MEPs , we must show the greatest vigilance and give you our support in your actions .
That is the Council 's position .
Subject : Lessons from the financial crisis
What lessons has the Council learnt from the current financial crisis ?
What short-term and long-term measures are presently under discussion ?
Do these talks involve Iceland and other European countries outside the EU whose economies are nevertheless closely interlinked ?
Subject : Member States ' responses to international financial crisis
Does the Council consider that the interventions of individual Member States to protect their banks and economies against the worst impacts of the international financial crisis are a retrograde step ?
Subject : EU response to the financial crisis
With confidence in the financial markets at a low and the banking sector in disarray , is the Council working to tackle the crisis and restore confidence by implementing a coherent and combined approach , or is it felt that Member States are better prepared to manage the financial turmoil unilaterally ?
Subject : Financial crisis and the Stability Pact
The global financial crisis has exposed the inconsistent behaviour of European Union governments and the European Central Bank , which are able to find funds to save banks from collapse , thereby breaching the provisions of the Stability Pact , when for many years they would not permit the slightest departure from the Pact 's rules in order to meet important social needs .
What is the Council 's view ?
Does it consider that , in the light of recent events , there is a need to review the provisions of the Stability Pact and the one-dimensional concept of the market economy , which has been the sole ruling principle for the development of Europe ?
Subject : Eastern Europe 's situation and prospects in the context of the financial crisis
Eastern Europe 's fragility in the face of the financial crisis is a matter of concern for EU policy-makers .
Leaders of Eastern European states feel that their economies are more vulnerable than their Western partners .
What main threats could the Council highlight for the Eastern European countries and Baltic States in particular in this financial crisis ?
What prospects does the Council see for the Eastern European countries and Baltic States in particular in the near future ( 2009-2010 ) and in the longer term ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , I will try to reply to all of the questions relating to the financial crisis affecting the world 's economy over the last 15 months or more , and which continues to affect the finances of the European economies .
As regards the Union , I would remind you that the European Council of 15 and 16 October stated its commitment , under all circumstances , to taking all necessary measures to maintain the stability of the financial system , support the major financial institutions , avoid bankruptcies and assure protection for savers ' deposits .
As for the financial system , the European Council also made a forceful call for all players in the system to act responsibly , especially in the banking sector .
It stressed that the real performance of company directors should be reflected in their remuneration , including severance payments and everything relating to golden parachutes .
Similarly , it agreed to ensure that stock option arrangements should lead neither to excessive risk-taking nor to an over-emphasis of short-term objectives .
Following this meeting , the informal meeting of the Heads of State or Government on 7 November , whose task was to prepare the coordinated European approach for the G20 meeting , which took place last weekend in Washington , had the objectives of taking quick decisions on transparency , worldwide regulation standards , especially accounting standards , financial supervision and crisis management , of preventing conflicts of interest and of creating an early warning system , in such a way as to create saver and investor confidence .
To reply more particularly to the honourable Member 's question , tabled on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and echoing the question from Mr Evans , on the practical measures being examined to respond to the crisis , I wish to refer to the reform of the Capital Requirements Directive , which the Council is currently considering .
The work of the Council on this proposal is already well advanced .
The Commission has also just proposed a regulation on an approval system for rating agencies .
This proposal is going in the same direction , insofar as capital requirements depend on the ratings awarded .
As for the protection of savers ' deposits , the Commission has proposed to amend the current Directive to increase the minimum guarantee to EUR 50 000 , with a further increase to EUR 100 000 planned in future .
The European Parliament and the Council are in the process of considering this proposal .
I also note , following the European Council of 15 and 16 October , the introduction of the financial crisis team .
This team , as you know , is an informal mechanism for warnings , information exchange and assessment among the representatives of the Council , the President of the European Council , the Commission , its President , the President of the European Central Bank , the President of the Eurogroup and the governments of the Member States , as well , of course , as the President of the Economic and Financial Committee , which is the linchpin of this early warning team .
To reply to the questions put by Mrs McGuinness and Mr Mitchell , I would stress that the European Council approved an action plan to offer Member States a complete common framework of national rescue and aid measures for the financial sector .
The European Council called on Member States to take into account the potential effects of their national decisions on the other Member States .
We also recognise that Iceland has experienced severe difficulties .
A message of solidarity was sent to this country by the European Council in October .
There were meetings in the wings of the Ecofin Council on 4 November and , finally , with the Council of the European Economic Area , I personally met representatives from Iceland and believe that we were able to find satisfactory solidarity mechanisms and also adapt the agreements which unite us with this country in the framework of the Council of the European Economic Area .
As for the question raised by Mr Papadimoulis , on the Stability and Growth Pact , I would remind you of the conclusions adopted by the Council on 7 October , in which it confirmed its desire to see the pact applied , whilst taking into account the exceptional circumstances with which we are familiar .
Implementation of the 7 October decision must , of course , take account of the G20 conclusions , which call for the use of all available resources to sustain activity .
To respond now to the question from Mrs Andrikienė , I would remind you that , according to the Commission , Hungary , Lithuania , Estonia , Bulgaria and Romania are affected more severely by the financial crisis than the other Member States .
These States have , for years , benefited from favourable external financing conditions , creating , of course , deficits in the current balances of payments and an accumulation of external debts .
It is evident that , now , financing conditions are much less favourable and the problem facing these States is one of refinancing their external debt .
As for Hungary , the Council has just granted a loan of EUR 6.5 billion in the framework of the mechanism for medium-term financial assistance for balances of payments .
In addition to the Council 's loan , there are loans from the International Monetary Fund , for EUR 12.5 billion , and from the World Bank , for one billion .
I do not know if the latter is in dollars or euros .
With current funding of EUR 12 billion , there is a risk that this mechanism will prove inadequate to meet future requirements , so this is why the Commission has just proposed increasing the assistance available to this country to EUR 25 billion .
The Council has asked Parliament to give its opinion on this proposal .
I welcome Council 's remarks and the general approach to the financial services crisis and , indeed , I hope that we will be able to build on the recent G20 results .
As you mentioned , we need to build on that movement to create global results for global regulations and particularly financial supervision .
I have to say that financial supervision requires financial support as well .
We have seen this .
This is taxpayers ' money , of course .
But supervision , to be appropriate , needs appropriate solvency , not just for banks but also for insurance companies .
I wonder , therefore , if you will also support group supervision and group support as stated in Solvency II , something not mentioned in your list of financial regulations , but which was thought up outside a time of crisis and could help us in crisis .
If this is the case , perhaps the presidency could explain why , on 2 December , it intends to delete group support from this proposal , and realise how unhelpful this can be .
Our questions were framed some weeks ago and the situation is now worse than , and different to , the situation then .
So , on that basis , could I ask how united the Council is in its joint action , and , where you have a situation in which Member States have to act alone , is the system working effectively ?
Is it not time we had something like a Marshall Aid Plan , perhaps a Sarkozy Plan for Europe ?
How would you fund that ?
Supposing China was to lend money to the European Investment Bank or the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and you were to give grants to Member States - that would not affect their debt / GNP ratio .
How would you refund it ?
From the customs and excise that you would collect from trade and perhaps from an extra 0.5 % VAT contribution from the Member States who would draw down this facility .
Will you give consideration at your December meeting to a Marshall Aid-type plan and stop tinkering at the edges ?
We are now just entering into this recession , and , if we take it head on with calculated risk , we can see our way through it .
( EL ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , even Mr Prodi , the former President of the Commission , said the Stability Pact was stupid , because it only cares about inflation , deficit and debt , at a time when Europe is sinking into recession and needs measures which will foster development , employment and social cohesion .
My question is : are you considering replacing rather than just relaxing it ?
If you cannot or will not , then please convey to the Council President that this crisis dumping must stop .
( LT ) Mr Jouyet , you spoke about Hungary and the solidarity shown towards Hungary , which is encouraging , but I am also very interested in the other countries you mentioned : Bulgaria , Romania and especially Lithuania .
Can Lithuania also expect the solidarity of the European Union in the current financial crisis ?
( FR ) Madam President , to reply to the honourable Member who echoed the question from Mr Evans , you are perfectly correct .
Issues of solvency not only affect banks , but also concern insurance companies , and our monitoring mechanisms need to be adapted to deal with groups in this sector which may be consolidated or transnational .
This is why we are determined to bring a satisfactory conclusion to the work on the Solvency II directive .
We are hoping the work will be concluded as quickly as possible and we support the Commission in the performance of its work .
We are hoping to find a compromise on this issue , but it is clear that we need features which will strengthen solvency monitoring at the insurance group level .
To reply to Mrs McGuinness , I think that the response from the G20 , the way it was prepared , the fact that there is an action plan agreed by the G20 , shows that the Council was united in its action .
I would remind you that , in the context of this action plan , there are also those who say that we should call on all the resources available to maintain activity ; in this action plan you have very practical financial regulation measures that I listed just recently , which I do not intend to repeat , and whose rapid implementation we are awaiting at European Union level .
We have requested , not only in response to the financial crisis , but also to the economic crisis , that the Commission takes the legislative or practical initiatives required and that the House supports these by adopting the texts required as soon as possible .
As regards the coordination of the Member States , I would say to Mrs McGuinness that I think it is important that the early warning team , this coordination team , should function correctly in the framework of the Economic and Financial Committee plus the representatives of the Member States and the various institutions concerned , whether this be the European Central Bank or the Eurogroup .
As for Mr Mitchell 's speech , I think that , without mentioning the Marshall Plan , and in application of the G20 principles , and speaking in the name of the Presidency , we wish to see all the levers for action at Community level put to use , combined with those at national level : whether these be existing loan facilities from the European Investment Bank , the resources available in the Community budget which should also be used to sustain activity , the resources , of course , available in national budgets , especially those relating to future spending and business support projects , or even , at Community level , the relaxation or adaptation of certain rules to help those sectors in greatest difficulty .
From this point of view , we are looking at things with the greatest pragmatism , but it is clear that we must act in this area .
You are , in any case , quite right , and the Presidency shares your point of view entirely .
As for what Mrs Andrikiensaid , I am sorry , but Hungary has received financial aid .
The Fund , as I said and can confirm , has granted EUR 12.5 billion , with EUR 6.5 billion from the Union , and it is clear that this solidarity is benefiting the countries affected by serious crises in their balance of payments and with problems in refinancing external debt .
Rest assured that , within the Union , we are implementing the required solidarity mechanisms .
We were faced with a particularly serious situation in the case of Hungary .
I alluded to Iceland too .
We have found ourselves in a difficult situation .
If , and I do not wish it , the Baltic countries or certain countries with which you are most familiar should find themselves in the same difficulties , the same solidarity mechanisms should come into play .
That is the Presidency 's position and , of course , there can be no unity without solidarity .
I wish to say to Mr Papadimoulis that , first , I do not always agree with President Prodi .
It is like that sometimes .
Secondly , there is a need for a certain budgetary discipline .
Thirdly , as I said in referring to the G20 conclusions , it seems obvious that these principles need to be adapted to the exceptional circumstances , and that exceptional measures are required .
It makes sense , and here I do agree , that one should never be dogmatic .
Finally , and fourthly , as for tourism , I know the Council President sufficiently well to know that he has other favourite spots and that he is putting all his energy at the service of the European Union .
I trust you note that this is essential for us .
( ES ) Mr Jouyet , through the financial technique of securitisation , US subprime mortgages have been included in the mortgage notes and other funds purchased by European banks and citizens .
Does the Council know how much of this financial garbage has been sold to us from the other side of the Atlantic ?
I would like to know whether the French presidency finds itself isolated at the Council table in any way in terms of its historic fondness for regulation of the market and , in this particular instance , for financial services .
( FR ) Madam President , to reply to the honourable Member , I do not have the exact figure in my head .
The orders of magnitude that I am familiar with are really high and the excesses of securitisation , mainly from across the Atlantic and which have spread to Europe , are greater than the GDP of many Member States , or even of the EU .
It is really considerable .
That is what I can tell you .
Securitisation has , therefore , left us to deal with a destabilising shock of an unprecedented severity .
That is what I can tell you today .
To reply to Mrs Doyle , I hope here that , as with other issues , we are not totally isolated and that the Presidency is confident .
Financial regulation is certainly not an easy matter , Mrs Doyle , but I think that we are making progress .
This afternoon , we have had exchanges in your House with the President of the European Commission and we are relatively confident about the action plan as defined by the European Council and as shaped by the whole of Europe at the informal meeting of the Heads of State or Government , and then guided by the work of the G20 this weekend in Washington .
There is no longer any argument , I would say , at least about the theory .
We have to deal with this lack of regulation .
There is no need or desire for more regulations , but we have to adapt some of them and need to ensure there is a system which is secure and transparent for savers and investors .
I think the whole world agrees with us on this .
Thereafter , it is a question of adjustment .
Subject : Political responsibility for abuses that occur during EU military operations
Testimony has emerged in Sweden that the French military force involved in EU operation Artemis in Bunia , Congo , engaged in the torture and fake execution of a prisoner .
This incident is alleged to have taken place on 13 July 2003 and has been investigated by both the Swedish and French armed forces .
This incident raises many issues regarding future cooperation .
Are there any guarantees that the forces sent by EU Member States on EU operations observe signed conventions and have competence under international law ?
How does the Council intend to follow up the findings of the current French investigation into the Bunia incident ?
Subject : Political responsibility for abuses that occur during EU military operations
Testimony has emerged in Sweden that the French military force involved in EU operation Artemis in Bunia , Congo , engaged in the torture and fake execution of a prisoner .
This incident is alleged to have taken place on 13 July 2003 and has been investigated by both the Swedish and French armed forces .
The Swedish evidence gave contradictory accounts and the French investigation came to the conclusion that no abuses had occurred , but the incident does raise a number of issues for the future .
Who should assume political responsibility for excesses committed by a Member State 's military force engaged in an EU operation abroad ?
If a Member State 's military force is found guilty of a war crime during an EU operation , is it possible to suspend that Member State from EU operations for a lengthy period in order to defend the good name and reputation of military forces from the EU Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , these are serious questions raised by Mrs Goudin and Mrs Dahl .
I can assure both them and your House that the operations of the European Union are carried out in compliance with the conventions protecting human rights and international law .
This principle is clearly specified in all planning documents approved by the Council and included in the individual instructions which are given to active forces .
This is what is known as the ' soldiers ' corps ' .
Where certain individuals deployed in foreign and defence operations go beyond their duties , the disciplinary and legal consequences fall within the competence of the Member States .
All Member States adhere to the conventions that protect human rights .
In the case referred to in this joint question , allow me to take off my President-in-Office of the Council hat to say this : for the sake of transparency , the French authorities , after contacting the Swedish authorities , carried out a thorough inquiry .
This inquiry was carried out for the French authorities by the Inspectorate for active forces and national defence .
This inquiry showed that the young man captured by French forces on 13 July 2003 , during Operation Artemis in the Democratic Republic of Congo , suffered neither torture nor cruel treatment .
Thus , the serious accusations levelled against the French and Swedish forces are unfounded .
( SV ) I should like to ask the following question : this young man has , as we know , disappeared .
How is it possible to prove that nothing has happened to him ?
( DA ) Madam President , I would like to follow up the question by asking for clarification as to whether , if there is doubt about whether a Member State complies with the international conventions in connection with an operation for the EU , it is possible for the Member State to be excluded from participating .
I think in some cases it could be necessary and quite important to be clear on that .
( FR ) Madam President , without going to extremes , I want to give a factual reply to the questions from Mrs Goudin and Mrs Dahl , and so I will give your House , as well as my hat , the information from the report on the inquiry carried out by the French Inspectorate for active forces and national defence .
For the House 's information - I am not obliged to deal with these questions as part of my functions , but I will do so - I will summarise for you the inquiry into the occurrences of 13 July 2003 in Chem-Chem camp in Bunia , in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This inquiry , carried out with the support and cooperation of the Swedish forces , shows that the young man captured by French forces on 13 July 2003 , during Operation Artemis in the Democratic Republic of Congo , suffered neither torture nor cruel treatment .
He was detained for several hours in the camp , then released .
The inquiry was ordered on 31 March 2008 by the head of the army , to complement the preliminary inquiries carried out by the Swedish and French authorities in their respective countries .
There was very good cooperation between these authorities and , as a result of the inquiries , it appears that the serious accusations levelled against the French and Swedish soldiers and the two colonels involved are unfounded .
To conclude , it is evident that the protection of human rights and the international conventions must be respected in every phase of foreign policy security and defence operations , from planning to the implementation phase , and this must be achieved , especially , by continuous training for the teams in this sphere .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should be interested to hear what you view the role of the UN to be as far as these issues are concerned .
Do you think that the UN will have a job to do in these areas ?
I am reassured by your comments - both with your French hat and the wider Council hat .
But would you not agree that this incident , and any such incidents like this , are very bad from the point of view of our EU operations and that we need to be very clear and very careful about how we handle any such reports so that we deal with them timely and that it does not cause a slur , if you like , on our good work ?
- ( FR ) Madam President , as for what Mrs McGuinness said , I share your opinion entirely .
It is evident that , whatever the foreign operations , whether pursued in the framework of European Security and Defence Policy or in a joint framework , they should obviously be announced and reported on .
Transparency must be absolutely vital .
I am in full agreement with Mrs McGuinness and this is why we need to develop everything to do with ' Military Erasmus ' .
I hope that the work of the next European Council , which will be held in December , can expand on the aspects relating to training and the exchange of best practice and experiences between the Member States in the framework of the European Security and Defence Policy .
In response to Mrs McGuinness , I think that this is an extremely important element , if we wish to develop a strategy for European security and presence on foreign soil .
You are quite right , Mrs McGuinness .
As for Mr Rübig 's question , this will be dealt with tomorrow morning in our debate on the Democratic Republic of Congo .
I believe that the UN 's role is indeed important .
The question is how its resources can be strengthened and complemented .
I see Mrs Dahl asking for the floor again .
I can only give you one supplementary question and that is it , I am afraid .
I am sorry , but that is it .
( Interjection from the floor )
I am not in a position to force exactly what you would like to hear , maybe .
The President-in-Office has answered , and I am afraid that has to be an end to it unless you address further correspondence .
Subject : Coordination of national social security systems
Will the Council say what progress has been made in the process of updating and simplifying European legislation on the coordination of national social security systems , the first stage of which was the adoption of Regulation ( EC ) No. 883 / 2004 , to enable EU citizens to move freely within Europe , whilst retaining their rights and social benefits ( health care , pensions , unemployment benefit ) ?
What stage has been reached in the adoption of an implementing regulation to replace Regulation ( EEC ) No. 574 / 722 , which will also contain provisions designed to strengthen cooperation between national agencies and improve methods of exchanging data ?
Madam President , to reply to Mrs Panayotopoulos , I would say to her that the Council fully shares her opinion on the need to reach an agreement , as soon as possible , on the proposed regulation setting out methods for applying Regulation No 883 / 2004 , which relates to the coordination of social security systems .
This means establishing the conditions for the adoption of this regulation in order to complete , by May 2009 if possible , the reform of the coordination of social security systems .
This proposed regulation , presented by the Commission in January 2006 , has since , given the breadth and highly technical nature of its provisions , been subject to chapter-by-chapter examination under the successive Presidencies .
Thanks to the sustained efforts of the preceding Presidencies , partial general approaches have been adopted .
This process was completed last month under the French Presidency with the adoption of the partial general approaches on the two remaining chapters , relating to benefits for accidents at work and occupational illnesses and also death benefits .
Meanwhile , Parliament gave its opinion last July at first reading .
The Council welcomes the broad convergence of views with Parliament .
It sees in this the fruits of some highly constructive cooperation , initiated between the two institutions from the very beginning of the examination of this text .
The adoption of a common position on the draft regulation is , for the French Presidency , one of the major steps towards increasing personal mobility within the Union .
This is why the Presidency will do whatever it can to have this common position adopted at the Council meeting on 15 December , so that Parliament can adopt it in its part-session next January .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council about the new Commission proposal 2008 / 414 on the rights of patients to cross-border services .
What is the French Presidency 's position on this new proposal ?
( FR ) Madam President , it is clear to the French Presidency that we must support this proposal from the Commission .
In practical terms , it facilitates the procedures for insured persons , speeds up the response and processing times for cross-border situations by institutions in the various social security spheres , such as accidents at work , occupational illnesses and invalidity .
We need to make progress to adopt rules on this issue .
As you know , the French Presidency asked Alain Lamasssoure , whom you know , a question about ways of overcoming the obstacles to cross-border mobility .
Harmonisation in the social security sphere is one of the responses .
An appropriate balance has to be found between maintaining national social security traditions , which are important in each of our Member States , and making the changes which are vital for facilitating cross-border mobility .
In this framework , we support the proposal you mentioned and the Presidency , under the aegis of Xavier Bertrand , is making all possible efforts to achieve its adoption .
( DE ) I believe that one of the biggest problems that we have is double taxation within Europe , which , in the area of social security in particular , unexpectedly leads to additional tax burdens .
I would be interested to know whether an initiative from the French Presidency of the Council is to be expected .
With electronic transfer of payments and the ease of electronic reimbursement , surely it is not beyond the collective competence and wit of European institutions to put the technology in place to allow the essential single market right of freedom of movement or cross-border mobility of all our citizens - including the disabled and old age pensioners and others - or is it the fact that there is no collective will to do so ?
Is any country standing in the way of a collective resolution to this problem ?
( FR ) Madam President , I wish to reply to Mr Rübig and Mrs Doyle , as these are questions which have already caught my attention .
Firstly , I think that Mrs Doyle is correct .
All technologies , and electronic technologies are especially useful here , should be used to facilitate the processing of patient files .
Secondly , Mrs Doyle , we are in favour of a collective solution , providing that , in the cause of mobility , we do not threaten each country 's social security traditions .
Thirdly , I agree with Mr Rübig .
It has been seen that there are legal issues relating to contribution payment problems , relating to double taxation .
Mr Rübig is correct .
To give you my own view , having considered these problems closely only last week , as we come from border countries , Mr Rübig , I think that national administrations are not always properly trained , confident or sufficiently motivated to solve this type of problem .
This seems to me , to reply to Mrs Doyle , the real difficulty .
That is why a collective Community approach is required .
The Commission , really , has to push hard .
The Presidency is pushing this work forward too , because there is administrative , bureaucratic and cultural reluctance in each of our Member States .
Now , the question of cross-border mobility is a real issue for European integration , for developing a new European generation and simply for allowing our citizens to see the practical advantages of the European Union .
There are far too many administrative obstacles to these cross-border movements , especially in the social and fiscal spheres .
That is a real issue .
I believe that this also requires in-depth reforms and coordination between the Community institutions , especially the Commission , and the national administrations .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.05 and resumed at 21.00 )

Publication and translation obligations of certain types of companies ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs P-N . Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 68 / 151 / EEC and 89 / 666 / EC as regards publication and translation obligations of certain types of companies - C6-0171 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this report is part of the simplification package on company law .
It is very important that in the European Union we try to simplify the environment for companies to flourish and to create growth for the European economy .
The aim is to diminish administrative burdens as regards publication and translation obligations of certain types of companies .
The proposal is part of the wide-ranging administrative burden reduction exercise ; it would free up and redirect business resources and thus enhance the competitiveness of European economies .
Nowadays , under the First Company Law Directive , companies need to publish certain information in the national gazettes that has to be entered into the Member States ' commercial registers .
In most cases , publication in the national gazette entails additional costs for the companies without providing any real added value .
The objective of this proposal is therefore to remove any additional publication requirements in national law that cause additional costs to the companies .
Anyhow , the Commission leaves flexibility for Member States concerning these additional publication requirements .
It is still possible for Member States to have additional requirements , but these should be covered by the single fee proposed for the new electronic platform .
Member States should all have electronic platforms containing the full information and providing access to this information in the companies ' electronic file in the register .
This would be a cost-effective and easily accessible way of providing all the necessary information regarding the companies .
Some Member States already have these electronic registers and databases , but others do not have this kind of digital database .
The most important thing is to introduce the single fee set by the Member States that covers all the costs related to the publication and administration requirements .
This single fee should also cover any additional national requirements for the publication of information in local and regional newspapers as well .
However , the Committee on Legal Affairs also wanted to introduce some flexibility regarding these costs and we now say that , if there are well-founded reasons , it would be possible for Member States to have additional fees .
Regarding the 11th Company Law Directive , this proposal deals with the translation requirements for documents to be filed in the registers of company branches .
When registering a branch , companies also have to file certain information in the register of the company branch .
This often leads to significant additional costs for companies as they not only have to ensure the translation of certain documents into the language of the Member States where the branch is situated , but also have to comply with sometimes excessive requirements for certification and / or notarisation of that translation .
So now we are trying to ease translation obligations by having this certification and authorisation abolished .
The objective is to reduce the costs for translation and certification to the minimum .
This also leads to benefits for companies by achieving a certain reduction in costs while ensuring the reliability of the translations .
I agree with the Commission proposal and tried to keep my wording as close to the Commission proposal as possible .
However , it was not possible to reach a consensus based on the Commission proposal here in Parliament .
In the report we introduced some amendments to clarify the practical implementation of the provisions relating to publication costs and translation provisions , and we also introduced some technical amendments in order to ensure correct cross-referencing with the Second Company Law Directive .
The Committee on Legal Affairs introduced three compromise amendments tabled by several colleagues to the effect that these additional publication requirements may be permitted if they are well-grounded , but we put them into recitals - they are not in the articles .
I think it is very important that there is a recommendation in the recitals for the Member States to use this flexibility , but we do not call on them to do so .
If the Member State feels that its companies really need to have this publication in the national gazette - and this is really something that Member States wants - they can do that , but we have not put any call to this effect into the articles .
The second issue is that I , personally , tried to introduce a transition period , which I still think would be a very good way forward .
During the transition period these publication requirements would be there , but once the transition period is over we would have only the electronic database .
I think this kind of proposal for a transition period would also be in line with the issue of internet penetration , namely that some Member States have better internet penetration than others ; maybe after the transition period we could then make sure that there is enough distribution of information in all Member States .
In this way we could take into account the fact that internet penetration in all the Member States is not at the same level .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work on this file , which has turned out to be more complicated than expected .
We are taking our commitment to reduce regulatory burden on companies very seriously and are grateful for Parliament 's continued encouragement in this regard .
However , it is difficult not to be disappointed with some of the proposed amendments to the First Company Law Directive .
Let me recall that the European Parliament , in its resolution of 12 December 2007 on the Commission Work Programme 2008 , welcomed the Commission 's determination to reach the goal of a 25 % reduction in administrative burdens on undertakings at EU and national levels by 2012 .
Parliament stated that it would regard this as a key priority for the coming months , in particular as regards SMEs , and as an essential contribution to reaching the Lisbon targets .
Parliament therefore underlined that it would examine legislative proposals in this light .
Furthermore , in its resolution of 21 May 2008 on a simplified business environment , Parliament supported this specific proposal for modifications to the First Company Law Directive , agreeing that it should be easier for companies to publish statutory information .
In particular , Parliament strongly supported the use of new technology .
However , the Legal Affairs Committee 's report that is now on the table completely undermines the objective of the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission 's impact assessment estimated the reduction potential at about EUR 600 million per year .
Under the draft report , Member States could not only continue to impose all current administrative burdens on companies , but add new ones .
So , whereas the Commission proposal is based on the idea that the new publication tool of an electronic platform should replace the current cumbersome publication methods , the draft report would , instead of reducing administrative burdens , add new ones .
The objective of the Commission 's proposal has been supported by an overwhelming majority of stakeholders .
It was also supported by a very large majority of Member States in the discussions in the Council that have taken place so far .
But adopting the directive in the form currently proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs would risk jeopardising the credibility of the entire administrative burden reduction exercise .
To the extent that the objective of the Committee on Legal Affairs amendment is to secure the financing of newspapers that currently depend on the fees for company publications , this objective can in principle be shared by the Commission .
However , other ways for this financing have to be found .
It cannot be imposed on the companies by obliging them to comply with publication obligations that do not provide any significant added value in today 's technological environment .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( EL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I should like to convey our opinion to you .
We endorse to a large extent the root cause of this Commission proposal , which is well structured and , of course , is designed to minimise administrative burdens .
We think that , alongside translation , the simplification of procedures and the recognition of translations by other certified translators from another Member State is absolutely justified and fully endorse this approach .
Now I come to the question of publication .
Our committee believes - as the Committee on Legal Affairs , in my opinion quite rightly , believes - that , in addition to companies , there are also citizens who also have the right to know .
Unfortunately , Commissioner , citizens do not have the same access to electronic media to which your initial proposal directed them .
We live in a pluralistic Europe , with different models and different values .
You , as a Commissioner from Ireland , know that the outcome of the referendum in your country , the perception of many of your fellow countryman about one model for all of Europe , cost us dearly .
We do not therefore want to introduce this model in Europe , knowing full well that in my country , in my region , access to the Internet is restricted .
Why should we therefore deprive these people , these European citizens , of the right to learn about things which concern them via other traditional channels ?
I therefore consider , Commissioner , as do the Committee on Economic Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs , that the electronic platform must be compulsory and quite rightly so .
However , it must not be the only platform .
We must allow all European citizens to access information .
We do not want a situation in which someone in a region of Europe has to find out what is going to happen in his region on a BlackBerry , because where I live many people do not have a BlackBerry .
I therefore consider that , as the representative of the Commission , and I believe that we should send the Council the same message , you must take serious account of the position which we expressed unanimously in the Committee on Legal Affairs and by a large majority in the Committee on Economic Affairs .
May I say that , if you are thinking about ignoring it , I would advise you to think again , because it is only through productive democratic dialogue that we can find mutually acceptable solutions for the benefit of the many , not just the few .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the European Council in March 2008 ordered new , fast-track legislative initiatives to be taken in order to improve the business environment for companies in the Union by reducing administrative obligations and costs .
In my opinion , the Commission 's proposal for a directive which we are debating contributes little to the objective set .
The core problem for companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , is that objective conditions are needed for improving the bureaucratic , legislative and fiscal environment in general and we expect an even more substantial contribution on the part of the Commission in this direction .
In this particular instance , the main purpose of publishing companies ' annual accounts and other financial statements is to apply the principle of transparency and publicity in commercial activities .
However , the low level of penetration of the Internet in a significant number of Member States of the Union does not constitute an adequate guarantee .
Apart from that , having compulsory records in purely electronic format would also mean the loss of thousands of specialist jobs in traditional printed media .
Furthermore , the press is an essential component of the principle of the transparency and democratic life of the Union , the contribution of which to the multilingualism and diversity of the European Union is beyond question .
I consider that the safety valve of adopting a single fee and of maintaining the parallel facility to publish in the printed media , in conjunction with the introduction of an electronic register , as formulated in the consensus reached and voted by all - I repeat all - wings of the Committee on Legal Affairs , is the balanced and rational solution needed .
In closing , allow me to emphasise that what is required of the European Parliament and what it has a duty to provide is productive consent to Community lawmaking whilst retaining the full independence of its legislative will .
It is the will of the Committee on Legal Affairs , as already formulated , that plenary adopt the report by Mrs Kauppi , whom I congratulate on her work .
In post scriptum to you , Commissioner , I do not know if the consensus proposal by the Committee on Legal Affairs comes as a disappointment to you , but I should like to say to you and I honestly hope that , as soon as the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , the culture of cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament will - and must - change .
That is what we are waiting for now ; that is what the democratically elected European Parliament is waiting for .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , firstly I shall say something about the procedure .
It is a pity that we did not discuss it this morning , Commissioner , when we were sitting together , because I was a bit surprised that you are so harsh now in your speech to Parliament .
On the procedure , I am particularly harsh on the way that the French presidency has dealt with our proposals , in not meeting any requirements to negotiate or try to have a dialogue on a possible compromise .
It is the same for the Commission .
With these types of issues it is normal to try to get together and find a solution that meets the concerns of the different parties .
I regret that this has happened , and I hope that in the time between the plenary and the vote in committee there will be an opportunity to do that .
On the content , I think we do not differ so much .
I am also very much committed to relief of administrative burdens .
I am always pushing for the XBRL system in accounting and this type of electronic platform .
I think we all agree that it is necessary , precisely because in some Member States the electronic society is not yet completely in place .
It is necessary to have this temporary transitional solution so Member States still have the option of using this type of paper registration .
This is really a temporary problem and there could be a pragmatic solution .
I heard this week that it is only 20 years since e-mail was first used and since the first internet connection , so in 10 to 20 years ' time it will be completely normal for everything to be processed electronically .
It is only a very temporary problem that we are facing and we should not make a big issue of it .
We should try to find a reasonable , pragmatic solution in the spirit of what you are always telling us you want also .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I first want to thank our colleague , Piia-Noora Kauppi , for her excellent report and for her efforts to allow a reasonable solution to be found to the various issues , especially that of the platform .
The proposed directive is part of the wider action undertaken to reduce the administrative burden on companies , to reduce the restrictions upon them and increase their competitiveness .
We , of course , actively support this objective which will benefit SMEs .
We approve the creation of an electronic platform containing all information and the principle of a single fee to cover all of the costs related to the necessary publications .
It is appropriate , however , to provide the best possible information and to allow continuation of the usual publication methods , which are still needed , especially in the printed press .
The text proposed by the rapporteur after negotiations , and unanimously adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs , will allow the Member States to provide for the retention of the usual publication methods , as their cost is included in the single publication fee .
We have therefore , Commissioner , complied with the spirit of the proposal by making the platform a requirement and by maintaining the principle of a single fee .
We have , however , taken account of the reality in various countries without the IT infrastructure that some other countries have , and which have information habits that should not be ignored .
Commissioner , you know that the citizens ' views have to be taken into account and that Europe must not appear to be a source of new restrictions or difficulties .
This is why we are looking for the flexibility to take into account the realities of the different Member States , whilst retaining an economical system .
You harshly said , Commissioner , that the Committee on Legal Affairs ' proposal undermines the Commission 's position .
I do not think this is accurate , nor is it accurate to say that the Committee on Legal Affairs ' proposal introduces new formalities .
On the contrary , it is agreed that these are existing formalities which will be retained and we obviously reject the introduction of new formalities .
What is needed , Commissioner , I believe , is for Europe to show it is capable of reducing bureaucracy and administrative burdens , whilst respecting national identities .
( ES ) Mr President , I want to thank the Commission for having presented this proposal .
I believe it is positive and will help us to reduce unnecessary administrative burdens .
As previous speakers have said , this Parliament has a duty to bring down to earth the Commission 's very generous and very altruistic proposals .
The reality is that we have 27 countries with different legal systems and very different languages which means that , in each country , we must adapt to the realities of that country , including on the issue of languages .
However , as mentioned just now by Mr Gauzès and also by previous speakers , it is vital that the recognition of these national specificities does not lead to increased costs , that fees are uniform and that governments , if necessary , shoulder this additional cost .
However , there is also another issue : the issue of translations .
In the European Union we do not have a common language .
Different languages are spoken in all the 27 countries , and even within some of these countries , such as the Commissioner 's .
We have to live with this .
Also , in legal terms , we are faced with a reality in which legal documents differ .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has , for example , proposed amendments on the certification of documents , together with the certification of translations .
At this moment in time , the Committee on Legal Affairs is preparing a report on the recognition of certified documents in various European Union countries , which should complement this report .
Finally , I believe that the Commission has done well in presenting this proposal .
The rapporteur has done a magnificent job and we have all tried to develop a proposal for a legislative text that can be recognised throughout the Union , thus guaranteeing rights and which is based on the reality of a Union that is still being constructed , that has different national legal systems and that has different levels of access to electronic communications .
( FR ) Mr President , firstly I wish to congratulate Mrs Kauppi , the rapporteur , on her excellent work as , thanks to her , the Committee on Legal Affairs has found a compromise which was , I recall , Commissioner , adopted unanimously .
This is , then , a clear signal .
It will reconcile the need of companies , especially SMEs , for administrative simplicity and the citizen 's right to information , whilst leaving Member States the option of retaining publication requirements , if they so wish .
I am convinced that the European Parliament will follow the lead from the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The 27 Member States have their traditions .
Some advocate the Internet exclusively .
Others still use more traditional paper methods of communication .
These traditions have to be respected .
Let us not forget that 50 % of Europe 's citizens have no Internet access .
If the information were only available on a single electronic platform , those unable to access the Internet , or who prefer to use paper , would be unable to receive information about companies in their region .
I believe that the European Parliament well understands that simply abolishing the publication of judicial and legal announcements in regional newspapers , for example , would have disastrous consequences .
As a result , the Member States must be able to organise the distribution of information via complementary channels , under specific conditions .
Commissioner , this is not an ideological debate .
Do you not think , in the current circumstances , that you have other things to do instead of hindering something which is working well in the Member States ?
In seeking always to simplify , there is sometimes the risk of making things more complicated .
Reducing costs ?
Yes , but at what price ?
Easing the restrictions to increase competitiveness ?
Yes , but what happens to competitiveness when the simplification risks severely damaging the economy of an entire sector ?
There is a strong desire for the Commission to take notice of the fact that we support solutions which will allow the printed press to overcome the difficulties it currently faces .
Commissioner , you should not be impervious to the traditions of the Member States .
By acting in this way , you are responsible for risking redundancies for a certain number of journalists and a lack of information for a large part of the population .
We are looking for a balanced directive incorporating the electronic platform and the single fee .
We are convinced that we have achieved this solution , and you must respect the European Parliament 's vote .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament has long been raising the issue of unnecessary and disproportionately high administration costs imposed on European enterprises .
These costs not only make doing business more difficult , but represent a barrier to meeting the challenges of today 's highly competitive world economy .
It is therefore pleasing that the Commission has finally turned its attention to this issue , proposing to apply the fast-track procedure to the amendment of the 1st and 11th Company Law Directives , which will contribute to a faster improvement of European enterprises ' business environment .
In the case of the 1st Directive , the elimination from national law of all additional disclosure requirements which increase enterprise costs seems very appropriate indeed .
The proposed electronic platform with full information about companies will provide an economical and easily accessible solution , as will the single payment covering all costs , whether administrative or associated with disclosure requirements .
The proposal relating to the 11th Company Law Directive concerns the translation and certification of documents to be entered into the commercial register of a branch of a company established in a different Member State .
The mutual recognition of translations proposed by the Commission as a way of reducing the administrative burden will undoubtedly contribute to reducing the costs borne by companies , while ensuring the reliability of the translations .
Finally , may I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Kauppi , on the excellent report .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to use the privilege of being the last speaker to make a political comment and two technical comments on the directive which we are debating .
My political comment is that today we are witnessing a rare moment in the European Parliament : complete unanimity in all wings of the House , from the right wing to the left wing , on the direction in which Parliament wishes to take a specific legislative initiative .
Numerous members have said and I too wish to emphasise the fact that this is a rare occurrence and must of necessity be taken into account in the Commission 's final decision .
We are not undermining the Commission 's proposal .
We are trying to modernise it and make it more human , more logical and more practical .
That is my political comment .
I have two brief technical comments : on the question of publication , Members have said and I too shall add that it is absolutely fair and absolutely right for the Member States in which access to the Internet is severely limited to be given the facility , alongside the general rule of electronic publication , of publication in the press for obvious social and financial reasons .
I should like to comment briefly on the question of translation , with which there is no problem whatsoever .
The facility for there to be just one recognised translation gives us a practical solution .
The question of translation raised here is not a question of language , it is not a question of transparency , it is not a question of style .
It is a practical question which can be very simply resolved by recognising the translation .
There is a distinction , therefore , between the political issues and the technical issues .
We are not undermining the proposal , we are improving it .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me begin by saying that if Ieke van den Burg had raised this issue this morning , I gladly would have dealt with it .
I had asked you whether there were any other issues you would like to raise and , if you had , I would have spoken to you about it .
If you had raised any issue at all - including the weather in Ireland - I would have discussed that with you as well .
I have no problem doing that .
I do not have any problem at all as to what the European Parliament decides , because that is your job and that is what you must do .
But the background to this particular proposal has to be kept in mind and , since I appreciate your position , I would ask you to appreciate mine .
This particular proposal was put forward in the context of reducing the administrative burden on small companies .
It was part of the simplification of the business environment .
There are estimates of what this proposal would achieve : reducing the cost annually by EUR 600 million .
So the reason for putting forward this proposal was to reduce administrative costs for small business .
As I pointed out in my earlier remarks , the whole project of reducing costs has been welcomed by the European Parliament in various resolutions .
So this is the context in which this was put forward .
With the idea of bringing down administrative costs and simplification for smaller business we came up with this particular proposal .
You can hardly expect me then to accept amendments by the European Parliament that go in totally the opposite direction by not reducing administrative costs but increasing them .
If the European Parliament feels that , in this particular instance , the balance of advantages weighs further in keeping this the way they want , so be it .
That is a perfectly legitimate viewpoint .
But this cannot be reconciled with the original objective which you brought forward , which was to reduce costs .
If Parliament and others feel that for all the reasons you have outlined it should be kept like this , you can hardly expect me to stand up and agree with you that this is going to reduce administrative costs when it is going to do the opposite - in fact it is going to add to costs rather than reduce them .
The amendments tabled by the two European Parliament committees mean that the only change that Member States would have to implement following the adoption of this directive would make the use of an electronic platform mandatory .
No reduction in the current administrative burden would be achieved by the savings which we expected from our original proposal , which have been assessed , as I said , in the impact statement , at around EUR 600 million per annum .
So adopting a directive that leads to no reduction but only to cosmetic changes would definitely give a bad signal concerning the overall reduction of the administrative burden that we have been talking about .
So I would ask Members of the European Parliament to respect my position also .
If the view of Parliament seems to follow that particular line - and there will be a vote on it tomorrow - that is your view and you are fully entitled to that position .
I have no difficulty with it .
But you have to respect my position in that I can hardly accept amendments that go in the opposite direction to the original purpose of bringing this forward in the first instance .
We should not fall out about it , but I will not be in a position to turn logic on its head and say that what the European Parliament is doing is all right , because it is increasing administrative costs rather than reducing them .
I can listen to the reasons you put forward for keeping it as it is - and perhaps there is some validity in them - but that is not what we started off doing ; that is not the reason why we brought forward this particular proposal .
So , c 'est la vie !
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to make a comment about the procedure .
Mrs van den Burg already said that the French presidency has not behaved very well with this dossier .
We have tried to propose several possibilities for trialogue meetings to discuss possible compromises .
Unfortunately the French presidency is unwilling to come to these meetings .
They are unwilling to organise meetings in the Council working group in order to discuss the way forward .
Also they are not present here today to discuss this very important matter .
The view of the Committee on Legal Affairs gives a lot of flexibility for the Member States .
It gives much more flexibility than my personal view .
However , the view of the Committee on Legal Affairs is going as far as we can possibly go .
This is the only proposal on the table in Parliament at the moment .
My opinion is that if the Council is not able to accept Parliament 's view , i.e. the view of the Committee on Legal Affairs - which is to be voted on tomorrow - as we have requested them to do , then we have to go to second reading .
We cannot allow Council to play us .
If this is not accepted in the form voted on tomorrow by Parliament , we will certainly have a delay in the process .
Perhaps we will not have this project ready before the elections and there is a risk perhaps that the Commission will withdraw the proposal .
I think that it would be very disappointing if Council does not have a qualified majority behind it and does not come up with proposals on how to reach a compromise .
We would be willing to discuss compromises .
I would personally be very happy if the Council would propose something in the trialogue meeting on which we could then base the compromise , but it is hiding and not coming to meetings and it is not organising trialogues .
It leaves us in a very difficult situation .
That is why I am upset about the discussions about the procedure .
I hope that the Commission does not withdraw the proposal .
I hope there will still be an opportunity to have a compromise that would suit all the Member States and also the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
European statistics ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr A. Schwab , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European Statistics - C6-0346 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I am sorry to see Commissioner McCreevy leaving the Chamber as with this dossier he could have experienced the conclusion of a very successful and relatively lengthy procedure with the European Parliament .
This experience is now reserved for you , Commissioner Almunia .
I am pleased that today we can bring a successful , lengthy process to its conclusion at first reading , with a large degree of consensus .
To begin with , I would also - in contrast to the previous dossier - like to thank the Slovenian and French Presidencies of the Council for the sustained and sometimes difficult negotiations that you have conducted in order to reach a compromise .
This dossier also involves reducing the administrative burden with regard to statistics within the European Union , as well as for companies at local level .
Therefore I believe that we can put this report in the context of reducing bureaucracy .
In Germany , for example , the proportion of costs for official statistics is , according to calculations by the Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung ( German Institute for Economic Research ) , less than 10 % of total bureaucratic costs when analysing the entire economy .
This is approximately EUR 230 million .
If we , as the European Union , really can take this situation in hand , I believe that we will make an important step towards less bureaucracy by reducing statistics-based obligations .
Thank you , Commissioner Almunia , for your proposal .
Now I would like to discuss the new regulation on European statistics specifically .
The regulation on European statistics represents the legal structure for producing statistics at European level and revises the existing basic legal framework for producing statistics at European level .
Even though the shadow rapporteurs from the other Groups are not present this evening , I would still like to take this opportunity to thank you for the constructive cooperation .
The discussions were not easy but they proved successful in the end .
The proposal is part of a whole series of regulations which the Commission has adopted in the current legislative term in connection with producing and distributing statistics and which were debated in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We will make the following changes to the contents of this regulation proposal .
We will redefine the European statistical system and fix its activities within Community law .
We will define the role of the national statistical offices within the European statistical system , while at the same time ensuring that the subsidiarity principle continues to be fully applied in the Member States , as is prescribed , and we will strive for reference to the European Statistics Code of Practice and its entrenchment in Community law .
In this respect , a response is being made to the difficult situation concerning statistics after the introduction of the euro in some of the Member States of the European Union .
Finally , the proposal sets up two different bodies - an ESS Partnership Group and an ESS Committee - which together replace the former Statistical Programme Committee .
The clear-cut committee vote and a successful trialogue prove that coherent legislation has been achieved .
In the minutes that remain , I would like to present this legislative project once again in connection with two important issues .
We have been able to ensure that , in the future , this regulation will enable Eurostat to gain faster , unrestricted access to all the statistical data which is required to collect important economic criteria .
In this way , we will provide a bit more transparency for statistics at European level and therefore make the euro area that bit more competitive .
This is good news , particularly in the light of the financial crisis and the difficult discussions concerning the statistical system .
Secondly , I believe that it is very important that this report reinforces the scientific independence of statistics even more .
This is a positive signal to the staff working in this sector .
Finally , I am grateful that a compromise with all the Member States has been achieved .
I know - even though the Council 's benches are empty this evening - that it was not easy for many people , but I believe that with this regulation proposal we are able to satisfy all those involved and that we can be happy with the regulation .
I would like to thank you for listening and for the successful cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , official statistics undoubtedly play a fundamental role in today 's society .
Institutions , policy makers , economic operators , markets and individuals rely heavily on statistics to describe as accurately as possible the developments in economic , social , environmental , cultural and other spheres .
Statistical information underpins transparency and openness of policy decisions , and official statistics therefore represent a public good providing a basis for the smooth functioning of democracy .
At European level , European Statistics are increasingly important for the development , implementation , monitoring and evaluation of policies decided here , in this Parliament , and in the Council , and that we propose from the Commission .
The objective of the Commission proposal being debated today is to revise the basic legal framework governing the production of statistics at European level .
I want to welcome the rigorous work carried out in a constructive spirit by this Parliament , and in particular by Mr Schwab as rapporteur and by Mrs Ferreira - who is not here today , but is represented by Mrs van den Burg - and Mrs Starkevičiūtė , who worked in cooperation with Eurostat and the Commission to arrive at this debate .
This revision is led by changes in society and the need to more clearly define the role of the European Statistical System ( ESS ) .
The previous Regulation on this subject dates from 1997 and , since then , many things have changed which have necessitated this revision .
This revision will give a new impetus to the established cooperation between the national statistical institutes of our 27 Member States and Eurostat and will undoubtedly lay down the foundation to address the statistical challenges of the future .
Furthermore , this revision is the culmination of a series of measures undertaken by the Commission since 2005 , with the support of this Parliament and the Council , to modernise the governance of the European Statistical System .
In this process , the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board and the European Statistical Advisory Committee have been set up and will shortly begin work .
In this respect , as proposed by the new regulation , in order to enhance trust in European Statistics , the statistical authorities must enjoy professional independence and ensure impartiality and high quality in the production of European Statistics , in accordance with the principles laid down in the European Statistics Code of Practice endorsed by the Commission in its Recommendation on the independence , integrity and accountability of national and Community statistical authorities .
I should also mention , among the principles having guided the Commission proposal and set out in Mr Schwab 's report , the objective that the proposed improved regulatory environment for European Statistics should respond to the need to minimise the response burdens on businesses and contribute to the more general objective of a reduction of administrative burdens arising at European level .
I must conclude , Mr President , by once again thanking the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , and the whole of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their excellent work aimed at giving the Union a more solid and reliable statistical structure which will , in a context of total security , prove extraordinary useful in these times of crisis in which the production of statistics , particularly statistics on public accounts , will play an even more crucial role .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , there are times when politicians might like to influence statistics - particularly at the moment .
If the statistics on the economy are so bad , you might wish to take them away and dream that it is different and that this does not influence the spirit of consumers etc .
I fully agree with what everyone says about this report : that decent , true and fair statistics are an important instrument for politics and that this is an important reason to have independent statistical bodies to present these statistics .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Commission on the proposals on this regulation .
We had good cooperation with the Council to reach compromises on what we have stated in this document .
It is important to have these independent bodies to have a clear contact point for the Commission in the Member States and for this European system of statistics to include the statistics code of practice , which has been elaborated by the experts , into European legislation .
I think this is a good achievement and I hope that it will really work and help us to overcome the bad statistics and really try to face the recession that is coming and get clearer measures to counter it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) We are considering a very important document , which should help reform the European Statistical System .
I would like to point out , as my colleagues did , that the European Parliament rapporteur , the Working Group on Statistical Reform and experts from the Council , the Presidency and the Commission were very thorough in their preparation of this document .
It is a splendid example of our joint efforts .
In the last few days , weighed down by various problems , perhaps we have sometimes blamed each other , but if we all work together , we can achieve really good results .
The ALDE Group supports the proposal presented and hopes that it will lay out our regulations in the area of statistics .
Above all , statistics must be reliable , protected from the influence of various interest groups .
Today doubts do still occasionally arise , especially as regards the quality of state financial statistics .
When talking about financial market statistics , there are problems of confidentiality and here we also have to work with the European Central Bank .
The quality of statistical data depends not only on the quality of work done by specialised institutions , but also on the methods used and we would like academic institutions to play a more active role in the preparation of these .
The gathering of statistical data must be organised more effectively using data from existing state registers , applying generalised methods and thereby reducing the administrative burden of statistical reports on business .
There are certainly many untapped reserves in this area .
Economic and social development is dynamic in today 's world , therefore statistical data should be presented in a more effective manner , so that decisions can be taken more quickly .
Let us hope that statistical reform will also help solve this problem .
The European Statistical Programme is financed by the European Union budget .
I would like to hope that the proposals presented will help these programmes to be better coordinated , which will allow Community capital to be used more effectively .
Mr President , I simply want to reiterate my thanks to the rapporteur and the Members who have just spoken for their excellent work .
As said by Mrs Starkevičiūtė , working together produces results like these which are positive for everyone .
What I hope , as do we all , is that , through these excellent statistics , we will shortly be able to offer our citizens good news on the economic situation .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks for the constructive comments at the end , and above all for the constructive cooperation .
I do not want to repeat anything that has already been said .
Therefore I would like to mention two items that , in my opinion , should be thought through as a follow-up to the discussion on this report .
Firstly , the fact is that we have been dealing with Article 285 of the EU Treaty , which discusses the scientific independence of the statistical authorities .
In this report we have now also placed a strong emphasis on professional independence as we have discovered that there have been difficulties in this regard in the past .
It may also have to be enshrined appropriately in primary law at some point , to ensure long-term clarity .
However , I would expressly like to add that , with regard to German law , this does not mean that there can be independence with respect to professional supervisory regulations .
Secondly , this report places setting priorities for producing statistical data and recording it very much in the foreground .
Mrs Starkevičiūthas also pointed this out .
Commissioner Almunia , I hope that by setting these priorities we can also manage to reduce the statistical burden for medium-sized companies in the medium term , as we will be able to search for data which we actually need for our statistics in an even more targeted way .
With this in mind , thank you very much .
I hope that the vote is completed quickly tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
A facility providing financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments - Financial support to Member States ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate :
on the report by Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 332 / 2002 establishing a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments - C6-0389 / 2008 - ;
the Commission statement on financial support to Member States .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , behind this obscure title , each person is assessing the importance of the discussion we are holding this evening following Hungary 's request for financing , which was first made to the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
The European Union has looked at the issue to verify the conditions under which it could give its support to one of the Member States .
It is true that there was a discussion amongst the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs as to why Hungary first approached the IMF .
That is a question for Hungary as a country , as a member of the European Union of some years standing , and also for the institutions of the European Union in the sense that , manifestly , at this stage , we have been unable sufficiently to develop this climate of confidence , this climate of solidarity , this climate of cooperation to allow a country like Hungary , in its current difficult situation , to consider that its first circle of solidarity , its first circle of cooperation , should be the European Union .
I believe , finally , that the plan implemented for a balance of payments assistance facility , on the basis of Article 119 , achieved on the initiative of the Commission and Mr Almunia , whom I thank , will allow an appropriate solution to be found jointly with the IMF .
Evidently , we all think now that , unfortunately , Hungary 's situation is not an isolated case , and we must in some way consolidate the cushion which will allow the European Union to meet such requests .
In the resolution that we adopted in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and that I hope will be supported by plenary tomorrow , we ask the Commission to examine how and whether the banks of some Member States of the Union have helped to aggravate this situation .
I believe that this is important information for the European Parliament to have in the coming debate , and which , doubtless , Jacques de Larosière 's group will examine thereafter .
We have also said that we think , essentially , that the Council 's proposal was to raise the level of the facilities to a given threshold , which we have accepted , believing that this , perhaps , will not be the last discussion we will have with the Commission .
At this stage , we understand that this is the basis for agreement in the negotiations with the Council and , therefore , we accept this situation .
In the future , we hope that the European Commission , Council and Parliament will all regularly approve these amounts , because , in 2002 , when the European Parliament voted on the Regulation we are now amending , we asked for a regular update to be organised .
Evidently , and unfortunately , I have to say that we were right .
We are now therefore asking you for it again , Commissioner , and I believe it is reasonable to ask that it be carried out in that manner .
Finally , in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I asked for the tools and processes of Article 100 of the Treaty to enable us to act to support some Member States more widely , and not just on balance of payments problems .
Unfortunately , I was not supported by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in this matter , but I am using my position as rapporteur to urge the Commission to examine this mechanism which the Treaty offers us and which , to date , we have failed fully to exploit .
Mr President , Mrs Berès , ladies and gentlemen , when the founding fathers of the European Union drafted the Treaty of Rome , they had the foresight to include , in one of its articles , a mechanism to help Member States whose balance of payments was seriously threatened .
That foresight in that article of the Treaty of Rome has been passed on through successive treaty reforms and is now in Article 119 of the current Treaty .
After many years of non-use , this legal basis has now been used by the Commission to assist a Member State which needed urgent help , namely Hungary .
This article of the Treaty was developed in a 2002 Regulation which is what we have used in the case of Hungary and which is what we are now proposing to amend with regard to the maximum ceiling of the amounts that can be made available to help Member States facing this kind of difficulty .
Yesterday we debated in this House the ten years of Economic and Monetary Union .
This afternoon we have debated the economic situation .
Yesterday and again today we have discussed the problems caused by this situation and , unfortunately , there are some EU Member States which are outside the euro area and whose macroeconomic and financial imbalances are putting them in a particularly vulnerable position , given market pressures .
In the case of Hungary and in light of these difficulties , at some point the Hungarian authorities contacted the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
Immediately after establishing contact with the IMF , they contacted the European Commission .
As I have said to the Hungarian authorities , this was not the right procedure for a Member State .
The logical procedure is firstly to contact the European authorities and then , if necessary - and in the case of Hungary , it undoubtedly was - to jointly contact the IMF .
I must say to you all that the IMF and its Managing Director , Mr Strauss-Kahn , have proved to be absolutely open to this cooperation between the IMF and the European Commission , the European authorities and the EU Member States which are members of the euro area and need to access the facilities provided by the IMF .
In the case of Hungary , we have acted in cooperation .
Although the procedure was not started correctly , the end result has been right as we have acted in cooperation .
The European Union is providing Hungary with EUR 6 500 million within a global aid package worth EUR 20 000 million .
This same approach , but in this case using the right procedure of firstly contacting the European authorities and then jointly contacting the IMF , is now being used in the case of another country .
Unfortunately , the situation is proving so difficult that this may not be the last case , or at least we should be prepared for there to be other cases , other Member States which need this type of help .
That is why , at the same time as we presented the Council with the proposal to help Hungary , by using Article 119 of the Treaty and the 2002 Regulation , we also presented a proposal to raise the maximum ceiling of the facility established by the 2002 Regulation to EUR 25 000 million .
Hopefully we will not have to use these funds , but we cannot rule out this possibility .
If we have to use them , then we must demonstrate our solidarity , as the founding fathers did in the Treaty of Rome in 1957 , and we must also plan for a possible increase in the ceiling above EUR 25 000 million , if this proves necessary .
As a result , I would ask Parliament , when discussing this issue in the future , if this proves necessary , to show the same willingness that I am pleased to witness here today .
I would ask Parliament to give its opinion quickly and flexibly on help that , due to its very nature and characteristics , will be urgent .
There are elements in the motion for a resolution tabled by Parliament , together with the debate on the proposal to raise the ceiling of the balance of payments facility , with which I agree .
These involve concerns about the vulnerability of some of our Member States and about the need to assess how we can protect ourselves and protect those Member States affected by this particular vulnerability , as in the case of Hungary , but which may also arise in the case of other countries .
We have to make this defence of the stability of Member States ' economies and financial positions compatible with the free movement of capital and with the principles on which the internal market is based .
However , we must be aware that we have to react to unnecessary risks and situations in which certain private interests may threaten the higher interests of Member State citizens and the economic and general security of our States .
I have taken due note of the suggestions made in this motion for a resolution .
We will assess these in the Commission and report our findings to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
As stated by Mrs Berès , these will also be conveyed to Mr De Larosière so that his group can present its findings within the period set for its work , in other words by March .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
As a matter of fact we are faced with a sad situation , since we need to debate a request for immediate assistance .
I would say , however , that I can make a positive comment because the European Union has finally , after a lot of searching - which was far from easy - discovered Article 119 and the legal basis on which it can provide such assistance .
For a long time , as the news wafting in from Hungary indicates , they could not find a legal basis for doing so .
Before going any further , let us examine the reasons for this .
One reason is convergence - as we debated yesterday - or rather the lack thereof .
In recent years , there has been no reinvestment in capital movements from east to west within the EU , and consequently there is an enormous capital drain from eastern Member States to the western ones .
This means we face an ongoing imbalance of payments , which , moreover , will prevent true convergence .
The other problem is that obviously the surveillance system is incomplete , since the countries which do not use the euro can simply run up debts in foreign currency .
If I have heard correctly , until now the European Union did not entirely have the power - though in my view it does have a voice - to tell these countries to ' be careful , do not allow the population and businesses to run up endless and irrational debts in foreign currency , because there could be trouble if there is a crisis ' , and so the problem has indeed arisen .
Therefore , surveillance must be extended to cover this , and should already have been extended long ago , for as I say , the Commission has a strong voice in Central and Eastern Europe , and can open its mouth .
The crisis has now arisen .
The Hungarian Government first ran to the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) out of fear , this we know , but they say that they did of course try to approach the EU as well , and that the latter tried systematically to find a legal basis .
The government also say that they lack sufficient capacity to analyse the crisis .
To this I say , let us create it .
It should not be the case that everyone has to rely on the IMF whenever they need crisis analysis .
What will the outside world think of us , if we try to use IMF funds to rescue Member States of 1-1.5 million inhabitants from an imbalance of payments ?
A crisis mechanism will not work when a system , at times of crisis , has to stop a capital drain from a non-euro area country , for instance in the monetary sphere , for that is when the drain really begins to operate .
Even the European Central Bank cannot do much , since in spite of coverage in forints , it does not really want to help with the liquidity problem , although all Hungary needed was foreign currency liquidity , since the banks were not heavily in debt .
As far as the Hungarian report is concerned , its 2006 analysis began with an improving situation .
It reminds me a bit of Chernobyl in 1986 , when on the first day they reported that there was no problem , and thereafter the situation was steadily improving .
In the end we worried that there would be negative radiation .
In this case as well , everyone is forgetting .
We started out with what happened until 2006 , and since then there has been a serious lack of surveillance of currency flows .
This EUR 25 billion ceiling , I would like to observe , seems very low .
It includes from the outset that we want to work with the IMF , whereas it is hard to imagine a more terrorising situation than relying on the IMF .
It would be very important , of course , for the European Parliament to be involved and at the same time to act speedily .
In my view , the two are now happening at once , and for this I am grateful to the Commission as well as to Parliament .
I would , however , reiterate that we should create a mechanism which will prevent a recurrence of the various misfortunes that occurred in relation to the Hungarian crisis , and which has done nothing to increase the prestige of the European Union in Central and Eastern Europe . Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I am not a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , please allow me to approach the question before us from a different perspective .
Last year 's financial crisis in America has reached Europe this year , and our financial markets , which we had believed to be stable , were shaken in their very foundations .
Instead of devising a unified EU solution , it was only after long hesitation that we were able to address the crisis with an individualised , harmonised response that is costing several billion euro per country .
These individual national solutions cannot be the way to handle crises in the new EU Member States , which are unable on their own to move billions of euro .
Initially , these countries trusted that , since their banks did not get involved in dubious , speculative overseas transactions , this international credit crisis might not affect them .
The lack of liquidity and crisis of confidence that accompanied the international financial crisis has , however , greatly shaken the finances of those States that rely on foreign credit , and the speculative attacks on national currencies further contributed to this turbulence .
In this situation it was important for the new Member States to receive not only moral but concrete , tangible financial assistance from the European Union , and for the EU to extend its protection to those countries that have not yet joined the euro area .
This is not just solidarity , as inspired by the fundamental European value , but a shared European interest to avoid a domino effect by preventing even a single bank - not to mention an entire country - from becoming insolvent .
Bearing this in mind , we are now looking at raising the facility from EUR 12 billion to EUR 25 billion .
In this context , the European Central Bank provided Hungary , which was most severely affected by the crisis on the money markets , with a rescue package of EUR 6.5 billion euro .

This was a very fair and dignified solution , since Hungary has not only spearheaded reform and European unification for decades , but has also , since last year , halved its approximately 10 % budget deficit , in accordance with the convergence programme adopted in 2006 ; that programme has been implemented systematically since that time , and the deficit this year is being reduced to 3 % .
In order for the consolidation process required by the EU to continue , assistance is needed from international financial bodies .
As a consequence of the financial and credit crisis , the entire world economy is now facing difficulties ; yet individual EU Member States are trying to deal with these with their own instruments and in accordance with their own very specific goals .
In order that the new Member States , which do not have such instruments at their disposal , should not lose out in the process , what is needed in order for Europe to weather the crisis jointly is not only to harmonise current actions but to adopt a common European strategy to deal with the economic crisis .
I hope that this financial rescue package constitutes the first rung on this ladder , and that once it has been adopted , we will be able to concentrate all our efforts jointly on solving the crisis of the real economy . Thank you for the floor .


on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , speaking on behalf of the UEN Group on the Council Regulation establishing a facility providing medium-term financial assistance to EU Member States , I should like to draw attention to the following issues : first , the situation in world financial markets is having an increasingly adverse impact on the real economy , with the result that GDP is expected to fall in 2009 in the US and in many of the European Union 's most developed states .
Second , since those countries constitute the main market for the new EU Member States , this threatens their economic growth and will therefore have an adverse impact on their balance of payments .
Third , this being the case , we must definitely support raising the ceiling of Community financial assistance to EUR 25 billion for each Member State not in the euro area , because only a ceiling this high will guarantee the effectiveness of any assistance granted by the Community .
Fourth , should a Member State outside the euro area need immediate financial support , the Council , European Commission and Parliament should act with sufficient speed to prevent confidence in their effectiveness being undermined .
Fifth and last , we welcome the European Commission 's rapid response to Hungary 's financial needs , granted in spite of the fact that Hungary had in the first instance approached the International Monetary Fund and not the European Commission .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when I read up on the subject that we are now debating , the balance of payments problem , I felt like Marcel Proust with his madeleine cake , In Search of Lost Time .
There is an aroma of the 1950s and 1960s about the approach to the problem .
The balance of payments problem ?
This is something that we are to set aside EUR 25 billion for .
Why on earth should we do this ?
Is this what we are doing today ?
This is intended for those countries , those poor countries , as I understand it , that are in the EU but not in the currency union and that may then need to be rescued from a fate worse than death : the balance of payments problem .
This has , in that case , been created by the European Union itself , of course .
What we are talking about here no longer exists in fact .
My own country , Sweden , is part of the EU and loyally supports it , implementing everything that is decided there much better than most other countries , but we have not joined the monetary union .
Wisely so , in my opinion .
However , if we should now experience problems in Sweden , will we then have a balance of payments problem ?
The answer is , of course , no .
Naturally , it is possible to imagine that Sweden could start to mismanage its economy and experience a much higher rate of inflation and increase in wages than other countries .
What happens then ?
Do we get a balance of payments problem ?
No , the Swedish krona falls to compensate for this .
Nothing else happens at all .
This is also the case in other countries in the same situation , for example in the United Kingdom .
What is the problem then ?
Well , the problem is that , if these countries are members of the European Union - which they should be - but are not members of the monetary union - which they should not be - then they are to be forced , as you intend , to keep a fixed exchange rate with the euro .
The worst-case scenario is to be forced to keep a fixed exchange rate with your most important trading partners .
It is clear that if a country mismanages its economy , experiences a higher inflation rate or suffers a structural setback in its most important export industry , its exports will decline and its imports increase .
Suddenly the question is , how is this to be financed ?
This is , however , a totally artificial situation .
It is thoroughly old fashioned for countries that are not members of the monetary union to choose to fix their exchange rate and then need to be rescued by the International Monetary Fund or the EU or by anyone else .
Why , for goodness sake , should this happen ?
It is a form of economic policy that is completely out of date .
Either a country joins a monetary union - that could be right sometimes , I agree - or it remains outside , standing on its own two feet with its own independent monetary policy , and takes care of itself .
If the country takes care of itself , nothing in particular will happen .
If it mismanages itself , the currency will fall to compensate for that .
This is not particularly dangerous , either .
I would therefore like to point out that , while we are discussing whether we should set aside EUR 25 billion for this purpose , it is a purpose that is actually not at all necessary .
It is a problem that we have created ourselves , or rather you have created yourselves .
Put an end to it .
Those countries that are members of the EU but have not joined the monetary union should maintain a regime with a floating exchange rate .
Then the problem disappears .
- ( SK ) The limit for mutual assistance to an EU Member State that is not a member of the euro area and that is experiencing balance of payment difficulties or is facing the risk of serious problems as a result of an overall disequilibrium in its balance of payments is currently EUR 12 billion .
The examples of Denmark and Hungary show that the consequences of financial crises in some states can be so great that , if such a crisis occurred in a larger state , then this limit would be too low .
I would therefore like to stress that I do not consider the primary reason for increasing this limit to be either the expansion of the European Union or the greater number of states outside the euro area , as is stated in the explanatory report .
We need to be aware that the financial problems in some Member States are mainly the result of inconsistent economic and social policies .
These problems are aggravated and made more profound by the financial crisis , thereby creating pressure for increased levels of assistance .
Hungary is just a typical example .
I support increasing the limit on medium-term assistance to EUR 25 billion .
I also support , however , the opinion of the European Parliament that there is no need to create a special process allowing the Commission to revise this limit outside the usual decision-making procedures .
I believe that such an approach will maintain high levels of diligence in the assistance system while also giving sufficient scope for action .
I mention this as Hungary is a textbook example , since its political leadership has been unable to decide on reform and recovery measures for a long time .
In the final analysis , the adoption and implementation of such measures could also lessen the impact of the financial crisis in this country and reduce the need for financial assistance from the European Union .
On the other hand , however , I must defend Hungary over the fact that the new rules for financial markets must not allow excessive flow of liquidity from subsidiary banks to parent banks and that a sufficient level of supervision must be maintained over national central banks .
It is true that he who acts in haste may pay twice over , but it is also true that he who takes in haste will not always pay back on time or in full .
It is therefore essential for the system to set out clear rules in respect of assistance , based on a regime of recovery measures which covers both schedules and matter-of-fact issues .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I begin by responding briefly to two statements made by fellow Members .
First , I should like to point out that countries not in the euro area are not required to maintain a fixed exchange rate with the euro .
Poland is an example of a country with a floating exchange rate .
Second , I should like to say that even a country which has a perfect domestic policy and makes no mistakes could be affected by the crisis , due to the contagion effect .
Of course , the Hungarian situation largely originated in incorrect government policy , but Hungary had also been affected by a flight of capital , which was not the result of the Hungarian situation , but had external causes .
Commissioner , I wish to support the Commission 's proposal .
It seems to me to take into account the fact that we are all in a single market , and that the situation of individual countries is of importance to the other countries .
We should therefore be aware of the ties that bind us and feel a sense of joint responsibility for our partners .
The proposal is also an expression of European solidarity , which should be among the main values underlying our actions .
The amount of EUR 25 billion proposed by the Commission seems reasonable , though of course there could be situations requiring more money , and therefore I also support the proposal to grant the Commission the right to decide to revise the ceiling where there is an urgent need to do so .
It is my view that using the full procedure involving the consent of Parliament or a parliamentary consultation would be impractical in such circumstances .
Let us suppose that a crisis occurs in the summer , when Parliament is not sitting .
It is hard to imagine that we would wait six weeks for Parliament to convene before helping the relevant state .
I therefore support the Commission 's proposal granting it the right to raise the ceiling within a very short period of time .
May I also say that I see the proposal as lacking a reference to possible action on the part of the European Central Bank .
The Bank granted a loan to Hungary .
This action should be coordinated , and it is my view that a reference should be included .
Finally , I think that the proposal should not refer to Article 100 of the Treaty .
Article 100 deals with quite different situations and should therefore be treated separately .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , Mrs Berès , it is precisely the principle of solidarity that makes Europe more than an economic association and enables it to display the features of a strong political community .
When the crisis began , it seemed for a moment that Europe would split in two economically and socially , but thanks to rapid and effective action by the Commission , we were able to prevent that from happening .
Hungary turned first to the European Union to ask for its assistance .
However , the EUR 20 billion which we needed in support , or financing , would not have been possible from that source alone .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the European Parliament for their quick response , for the solidarity of our colleagues , which shows the value of being European . Thank you for your attention .

( DE ) Mr President , the proposal concerning amending the Regulation on assistance for Member States which are not part of the euro area , in order to increase the ceiling from EUR 12 to 25 billion , if they are hit by grave payment difficulties , has been made at the last moment .
The primary requirement for ensuring that these ad hoc measures work is that the EU does not make the same mistakes as the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) with respect to counter demands .
At the IMF , Mr Strauss-Kahn alone is not a guarantee of a sensible policy .
We know the shock therapies used for countries devastated by crises in the old neo-liberal style only too well .
We also know those who have previously profited from this only too well .
I hope that better , more sustainable stability will be achieved using the EU tool , based on the example of Hungary .
Hungary shows us in particular that the EU has to realise that it was the conservative opposition that obstructed Hungary 's premier with respect to stability and reform measures .
The stability of Hungary will certainly not be achieved by curbing social expenditure alone , social expenditure which is actually not too high anyway ; this will only help the anti-European right-wing populists .
Yes , Hungary has been put under pressure , especially due to the rapid depreciation of the forint , which hedge funds have been partially responsible for .
In the case of Iceland , the IMF has demonstrated that it is still enforcing shock therapies , for example by imposing high base interest rates to the detriment of the national economy concerned , in this case the national economy of Iceland .
Commissioner , please take into account that I do not want my neighbour Hungary to be plummeted into social conflict due to corrective measures such as this based on counter demands .
Hungary needs confidence-building , supportive action from the European Union , which , after all , will help not only Hungary but all of us .
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that this debate is taking place at exactly the right time .
I would like to remind you that Hungary is the country that has used the budget deficit to the greatest degree : minus 5 % .
This shows us that stability in this country also has a political background .
It makes no sense that , in the future , we abandon the state - and after all , this refers to all the taxpayers - to the risks involved in some businesses .
In this case I completely agree with Mr Ettl , we cannot burden the taxpayers with the risks of hedge funds and derivatives as this would lead to limited purchasing power .
This is precisely what we need in Hungary : more purchasing power .
We need people to invest in the country and in the companies again and this means that we need tax reductions so that investment is possible once more and not only for companies but , above all , for employees .
I believe that I am drawing the right conclusions .
Decisive factors are that allowances are granted , for example for energy efficiency measures , that investment bonuses are given , and that appropriate progressive depreciation is carried out .
I would like to ask Commissioner Kovács , who comes from Hungary , to set up appropriate initiatives at European level .
Mr President , I came down to the Chamber while I was watching the debate in my office just to make , I suppose , a broad point .
In Ireland we have the bank guarantee scheme , because of the financial crisis , and we have more unity now in the EU as to how we deal with this .
But we now realise that our banks will need to be recapitalised and , perhaps , as a matter of more urgency than we first thought .
I wish to express the hope that that would happen , because we have a real problem , as was said by the previous speaker .
We need people to spend and to invest and there just are no credit lines available .
I think it is most important that something happens swiftly to restore confidence and capital to the banking system .
. - ( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that we have this opportunity this evening to discuss such an important issue , the economic crisis , which is affecting not only Member States , but the whole world .
We therefore need to find solutions to this problem .
Mutual support for Member States should be one of the steps to be taken in this direction .
Bearing in mind that we want EU Member States to resort to this fund when necessary , we must welcome the decision made by European political leaders at last week 's summit .
I believe that this European financial assistance fund for Member States needs to be increased to at least EUR 25 billion for one reason : we need to save this market economy .
Before I finish , I would like to express my confidence that we will take the measures required to overcome this crisis , both at a European and global level . We urgently need to find the resources required to avert the problems which our citizens are going to be faced with , such as unemployment .
We all wish the best for the EU .
( LT ) I would like to thank the Commissioner for pointing out quite rightly today that this problem is linked to the question of how to make the free movement of capital compatible with the stability of macroeconomic nations .
I do not really like my fellow Members saying that this is a problem for the poor countries of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , if the economies of Germany and France were to grow by 2 and 3 percent , that would pose no problem for those of us who have integrated into the common market .
Therefore , if some kind of package is also required as a stimulus for national economies , it should be implemented by the countries mentioned and then we would not be talking about stabilisation funds .
In truth , we do not need that money , but guarantees that the European common market will function well and grow .
If there are such guarantees , which must be achieved through our joint efforts , then all the problems will be solved .
Mr President , I want to thank the Members for the support expressed in most of their speeches for the Commission 's decisions and proposals on this issue .
I should like to make three very quick comments on three of the issues raised in your speeches .
Firstly , I share Mr Becsey 's concern about the risks posed by families and businesses taking on debts in foreign currencies , in countries which have a floating exchange rate and which are subject to risks of excessive volatility in their exchange rate , as was the case with Hungary .
Mr Becsey knows of my concern because the budgetary and economic surveillance that we carry out in the Commission is sometimes not sufficiently heard or heeded or does not have the desired effects when comments are made on this type of risk .
We are , I believe , more effective in budgetary surveillance .
The case of Hungary is very positive in this sense , given the major budgetary adjustment that has occurred in that country between 2006 and now .
However , on the other hand , we have had no success in terms of the risks posed by taking on debts in foreign currencies .
I hope that , from now on , given the circumstances not only in Hungary but also in other EU countries due to the crisis and excessive volatility in many financial indicators , particularly in exchange rates , this type of comment and recommendation will be heeded more .
Mr Lundgren is no longer here but he made comments that were totally incorrect .
He criticised Hungary and the Commission for recommending to Hungary that it should have a fixed exchange rate , whereas the situation is exactly the opposite .
In other words , the exchange rate in Hungary is floating and the excessive volatility in this exchange rate aggravated the problems and was one of the factors that caused the crisis having led to the request for this help .
As a result , when criticisms are made , people should ensure that these are based on correct information and not on totally wrong information .
If Mr Lundgren had stayed until the end of this debate , he would have been aware that his information was totally wrong .
As he is not here , I hope that one of you will let him know .
Finally , with regard to the comments made by Mr Rübig on the deficit , it is not true that Hungary has a 5 % deficit as this has been significantly reduced .
In 2008 the deficit will be clearly below this figure , in fact it will be below 3 % , and in the commitment made by Hungary as a condition of this help , the target deficit for next year is 2.6 % .
Therefore , if this target is met - and I hope that it will be - Hungary will have to face another kind of problem .
Undoubtedly it will have to face this and will continue to do so , unfortunately , but at least next year it will not have an excessive deficit .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have four comments .
The first is that the Commissioner is asking us to give a fast , flexible response to any such new request .
I believe that the European Parliament has shown that it can come up to the mark .
Today , we are accepting the threshold of EUR 25 billion to amend the 2002 liability regulation , insofar as we know the conditions for negotiating with the Council , but of course , we are showing ourselves to be open and available to , unfortunately , envisaging other scenarios .
My second comment is to remind you that , for us , one of the lessons of this stage of European integration is that , for each Member State , whether or not they belong to the euro area , the first circle of solidarity , the first circle for discussions , should be the European Union .
I hope that , today , for each of us , for the institutions and for the Member States , that is clear .
My third comment is to note with satisfaction the Commission 's commitment to make public , or first to examine , then make public , both in our Economic and Monetary Committee and in Mr de Larosière 's group , the lessons to be learned from the situation which has developed in Hungary .
My final comment is to note with you that , in this crisis , everyone believed that there would be two channels for transmitting the crisis , the complex financial markets on one hand and , on the other , the real economy .
In fact , we now see that there is a third transmission channel , namely , the movements of capital which can affect even simpler , less opaque financial markets .
This is why the interweaving of the real economy and the financial markets , whose extent , I believe , we have yet fully to gauge , is so important .
Unfortunately , we are finding out more day by day , and we are faced with an issue which needs us to show flexibility and collective intelligence to find suitable solutions .
Parliament has , I believe , once again shown its ability and desire to contribute to finding suitable solutions to each new aspect of this crisis whilst hoping that , finally , we will also find what we need to allow our economy to face the challenges in these very difficult times .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November 2008 .
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 22.50 . )
Opening of the sitting

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , on a point of order , I should like to make a request on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance with regard to tomorrow 's debate and vote on Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , or the Gräßle report , in other words .
It appears that the Commission is considering ending the present process of reviewing the regulation further to recent revelations about irregularities within OLAF , and would consequently like to withdraw the present proposals in the course of the codecision procedure with Parliament .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens , I should like to ask you to check with the Commission to see whether this is the case , and if it would issue a statement before tomorrow 's debate , so that the European Parliament knows whether the debate and the vote still have any value .
The question was addressed to the Commission .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner will have the opportunity to answer it .
I welcome Mr Jouyet .
We are all here and can start on the next item of business .
Documents received : see Minutes
Response of the European Union to the deteriorating situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statement on the response of the European Union to the deteriorating situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , my dear Benita , ladies and gentlemen , I know how concerned you are , as are we , by the deteriorating situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo and I recall , as we have already debated the matter with you , that we were becoming increasingly worried when we raised the issue in your Committee on Foreign Affairs in October .
The Foreign Ministers of the Union discussed the issue at length in the General Affairs and External Relations Council on 10 November last and the President decided to put this item on the agenda for the next General Affairs and External Relations Council on 8 December , in the presence of the Commission , represented by Louis Michel and Benita Ferrero-Waldner .
It must be said that the situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo has deteriorated greatly since the end of August , when the CNDP , led by rebel leader Laurent Nkunda , launched an offensive against the Congolese armed forces .
The latter proved unable to resist , leaving only MONUC , the United Nations peacekeeping force , to protect the civilian population .
The rebels ' successes on the ground took them to the gates of Goma , the provincial capital of North Kivu , and enabled them to significantly extend their area of influence in this border province with Rwanda .
The continuing crisis once again shows the potential for instability which is caused by the presence of all the rebel groups in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo : not only the CNDP , but also the Hutu rebels of the FDLR .
The rout of the Congolese armed forces also shows that this complex crisis cannot be settled by a military solution and that the path to a sustainable settlement requires a political solution which takes into account both the local and the regional players .
I will return to this in a moment .
In the depths of the crisis and at the height of the offensive by Laurent Nkunda 's rebel forces , the European Union mobilised vigorously , followed by the rest of the international community .
The urgent task , you will recall , was first to prevent the capture of Goma and to try to stabilise the conflict .
That is why Commissioner Louis Michel went out to the region to see for himself .
On 1 and 2 November , he was followed by Bernard Kouchner , in his role as President-in-Office of the Council , and David Miliband .
The political message of restraint was delivered by both ministers , in Kinshasa , Kigali and Dar es Salaam .
The ministers also went to Goma to demonstrate , on the ground , that our full attention is on this crisis , to assess the requirements of the displaced populations , and to meet the humanitarian organisations since , once again , the civilian population is the first victim of the resumption of fighting .
This fighting has led to a major deterioration in the humanitarian situation .
It is estimated that a further 250 000 people have been displaced in the most dramatic conditions , taking the current total to over one million displaced persons in the province of North Kivu alone .
Add to this the serious infringements of human rights perpetrated by the rebel groups , including summary execution , widespread sexual violence , the recruitment of child soldiers and acts of pillage , both by the rebel groups and certain elements in the Congolese armed forces .
The resumption of fighting has also interrupted the implementation of the agreements concluded in November 2007 between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda , known as the Nairobi process , with which you are familiar and which focuses on the struggle against the Rwandan Hutu rebels of the FDLR located in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The agreement between the Congolese government and the Congolese rebel groups , including Mr Nkunda 's CNDP , in January 2008 , known as the Goma process , has also broken down .
The priority , currently , is to deal with the humanitarian emergency and secure access to the displaced populations .
In accordance with its mandate , MONUC is playing an essential role .
It is presently continuing to reinforce its measures in North Kivu and we encourage it to continue its efforts in this direction .
The Secretary-General of the United Nations has requested extra resources for this mission and discussions on this matter , which we hope to see concluded very quickly , have begun in the Security Council .
Faced with the emergency , the European Union has significantly strengthened its humanitarian efforts .
Many Member States , as well as the Commission , have made exceptional emergency contributions to support the actions of the non-governmental organisations and the United Nations agencies , such as the World Food Programme , and the High Commissioner for Refugees .
Extra provision , to a current value of over EUR 43 million , in the form of contributions to the airlift - I am referring to countries like the United Kingdom , Belgium and Italy - make Europe the main contributor , by far , to the humanitarian effort undertaken in this crisis .
Now we need to re-launch the dynamic which will give a sustainable settlement to the issue of the illegal armed groups operating in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo , all of the illegal armed groups , whether they be Congolese or foreigners , in the knowledge that there is no military solution to the crisis and that any solution requires the re-launch of the Goma and Nairobi processes which I have just described and which form the appropriate framework for the lasting stabilisation of the situation in this Congolese province .
The resumption of dialogue and cooperation between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda is essential in this matter , and I wish to acknowledge the action of the European Union 's special representative to the African Great Lakes , Roeland Van de Geer , in attempting to resume the threads of this dialogue .
It is around these objectives that the international community , in particular the European Union , has mobilised in the last few weeks .
These efforts have borne their first fruits , especially in the resumption of the dialogue between Kinshasa and Kigali at ministerial level and in the organisation , in Nairobi on 7 November , at the initiative of the states of the Great Lakes Region and the African Union , of an international summit dedicated to the crisis in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo , in which , in particular , the Congolese and Rwandan presidents , Joseph Kabila and Paul Kagame , participated .
Amongst the main advances of this summit , we should especially note the commitment of the states in the region to send , if necessary , peace-keeping forces to the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo and , if necessary , to appoint a high-level team of facilitators , consisting of the former president of Nigeria , Mr Obasanjo , and the former president of Tanzania , Mr Mkapa .
At its extraordinary summit in Johannesburg , on 10 November , the SADC also stated its readiness , if need be , to send a peace-keeping force to the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The European Union welcomes the commitment of the African states and remains determined to continue its cooperation with the UN , the African Union and the countries of the Great Lakes region to achieve a solution to this crisis .
However , let us be clear that it will not be possible to resolve this crisis without strengthening the resources designed to stabilise the peace , especially those of the United Nations .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , first , I will quickly say to Mr van Buitenen that I have indeed noted what he said and that I will certainly take his message to my colleagues , who will definitely reply tomorrow .
Mr President , honourable Members and Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my dear Jean-Pierre , today I am standing in for my fellow Commissioner , Louis Michel , who is unable to take part in this session for health reasons , and who has asked me to send his apologies to you .
You know the regard in which Commissioner Michel holds the Great Lakes region .
Indeed , as the President of the Council has already stated , he was the first to travel to the Democratic Republic of Congo and to Rwanda , on 30 and 31 October last , at the height of the crisis , to try to resolve matters .
From this shadow diplomacy mission arose the idea of organising the Nairobi conference , whose practical conclusions today give us new prospects for emerging from the crisis .
As for the response that the Commission is able to make , I would like to share with you an analysis of the situation from two aspects , although these are very similar to those described by the President of the Council .
First , on the humanitarian level : the international community , including the European Union , is in the process of providing a response to the crisis .
The Commission immediately mobilised EUR 6.3 million to meet emergency needs .
However , we remain very vigilant , so that we can adapt this amount as the situation develops ; the humanitarian needs are , on the whole , covered in Kivu and there is really good coordination between the humanitarian agencies .
The Commission and the Member States jointly announced , in Marseille on 14 November , new contributions totalling an extra EUR 43.5 million to meet the crisis .
The biggest problem remains , however , one of access to the populations in some areas where there is continuing fighting between the Congolese Armed Forces , their Mai-Mai allies and the FDLR , on the one hand and the CNDP on the other , as no party is respecting the ceasefire .
Secondly , on the political and military level : in eastern DRC , no military solution is possible .
There is only room for a balanced political solution , built on dialogue .
This was also recommended by the countries in the region , at the Nairobi Summit on 7 November and , above all , this also seemed to be what the CNDP rebels and a large part of the political establishment in Kinshasa , such as the National Assembly , were hoping for .
The Commission is , therefore , highly satisfied with the conclusions of the summit held by the heads of state of the Great Lakes countries , more particularly with the decision to involve African diplomacy at a high level in the resolution of the crisis and to introduce a verification mechanism to allow the heads of state in the region to monitor developments closely and to provide the necessary responses in a timely fashion .
In this respect , the visit just made to the region by Mr Obasanjo is very encouraging .
The visit has reassured us about the possibilities of military intervention by certain countries in the region , and it obtained guarantees from President Kabila that Kinshasa would be ready to listen to the CNDP demands and also ready to go down the path of dialogue .
During the visit , the CNDP 's grievances were also heard and General Nkunda reaffirmed his readiness to observe a ceasefire and do everything to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid in the areas under his control .
It is , therefore , crucial to maintain the current political momentum and do all we can to ensure that the declarations of the various players are put into practice .
It is , then , high time to treat the underlying causes of the crisis in the east of the country , with which everyone is familiar : the presence of the FDLR , the organised pillage of mineral resources , the political frustrations of communities and minorities , and ideas must be made to converge .
On this matter , it is crucial for the entire international community to support the diplomatic efforts introduced in the wake of the Nairobi Summit and that the international efforts be coordinated to allow sufficient space to Presidents Obasanjo and Mkapa to continue the negotiations .
It is also important to highlight the role of MONUC .
It is not MONUC which is responsible for all sorts of abuses of power .
MONUC is actually doing important work , despite the poverty of the resources it receives and the restrictions on its functions .
It is also carrying out a job which would be difficult to replace , that of ensuring peace , rather than waging war .
However , it is even more important to support the current efforts to strengthen its mandate at a moment in which , in the coming days , the Security Council is to consider this question .
The mandate , we think , should be extended , to include , for example , control of the pillaging of natural resources and , especially , as the President of the Council said , increasing the resources available to enable it to do so .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , currently we are facing a financial crisis which will go down in the history books .
Nevertheless , in only a few weeks , it was possible to set up a G20 meeting which delivered concrete results , the most notable of which was the decision to use 2 % of GDP to stimulate the economy and help the financial sector .
On the other hand , we have not managed to fulfil our commitment to use 0.7 % of GDP for development .
If we had done so , the DRC would certainly be more developed and maybe this entire conflict would not have happened at all .
But let us take things as they are .
We do not have time now to discuss development for Kivu : we are facing a humanitarian crisis there .
Two hundred and fifty thousand additional people have been displaced over recent weeks .
People are dying as a direct or indirect result of the fighting , and diseases such as cholera are spreading rapidly .
Since 2005 , the UN has accepted the concept of responsibility to protect .
The UN sent the peacekeeping force MONUC to the DRC .
With 17 000 troops , MONUC is the largest peacekeeping mission in the world operating under a strong Chapter 7 mandate .
But what can MONUC do ?
The quality of soldiers and equipment is very poor and the size of the DRC is enormous .
I therefore strongly support the call to strengthen MONUC , but realistically speaking , it will be months before this reinforcement can be on the ground - precious months , during which people will die .
For that reason , I propose sending a short-term European force to stabilise the region quickly until the reinforcement of MONUC is operational and deployed in the field .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first , in the middle of these quiet debates , in this very comfortable atmosphere , I want to paint the scene for you , as I have been over there three times in recent months .
Over there , as we hold our discussions , there is violence , rape and death .
Today , that is daily life for many citizens living in this horrible part of the world .
For me , this is no time for rhetoric , it is time for action .
This dirty war is not at all , in my opinion , an ethnic war , as some are beginning to say ; ethnic wars can always be created , because it suits us , the Europeans , because when there is talk of ethnic wars , that means the Africans are fighting amongst themselves and that it is not our problem .
No , the origins of the war going on over there are to be found at the bottom of the mines - the diamond mines , coltan mines and gold mines - which , despite the massacres , continue to operate calmly and efficiently .
Their minerals are exported , under the noses of the UN forces , from Goma airport or down the road to Kigali , and so they are still making some people very rich .
That is the war .
To stop this war , this is the first issue which needs to be looked at .
How can these mines be closed and what measures are needed to stop this scandalous trade ?
We could go back to processes , such as the Kimberley process , which was introduced for diamonds .
I suppose some of our fellow Members will talk about that here .
Roughly speaking , over the last ten years , and while this figure is contested by some , I assure you that it can easily be verified , over 5 million Congolese have suffered violent deaths in this region , either direct victims of the war or victims of the collateral damage , such as disease and so on , brought about by the war .
The question then is to know whom this war suits and who will benefit from its continuation .
I think that is the first major point .
As for the European Union , I and my group think that there are three important questions .
First , we must indeed support the peace efforts that are underway - not in recent weeks , but they have been going on for some time .
We have nominated Abbot Malu Malu for the Sakharov prize , because this gentleman has , for a very long time , been committed to trying to find peaceful solutions in this region .
In Goma , he brought together not only the CNDP - because the CNDP came , went , came back and went again - but all of the rebel movements and the DRC government .
This is something that I consider to be important .
There is the Nairobi process and the recent Nairobi Summit , to which the Commissioner alluded .
I believe it is , of course , necessary to support these efforts and support our Commissioner , Louis Michel , who , and I say this as a socialist whilst he is a liberal , is making huge efforts in this area .
Secondly , we must defend this population , at all costs .
We are told that MONUC is not there to wage war , that it is there to keep the peace .
Maybe , but MONUC has a ' Chapter 7 ' mandate .
It is not like 1994 in Kigali , where nothing could be done , where we had to stand and watch impotently as massacres occurred .
Now there is a chapter 7 , and MONUC 's mission is to defend the civilian population .
Well , the civilian population over there is being massacred and MONUC has not budged .
A short time ago , in a village whose name escapes me for the moment , a real massacre occurred in Kiwanja , on the edge of a MONUC camp .
MONUC must therefore be reinforced by European forces ; that is my group 's opinion .
We will , in any case , be tabling an amendment to this effect .
Finally , I believe , and I will have to say it very quickly in conclusion , there is , of course , a need to proceed to the decisions required to halt the exploitation of , and the trade in , minerals which , in essence , are responsible for all the massacres which are being perpetrated over there .
Mr President , Commissioner , this corner of the world seems to be cursed and , as Alain Hutchinson has very aptly stated , there have been almost five million deaths since the start of the 1990s .
This area is like a death chamber - mass killings in North Kivu , Uganda , Rwanda , Burundi - there is no end to it and each year the deaths start up again .
I know that the same causes always produce the same effects ; there are ethnic conflicts because the boundaries we marked out were often artificial boundaries .
There is a form of exaggerated nationalism : everyone attempts to be a small-scale Napoleon III and have a Mexican adventure so that the problems of their country are forgotten .
Of course , there is the taste for money , Alain pointed this out , the often incommensurable wealth of this area .
There is also madness , for how else can we qualify the action of the Lord 's Resistance Army ?
So what can we do ?
Oh , I would also like to draw attention to the action of Commissioner Michel , who has a long interest in this matter .
We have seen his action at the meetings in Kigali and Kinshasa , which resulted in Nairobi .
There is also the SADC and Obasanjo .
Once again , we shall have large diplomatic summits .
However , is that a reason to rely solely on diplomacy ?
We are facing a very serious humanitarian situation .
In my capacity as humanitarian aid rapporteur for your Parliament , I went to Kinshasa at the beginning of November to meet with Mr Botswali Lengomo , the new Minister for social affairs and humanitarian action .
I also met with Apollinaire Malu Malu , to whom we almost awarded the Sakharov prize , and who is in charge of the Amani programme .
Above all , let us not forget the considerable humanitarian effort that we must undertake .
So what are we really doing ?
Are we sure we are doing everything we should ?
What is MONUC doing ?
It appears to be absolutely right .
17 000 men , with 6 000 in the area , that is the equivalent of an armed division with tanks .
Who is going to believe that this is insufficient to guarantee access for humanitarian assistance , even if I am aware , as you are too , of the vast territories to protect ?
Hence , the solution is , of course , a diplomatic one .
We must therefore support an African solution , assuming we are able to implement it .
Obviously , we must ensure that the ceasefire is permanent to ensure humanitarian aid access .
Without this prerequisite , humanitarian aid will not get through .
The source of income must also be stopped .
Needless to say , we must close the mines but also , perhaps , start criticising companies in the West who purchase the coltan and other minerals that enable arms to be purchased .
We must , of course , give our full support to the peace initiatives by displaying a continued , rather than a sometimes indefinite , political interest
I shall conclude by calling for a much stronger military presence to stabilise the peace and that is something only the United Nations can do .
It is my understanding that the European Union has sometimes been known to be able to convince the United Nations of where its duty lies .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , the current situation in the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of Congo is getting worse every day , and the international community is very worried about this .
More than one and a half million people have been displaced in the Kivu province , which demonstrates how bad the problem is .
I support the efforts of Roeland Van de Geer , European Union Special Representative for the African Great Lakes Region , and former Nigerian President , Mr Obasanjo , who took part in intense talks with the political and military groups that are engaged in this violence .
I ask the African Union to make further efforts to ensure peace in the Great Lakes Region .
The governments of Rwanda and Nairobi signed a peace settlement in November 2007 as an attempt to resolve the animosity between the two countries .
The implementation of this settlement must be ensured , but the violence has to be ended first .
The European Union gives more money to the Great Lakes Region than any other organisation or country in the world .
I ask Louis Michel , European Commissioner for Development , and the Council to attempt to end the fighting and establish peace .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the atrocious fighting in the east of the Congo is not simply a case of a civil war , it is also a regional conflict involving many neighbouring countries .
It is also about strategic raw materials such as coltan , which we need for the production of our mobile phones , DVD players and computers .
It is also about gold , diamonds , cobalt and precious wood .
These are the deeper causes of this conflict .
What can and what must be done ?
The United Nations must be beefed up so that it is capable of meeting its responsibility to protect the civilian population from all the armed troops active in the region .
The United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( MONUC ) needs a clearer mandate , more equipment and more manpower .
The Member States of the European Union have repeatedly waived away the pleas to re-supply MONUC in recent years .
Yet we have then seen sharp criticism of MONUC 's failures and mistakes .
This case of double standards must be brought to an end .
We do not need a branded EU military contingent right now , we need MONUC to be actively re-supplied and I have listened with interest and approval to how this is also the way that the Council and the Commission wish to go .
The second important point to be made is that the extraction of , and trade in , raw materials from Congo must be monitored strictly and on an international basis .
The international corporations involved in this trade that profit from the extraction of the raw materials in Congo must be monitored and compelled to be transparent .
There is , of course , already an official UN Panel of experts on the illegal exploitation of natural resources from Congo .
This panel of experts has put forward a series of recommendations , including sanctions against people and businesses who participate in such illegal exploitation .
The European Union must push for the implementation of this UN recommendation , including , specifically - and this in an area where there is scope for action - insofar as relates to imports into the EU , as this is clearly an area in which we can act on our own and one where we can actively implement these UN recommendations .
The third point to be made is that the initiative for an international conference on the Great Lakes region must be brought forward .
Only political cooperation and the economic integration of the region can provide peace there in the long term .
Europe can , and must , play a key role in this .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , a whole series of neighbouring countries are physically involved in this war and there is , above all , direct participation from Congolese government troops , together with militia and Angolan troops on one side , with General Nkunda , Tutsi soldiers and Rwandan support on the other .
It is a regional war which does not just concern eastern Congo .
One key point is clear : the Congolese government has thus far not been prepared to negotiate directly with the rebels .
That is a point on which pressure must be applied .
It is very important to examine the real background to this conflict .
The Federal President of Germany himself has made reference to the fact that this is a conflict about raw materials .
Crude oil , gold , diamonds , copper , cobalt , coltan , zinc , tin and so on play a very important role here .
Above all , it is also about who actually holds the relevant licences to exploit these materials .
Action really has to be taken against these companies .
I just want to name one of these companies : Gesellschaft für Elektrometallurgie mbh , based in Nuremberg , is clearly the direct owner of one of the central mines over which this conflict is being fought .
I would like to talk a little about the role of the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( MONUC ) , since everyone in the House seems to be calling for MONUC to be re-supplied .
According to what I read , it is the case that MONUC is part of the problem rather than part of the solution , because MONUC itself describes its situation as having developed into fighting on four fronts .
MONUC 's role should actually be quite different .
In the meantime , we have found out from Human Rights Watch that Indian or Pakistani MONUC soldiers are conducting direct weapons trading with irregular militias and are clearly involved in the conflict for raw materials .
That cannot be allowed to happen .
MONUC 's role must be something else entirely and completely neutral .
That being the case , calling for MONUC to be re-supplied is not all that helpful .
I would also like to again point out that Congo played an important role once before in a previous European Union operation .
At that time , it was the security of elections that was our role and Mr Kabila was installed as president - the same Mr Kabila whose troops are now a significant escalating factor .
With that in mind , there should be close scrutiny of the actual role played by the EU in Mr Kabila 's installation .
I find what the EU did to be very problematic .
The point must clearly be made that Mr Kabila and his troops must also be criticised in this respect .
The report by the local correspondent of the Frankfurter Allgemeine newspaper , who was captured , made very worthwhile reading .
He described the set-up of the conflict very well .
His article shows the interaction between official and unofficial troops , which is to say that calling for the re-supply of MONUC alone is pointless , as what is really needed is to get to grips with the causes of the conflict .
Mr President , last night , I had the privilege of speaking directly to an experienced aid worker about the war in eastern Congo .
He knows the crisis in both North and South Kivu like the back of his hand .
His account , without wanting to put a gloss on the prevailing misery in the region , offers us a few rays of hope .
One ray of hope is certainly that , more than a week ago , the Congolese presidential guard , in cooperation with the police , rounded up government soldiers engaged in looting .
This is a hopeful sign of the Congolese government making a start on putting law and order in place , and is a development that emphatically deserves our European encouragement and support .
Another ray of hope is that rebel leader Nkunda has , to date , appeared unable to mobilise and recruit the Tutsis in South Kivu for his power aspirations .
My contact considers this to be a positive expression of a Tutsi identification with the Congolese state and civil population .
A third ray of hope is the religious reconciliation initiatives at local and provincial levels .
The elected authorities are just as actively involved in these platforms as the traditional authorities and the tribal representatives .
These platforms in North and South Kivu deserve dual European support : financial aid and professional input in resolving conflicts .
For humanitarian aid in both Kivu regions to be effective , it is of crucial importance for the local authorities to be involved , which includes , therefore , both groups of local leaders , traditional tribal representatives and the elected authorities .
Based on his own experience , my contact stresses that , despite all war conflicts and even when people are fleeing , these power structures that are in place continue to be effective , hence his urgent appeal to provide cash to the throngs of refugees in the villages of North and South Kivu , as well as the village people themselves .
After all , my insider states : ' If you have money , you can get food .
Surprisingly enough , it is always market day somewhere .
In Congo , it is perfectly possible to work with cash handouts .
It does not make the people dependent , because they can decide for themselves what they will spend the money on .
You boost the local economy and make instant use of it .
In order to ensure that this runs smoothly , we go and talk to the elected village committees , who will point out the most needy . '
Following such a discussion , and with Europe 's heart-warming efforts that are aimed at reconciliation , there has to be a future for North and South Kivu and , indeed , for the whole of Congo .
I would therefore call on the Council , the Commission , the European Parliament and the European institutions from the bottom of my heart to do what is necessary .
( NL ) Mr President , there is little point in discussing today how tragic we find the desperate situation in eastern Congo .
We should be able to call a spade a spade and , of course , ask the question whether Europe , and particularly countries such as France and Belgium , who have especially evil reputations in that region , should intervene in a military sense .
To me , the answer is no , for what have we noticed ?
In Congo , Europe has managed to prove once more how divided and how weak it is and what an illusion it would be to think that a common foreign and security policy would be possible at this stage .
Indeed , let us remind ourselves that Paris , the current Presidency of the Council no less , has just had the head of protocol of Rwandan President Kagame arrested in Germany for the attempted murder of President Habyarimana in 1994 .
He is seen as an involved party in the conflict .
Even my own country , Belgium , is disingenuous since , only yesterday , the Belgian Foreign Affairs Minister , Karel De Gucht , heaped heavy criticism on the policy of European Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid , Louis Michel , precisely on account of the latter 's policy in relation to Congo .
I quote Karel De Gucht : ' If the present situation in Congo is the result of Michel 's policy , then this is quite something .
The situation has never been as distressing as it is now . '
Ladies and gentlemen , these words were spoken by one of the Commissioner 's political allies .
In this cacophony , we can only conclude that the protection of the civil population should , in the first place , be the responsibility of the African Union , which must be supported , and of the UN Mission in Congo .
Europe would therefore do well not to send its own troops to that region .
Mr President , I echo the sentiments of my colleagues in expressing my extreme concern regarding renewed fighting between the Congolese army and resurgent militias in North Kivu in the DRC .
The increase in violence in North Kivu has seriously overstretched the UN peacekeeping mission ( MONUC ) in operation in this country .
The humanitarian situation is particularly grave with more than 1.5 million internal displaced persons in Kivu province .
The operations of the World Food Programme and other NGOs have been seriously restricted by the violence and there is widespread theft , rape and killing of civilians by both government and rebel forces .
MONUC has a mandate under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter to ensure the protection of civilians under imminent threat of physical violence , but lacks the resources and quantity of troops needed to fulfil this mandate .
The international community and the UN Security Council must strengthen MONUC by providing appropriate materials and staff to enable it to fulfil its mission .
Seeing that the European Union has decided not to initiate steps towards another ESDP mission to deal with these further escalations in violence in the DRC , I would urge the European Union to enhance its cooperation with MONUC to the greatest degree possible .
The current French-drafted UN Security Council resolution proposes a temporary increase in MONUC 's authorised military strength by up to 2 785 military personnel .
This increase would bring the maximum permitted number of troops and police deployed under MONUC , already the biggest UN peacekeeping force in the world , to just over 20 000 to cover a country roughly the size of Western Europe .
I urge the UN Security Council to vote on this resolution as soon as possible , given the urgency of the current events in the DRC .
I am outraged by the massacres , the crimes against humanity and acts of sexual violence against women and girls in the eastern province of DRC , and I call on all relevant national and international authorities to bring the perpetrators to justice .
( PT ) The new horrors in the Kivus and the international community 's inability to put an end to these are as shocking as the greed of the Rwandan and Congolese leaders who are perpetuating this situation of organised chaos in order to conceal the sinister plundering of the region 's natural resources .
What can the European Union do ?
What can it do for a country where there have been , and still are , various ESDP ( European Security and Defence Policy ) missions and where the first democratic elections would not have been held without Europe 's support ?
What can it do for a country receiving millions in development and humanitarian aid ?
What can it do for a country of unparalleled strategic importance where five million people have died at the mercy of the most barbaric violence in recent years ?
The European Union must go much further than the minimum decided since this latest military escalation began .
It is not enough to increase humanitarian aid and launch diplomatic initiatives in which promises to disarm and declarations of good faith are repeated for the umpteenth time .
The European Union urgently needs to strengthen MONUC ( United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo ) so that it can regain its lost credibility and effectiveness .
To this end , it is not enough to table resolutions in the Security Council .
The European Union must immediately link up with the DPKO ( United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations ) and provide equipment and , if necessary , soldiers to help fill the gaps in MONUC .
As a last resort , if the proceedings in New York and the situation on the ground justify this , the EU cannot , and must not , rule out sending a military mission under the ESDP .
It is our responsibility to protect what is at stake , namely the lives of defenceless civilians who need immediate international protection .
Never again !
We have to get serious and not let the genocide in Rwanda and the massacres in the Congo happen again .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the statements by the Council and the Commission on the EU 's response to the serious crisis in the Congo are , as usual , hypocritical and ineffectual .
Behind Laurent Nkunda are Rwanda and Uganda , countries which have always been interested in the region , so much so as to try to invade it on several occasions in the recent past : the underground resources and the resources in the east of the DRC are too great to be left in the hands of others .
Between January and now , three times the number of weapons have been purchased compared with 2007 , and some of these , as far as the Rwandan sector is concerned , were destined for the rebel Laurent Nkunda , with the results that we see today .
For years , however , Washington has focused its interest on the Great Lakes region , particularly by supporting Uganda and Rwanda .
For instance , the largest US embassy in Africa is in Kampala ; nothing happens in Uganda or Rwanda without the agreement of the United States .
Now , this swift about turn by the European Union regarding the possibility of sending a peace-keeping force to the region sends the wrong signal , as usual , because our preference is for focusing on diplomacy , as if diplomacy were enough to convince an ugly customer like Laurent Nkunda to withdraw .
As usual , our discussions amount to nothing , and then we hear Commissioner Michel almost eulogising Mr Nkunda . Thank you for that !
Mr President , we all understand the complexities of the current appalling situation in eastern Congo , which is ethnically based and has its origins in Rwanda , Burundi and Uganda .
An effective mediation process between Rwanda and the DRC must be started as a matter of urgency .
A ceasefire needs to be put in place and properly enforced , and the civil population clearly needs protection and urgent humanitarian assistance .
I am reminded of the recent statement by the Permanent Representative of the African Union to Brussels in Parliament 's Subcommittee on Security and Defence , when he indicated his preference for Africans to deal with security issues on their continent .
I am pleased , therefore , that the EU has not sought to use the Congo tragedy as an opportunity merely to put its label on another so-called EU military operation .
It is primarily Africans who must take responsibility for resolving the present situation , but we must give them every possible assistance in doing this through the African Union and the United Nations .
Meanwhile , there seems to be some ambiguity concerning the mandate , rules of engagement and use of force by MONUC .
MONUC 's commander , Lieutenant-General Vicente Díaz de Villegas , recently resigned after seven weeks in the job .
He cited personal reasons , but I wonder if it was not professional frustration .
However , it is encouraging that on 6 November , a thousand-member South African force deployed near Goma as part of MONUC .
The MONUC head claims that they have instructions to open fire if necessary .
MONUC must be able to act to protect civilians against imminent threats of violence .
Clearly , there needs to be a substantial increase in numbers of effective UN and AU troops deployed in eastern Congo and a clear idea of where they come from - there are many countries that could contribute to this that are not doing so at the moment .
If the West fails to do all that it can to assist operations in the Congo , there are other less high-minded actors waiting in the wings .

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Jouyet , I am a member of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and during the last session held in Kigali , Rwanda , I listened to President Paul Kagame , who spoke of the need to stabilise the situation in Central Africa .
He spoke of wanting peace , but while in Kigali , I visited the holocaust museum which commemorates the death of a million Tutsis massacred in just three months - a hundred days .
That was in 1994 .
Will we now witness a repetition of what happened then ?
We cannot allow it .
I consider it to be our duty .
I think that the European Union must do more .
I do not know whether sending additional troops will solve the situation .
Personally , I doubt it , but it does seem to me that we need a radical review of the sources of funds which , as noted by my fellow Member , are derived from the exploitation of Congolese natural resources and are then not channelled to small traders and unnamed individuals , but enter European markets as well .
This is both the source and the solution of the problem .
Let us now move on to the humanitarian situation , which is clearly getting out of control .
This is where we can play a role , and this is where the European Union must do everything to protect those 1 600 000 people in need of water , food , blankets , tents and care .
Let us address this problem .
( PT ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this moment in time , the world 's powers are tackling the international financial system .
They are trying to get it under control , and not before time .
It is also perhaps time that we solved another problem that we have been talking about for decades .
For years , we have been listening to tales of the shameful pillaging of resources .
How many times , and now again in the Congo , have we heard about the blood of people being shed ?
I believe it is also time to prosecute these companies , halt this disgraceful trade and freeze the accounts holding the shameful profits from this exploitation of mineral resources at the cost of the blood and suffering of people .
I do not understand why these companies are not listed in the same way as we blacklist terrorist organisations .
I do not understand why the international community is incapable of prosecuting these businesspeople who are not strictly businesspeople , but actually bandits who are threatening regional and world security .
I urge the French Presidency and the Commission to lead an international initiative in this respect .
Mr President , names like Lumumba , Mobutu , Chombe , Dag Hammarskjöld and Katanga dominated my late childhood in the early 1960s .
Fifty years on , Congo - now the Democratic Republic of Congo - is again ravaged by internal unrest bordering on civil war .
Only this time the war in the eastern parts of the DRC comes after , and in spite of , important EU efforts in the form of money , programmes , missions on the ground - including military missions - and intense diplomatic efforts .
The current situation in the DRC , therefore , is not just another crisis .
Rather , it is a test case of the capacity and willingness of the EU to play the international role it now claims in world politics , since the crisis has all the ingredients the Union maintains it is best equipped to deal with , and is taking place on a continent , Africa , whose geo-economic importance is increasing exponentially .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Hutchinson started the debate by saying that we should stop the rhetoric and leap into action .
I think that he is absolutely right .
Allow me to mention two essential elements from the debate .
First of all , what matters most is for the recommendations of the UN Panel of Experts on the illegal exploitation of the DRC 's natural resources , as well as the sanctions against persons and companies whose participation in the looting of the resources has been proven , to be implemented .
The EU must swing into action .
Secondly , we must put an emphatic stop to the illegal exploitation and implement systems of traceability and proof of origin of gold , tin ore , coltan , cobalt , diamonds , pyrochlore and timber , so that this blood trade can be brought to a halt .
My explicit question to President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Jouyet , and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , is what initiatives will you be developing in this respect in the next few months ?
I think we are entitled to an answer to this question .
Mr President , I do not regard myself at all as an expert in relation to Congo , nor do I have any ready-made solutions , but I do know this : if five million people have died over the last 20 years , then we all need to be concerned .
That concern for me is accentuated when I read some of the strictures which come from a number of NGOs involved in the area .
For example , a few days ago , I read that Amnesty International - not an organisation I always agree with , I should say - had this to say of the human rights , and particularly the humanitarian tragedy in North Kivu province : ' The UN Security Council , the European Union and the African Union are sitting on their hands .
They have so far failed to give the UN peacekeeping force the reinforcements and equipment it needs to provide effective protection to civilians .
I have listened in debates for an answer to that criticism .
I have to say , frankly , that I have not really heard it .
Diplomacy is good , but diplomacy of itself will not deliver all the answers .
Mr President , it would be easy for us to forget about Africa 's problem , given our own economic difficulties , but it would be a dreadful mistake .
I think we need to put pressure on the African Union to realise its own responsibilities in the region .
If the African Union is ever to assume the same kind of gravitas as the EU , it needs to put words into action - something it has conspicuously failed to do , for example , over Zimbabwe .
We should also not hesitate to link our long-term trade and aid relationship with countries like the DRC to their respect for human rights , good governance and transparency .
In this light , I hope the Commission will reiterate its support for the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , after everything that has been said , I should like to put the following to you .
You both stressed the fact that there is no military solution to this conflict .
Whilst I could not agree with you more , there is nothing wrong with the agreements of Goma or Nairobi .
There is nothing wrong with the process that is being brought back to life , except that the agreements are never observed .
Needless to say , Europe should press for a stronger and better MONUC mandate and more troops .
The big question we should ask ourselves though is whether MONUC could ever succeed , even with a Chapter 7 mandate , without any European intervention ?
Mr Jouyet , I should like to ask you what the good reasons were on the part of the EU ministers for rejecting European intervention of this kind ?
Mr President , honourable Members , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , many thanks for this very interesting debate .
We are fully aware of the appeal made in Parliament to the European Union to deploy a military mission in this region of the Republic of Congo .
However , I feel I should point out that the European Union is already committed in the Republic of Congo , firstly through community aid : EUR 50 million in 2008 , then EUR 6 million in emergency aid as mentioned by Benita Ferrero-Waldner .
There are two ESDP missions supporting reform of the Congolese police and army , whose unpreparedness and lack of efficiency were , as we have seen in this case , only too tragic .
Moreover , the European Union has already intervened , this was back in 2003 via a military mission referred to as Artemis .
However , the conditions were different since , at that time , the European Union was preparing the way for the arrival of a United Nations mission , which then took place .
Therefore , beyond rhetoric , how can we respond to the tragedy in this region ?
The quickest solution to address the humanitarian crisis would be to strengthen the existing measures , in other words MONUC , through a broader mandate and additional manpower .
I mean that , in the case of France , it is ready to participate in this reinforcement because if we wait for the deployment of a European Union mission , we run the risk of losing time .
As you know , the Union is already committed in Chad and the Central African Republic , so there is the problem of deployment and , to put my point quite clearly , a number of States within the Council would not , at this time , be able to participate in these reinforcement operations .
As several speakers have pointed out , reinforcing MONUC would offer advantages since its mandate is based on Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter .
We must also consider that the halting of the Nkunda offensive on 29 October has enabled MONUC to begin redeployment .
The next stage for the United Nations mission is to reconfigure with new elite troops , in particular , the Indian Ghurkhas expected this month .
3 000 men need to be added to the 17 000 men already present , and this was the thrust of the steps we undertook in New York at the Security Council over the last few days .
However , as several speakers have indicated , we cannot stop at the military situation alone since , faced with the atrocities which , as many have pointed out , have been going on for far too long , priority must be given to a political solution , as the visits by Commissioner Michel , Bernard Kouchner and David Miliband have shown , to enable contact to be resumed between the protagonists in the region .
Priority must be given to the negotiations conducted within the African framework , whether this is the African Union , SADC or the Great Lakes Conference , to revive the Goma and Nairobi processes .
In the longer term , the Union must help the Republic of Congo to equip itself with a real army , there is no real army , it is totally dilapidated , enabling it to ensure the security of the country which is vast and very difficult to control and to prevent further humanitarian crises .
I share the opinions of those who have stated that we also need to tackle the causes of the conflict and this is what the Council has done , on 10 November , in its call to combat the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the region by rebel groups in particular .
Should this task of monitoring the fight against illegal exploitation be entrusted to MONUC ?
The question is open , but faced with a humanitarian crisis situation , and several others have also stressed this , MONUC 's priority must be protection of the civilian population and I believe that what is important , and this has also been stated , is that one of the solutions to the plundering of resources must be found at regional level in order to put a stop to the exploitation and exportation of these resources to our countries .
Finally , I note that we should indeed execute the resolutions made by the United Nations panel on these issues .
Those are the additional elements that I wanted to bring to the attention of this House .
Mr President , honourable Members , first of all , I believe the debates have shown that we are all agreed : now we must act fast , very fast , in a terribly tragic situation .
As regards sending a European force to the east of the DRC , I believe that it emerged that only a European force with the strict aim of securing the humanitarian space could possibly be accepted by all the countries in the region .
This would therefore mean imposing on all parties in the conflict a humanitarian ceasefire to allow delivery of aid to the populations near the frontline .
This is precisely what the Great Lakes countries want , and for them a ceasefire and the delivery of humanitarian aid is an absolute and immediate priority .
In this respect , they have also indicated the avenues to explore : political negotiation and , above all , and this is what we have all said , reinforcing MONUC .
While the humanitarian situation is gradually coming under control , some Member States appear not to rule out the possibility of a CFSP mission .
However , no final decision will be taken until there is unanimous European support on this issue and the United Nations Security Council has stated its official position on this .
With regard to the reinforcement of MONUC , I believe this is absolutely essential , as does Louis Michel .
MONUC brings a constructive and objective approach to this conflict , but it cannot be asked for things that are not part of its mission .
MONUC must ensure peacekeeping in a specific approved framework and not impose peace on all the parties using military means .
It is sometimes difficult to grasp , but the nuance is , I feel , significant .
On the other hand , it is clear that , for the scale of the Congo and the complexity of the problem , MONUC is not sufficiently equipped - you have all said this and it is true - , neither in resources , nor perhaps with regard to its mandate and , for this , the request by the United Nations Secretary-General for more resources , in particular , three thousand additional men , is no doubt justified .
Moreover , the extension of MONUC 's mandate , in particular regarding the monitoring of the illegal exploitation of natural resources - which , as you said , is the real sinew of the war - is very important , as many have already rightly stated , in order to be able to have any influence on the development of the conflict .
Once peace returns , this question must be examined by the international community .
The example of the Kimberley process certainly opens avenues to be explored in this sense and , in practical terms , the Commission has already released EUR 75 million for the programme in the east of the Congo , for rebuilding governmental structures such as justice and the police , and to re-establish resource exploitation monitoring .
This programme is being put in place and I hope that the first results will materialise .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) The resolution on the Republic of Congo represents a clear commitment for the European Union with regard to this part of the world .
This time , however , we have the responsibility , in view of the serious nature of the crisis , to ensure that words are followed by deeds .
As ever , the UN is stammering out solutions .
Let it be the European Union that takes the initiative to attempt to mediate for peace between the parties in conflict .
I would like to thank the Commission for a particularly important signal given in recent weeks in the DRC : the allocation of a subsidy of EUR 75 million for a programme that aims to reconstruct the administrative and governmental structures in the country , including the justice and police systems .
This is a particularly significant step , because it is being made in the present with a view to the future and makes a start on tackling what lies at the heart of this dispute : the exploitation of the Congo 's natural resources , currently the object of very harsh and unregulated dispute between the various combatant groups
Crises in the car industry ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the crisis in the car industry .
Madam President , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , in the third quarter of this year , the European automotive industry has been hit by the deepening crisis in the global economy .
This comes after the industry 's good performance in the second quarter of the year .
All the leading automotive markets in the world are being affected , but with differing levels of seriousness .
Sales in the United States have fallen by 32 % in a year , reaching their lowest level in 25 years .
The three big American car manufacturers - General Motors , Ford and Chrysler - have requested emergency aid from the Federal State .
The emerging markets which , until this summer , offset the fall in sales for these countries , have also been hit by the crisis , but to a lesser degree .
In China , sales were down 1.4 % in September .
This is the second consecutive month of falling sales in China , following the 6.3 % drop in August .
In Brazil , car sales were down 11 % last month , for the first time since 1999 .
The automotive market has not yet fallen in Russia , but there is a significant slowdown in this market and it could experience the first falls at the beginning of next year .
We can clearly see , then , that the situation is also worsening in the large emerging countries .
In Europe , vehicle registrations were down almost 4 % over the period from the start of the year to last August .
The end of the year may prove difficult and the decline in the automotive market could be around 5 % for the whole of 2008 , which , for this market , would be the worst result recorded since 1993 .
Throughout the world , however , the automotive industry is making considerable efforts to tackle the crisis and is trying to find the foundations for new growth .
The measures to reduce production will have negative knock-on effects on jobs in all value chains as well as on demand .
We shall see this in the next few days .
Despite the difficult economic situation , the leading European car manufacturers will still be profitable in 2008 , even though the growth rate in margins is obviously slowing down .
They are able to maintain this profit situation given the very high productivity gains made over the last few years .
The competitive position of the European automotive industry remains , therefore , relatively good - I am not saying this lightly - , and this is explained by three factors .
Firstly , the fact that the European automotive industry is increasingly present in the emerging countries , which are both markets and production sites .
It is in these emerging countries that growth , even if it is slowing down as I have already mentioned , remains a driving force .
The second factor is that there is a better new models policy , with models that are now more economical , ecological and in tune with consumers ' demands .
Finally , as I pointed out , given the productivity gains in previous years , the financial situation of the European industry is , at present , still relatively healthy .
Above all , in this situation , vigilance is required to prevent State subsidies granted to non-European manufacturers by their governments from distorting fair competition on the world market , in particular , on the emerging markets .
Targeted and temporary support measures for European producers could prove useful , in particular , to improve the technological and ecological performance of the European car population , where the regulatory environment , as we know , is the most demanding in the world in terms of environmental legislation .
This is what led European manufacturers to invest more heavily than their main American competitors in research and development to face up to these ecological challenges .
We can be pleased that this has given our industry a lead in the environmental sector , but we must be vigilant and make sure that it effectively maintains this lead .
The Commission - I shall leave Commissioner Verheugen to expand on this - will make proposals on 26 November regarding European measures to support industry , especially the automotive sector .
The European Investment Bank is also being asked and should participate in the efforts underway at European level .
Member States must provide the Bank , if necessary , with the appropriate resources so that it will be in a position to make available new resources to support the automotive sector .
Member States are also considering national actions to support their manufacturers .
These efforts must be coordinated in order to maximise the effectiveness of this support .
As it has done in other areas in response to the crisis , the French Presidency shall do its utmost to obtain joint European action on this major industrial issue .
The December European Council will debate the Commission 's proposals and the various national support plans that may have been put in place by then .
This will , of course , involve acting consistently with the other political objectives of the Union .
Support for the automotive sector must , in particular , respect the integrity of the internal market .
It is in no one 's interest to take advantage of the crisis to create distortions on the automotive market and , naturally , this support must resolutely fall within the environmental objectives that the Union has set in the energy and climate change package .
I believe the Commission is working towards this .
The Presidency is determined to promote the emergence of a balanced agreement between Member States and Parliament on a coordinated offensive approach in support of the automotive industries .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , it is not surprising that the first full impact on the real economy of the crisis in the financial markets has hit the car market .
The car market is particularly sensitive to consumer behaviour .
It is clear that , in this situation , consumers who are unclear about their own economic future , who do not know whether they will still have a job next year , whether their income will be as high , or whether they will still have their capital , are not going to rush out and buy a new car .
That is a well-known and also probably a natural reaction .
It is not just the crisis in the financial markets that leads to this restraint , however .
There is also uncertainty amongst manufacturers and consumers in respect of the requirements that politics will make of the car of the future .
Consumers do not know , for example , whether they can count on tax incentives or allowances if they buy or do not buy certain cars .
It is therefore necessary for the statutory conditions for the industry to be cleared up as soon as possible .
The situation is clear .
The motor industry is a key industry , if not the key industry , for Europe and it consists of more than the manufacture of cars .
We have to look at the entire supply chain and the entire car market which , of course , also includes the vehicle trade and vehicle repair shops .
This is a sector which , all told , employs 12 million people in Europe and has a far-reaching impact stretching into other sectors .
The President-in-Office of the Council has already described the decline .
I will give you another figure .
So far this year , 700 000 fewer new cars have been registered across Europe than last year .
This has essentially been over a nine-month period , which means that by the end of the year , the figure will probably have risen to over a million .
I am sure you can quite easily imagine the economic consequences of this .
We still have no reason to hope that this will change very quickly in 2009 .
In other words , we must assume that 2009 , too , will be a crisis year for the motor industry , which will have significant effects on capacity utilisation , the number of people employed and the ability of car-makers to invest , especially as relates to large investments such as are needed to meet the requirements for low-pollutant and low-consumption vehicles .
This economic development has also given rise to an extremely negative development in relation to the environmental situation .
The older the stock of cars on the roads of Europe , the greater the pollution produced - and this is a very important point that we must keep an eye on .
If we really want to bring down pollutant emissions , in particular of CO2 , and that is our joint priority target , the crucial thing is to replace the old cars currently being driven around the roads of Europe quickly .
For a little while now , exactly the opposite has been happening .
The stock of cars on Europe 's roads is getting older and older and pollutant emissions are rising .
I say to you , in the clearest possible way , that if all the parties involved - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - do not pay very close attention to making cars affordable for consumers in the next few years , this situation will be exacerbated further .
We can , of course , already offer zero-emission cars .
It is just that no one can afford them .
We therefore have to create a reasonable relationship between these points .
As you know , we do have the Cars 21 process .
Since we recognised the seriousness of the situation at a very early stage , I arranged a ' motor summit ' as part of this process a few weeks ago in Brussels with car manufacturers , the Member States in which cars are manufactured , the unions , the environmental associations and all stakeholders .
Through this , a couple of things that we need to do became very clear .
The first of these is that we really must keep the statutory conditions for business stable and predictable .
The industry must know where it stands and what we expect of it .
We must keep an eye on the cumulative effects of the measures we take .
I think it right that I should remind you that CO2 is not the only thing that we are discussing when it comes to the motor industry .
We have already approved Euro 5 and Euro 6 .
The measures have not yet been implemented , however , and they , too , require high levels of investment and will make vehicles more expensive .
We have already adopted additional requirements relating to protecting pedestrians .
This again means a need for heavy investment , and that makes cars more expensive .
We already currently have making their way through the legislative process further strict regulations relating to safety improvements in European cars .
The effect is the same .
When we take all this together , we can already see that European vehicles are going to experience a clear jump in prices over the next few years , and we must take account of this too .
The second thing was that we agreed that demand must be boosted .
This can take place in various ways .
In my opinion , tax incentives are a good tool , but only when the tax incentives in question are CO2-based .
Tax incentives that quite simply lead to any old cars being bought are really of little use .
They must be about strengthening the demand for low consumption and environmentally friendly cars .
The same applies to public procurement .
Then there is the question of the ability to invest .
In this regard , there has been a line of credit at the European Investment Bank for years whereby car makers are offered favourable-rate credit in order to develop new environmentally friendly vehicles .
These lines of credit were also utilised in recent years , so this is nothing new .
We now need to increase these lines of credit to be able to meet demand and the European Investment Bank is ready to do that .
I am working on the basis that the relevant decisions will have been taken before December is out .
Finally , I would like to point out once again that we must ensure in our trade policy , too , that we maintain the future readiness of the European motor industry .
The competition will be increasingly relocated to regions of the world with expectations of high growth .
We will be competing in these regions with manufacturers from other parts of the world who manufacture under significantly cheaper conditions than European manufacturers .
Let me be quite clear here : the great advantage that the European manufacturers have in terms of global competition is the fact that Europe will soon already be offering the cleanest and safest cars in the world and it is my hope , when it comes to quality , that the same will apply and that we will also be offering the best cars in the world .
Let me add something about the problem at hand , the one that really led to this debate here today in the first place .
One European car maker , Adam Opel GmbH in Germany , a 100 % subsidiary of General Motors , is currently in very worrying financial waters .
Negotiations are under way between Opel and the German government as to whether there may be a state guarantee to solve Opel 's financial problems .
Very serious arguments of political policy structure are being put forward to oppose this and I can well understand these arguments since we have an industrial policy that is not based on subsidies and that will continue to operate that way .
Our European industrial policy aims , by hook or by crook , to prevent a return to the old subsidising mindset and instead to help industry to grow through predictable , stable conditions for business and to hold its own in competition .
The problem at Opel is , however , not one caused by management error , poor production or bad quality cars .
This company has , in recent years , made particular efforts to meet the requirements of the future , with high levels of investment in modern technology .
The problem arose solely on the back of the crisis situation at Opel 's US parent company .
I really do believe that what we have here are extraordinary circumstances , circumstances that do not apply to other manufacturers in Europe and which justify the consideration of extraordinary measures .
I would like to reiterate that we are not talking about subsidies here but about a possible guarantee .
This is a competitive company we are talking about .
From the European point of view , we have no interest in seeing Opel disappear from the marketplace , and this is not just a German problem either .
Opel manufactures in several European countries and has a supply chain stretching across Europe .
That supply chain is closely connected with all the other car makers , which means that , if a large European manufacturer were to vanish from the marketplace , that would also have consequences for all other manufacturers .
As I say , that would not be in our interests while , from the social and political viewpoints , it would clearly not be justified to say that Opel employees have to foot the bill - and I want to make this point clearly - for serious and irresponsible errors that were made at the parent company in the United States .
( Applause )
We will see , then , what decision the governments affected reach , and I say the word governments expressly , something that has not been on sufficient public display hitherto .
In Sweden , too , there is a problem with another General Motors subsidiary , Saab , where the problems are structural and considerably worse .
In addition , there is a problem in Spain , where the planned production of a new environmentally friendly vehicle is in doubt .
From the European perspective , I would say that we will do everything in our power to help European manufacturers get through this difficult time so that they will be able to play their role as a real engine for future growth and sound jobs in the future , too .
( Applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the manufacturing sector in the European Union that produces a third of the cars produced in the world .
In Europe , the sector employs three million people in addition to all the indirect employment , and it is one of the key industries for the world as a whole in terms of direct sales , indirect sales and total number of people employed .
Let us also consider that today , while we are having this debate , the most recent estimates say that over the coming year , the numbers of unemployed people throughout the European Union will double .
Personally , I believe that even this estimate is optimistic .
I agree with the Commissioner that the car industry should receive assistance , in the attempts that we have requested to produce cars with low emissions and low fuel consumption .
We need to aid change , not penalise those who are left behind , and we need to link funding to innovation .
If helping car firms to recover may seem burdensome , the bankruptcy of some of them would cost the EU much , much more .
The sector is in crisis , throughout the world , and we can find a way out of this situation by making a technological advance - here we are in agreement - and therefore we need to decide between producing 21st century cars in Europe or losing this manufacturing activity to countries which are coming close to producing low-technology , low-cost cars in large quantities , such as India or China .
It is true that banks are now no longer lending money , that the large automobile firms are using up the liquidity that they had previously built up , and which had existed up until halfway through this year , and that the market has shrunk significantly and will end 2008 with negative figures and , I believe , Mr Jouyet , with a percentage figure closer to two digits , while my forecasts for 2009 are pessimistic .
Europe has a great opportunity : to support , without discrimination , structural changes to the sector with long-term , low-interest loans and assistance for research .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , faced with the recession , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament advocates a united and European policy .
This is true not only for financial confidentiality , it also applies to the other economic sectors , including the industrial sector .
We have often regretted the lack of a strong industrial policy in the European Union .
Countries such as the United States and Great Britain have allowed their industries to decline while mainly backing services .
The outcome is not convincing .
Europe must fight to maintain the extensive industrial fabric on which SMEs and services to businesses are dependent .
The automotive industry in Europe is by no means a dinosaur , it is not a species doomed to extinction .
I agree fully with Vice-President Verheugen in this respect .
We account for one third of all automobile production in the world , despite the fact that car production has declined recently .
Cars produced in Europe must become cleaner and less energy-guzzling and , for the foreseeable future , we will not be able to do without this essential , individual means of transport .
The best possible organisation of collective transport will never succeed in appeasing the human need for mobility .
The European Union must therefore develop a common response to the sector 's problems and the response cannot be , as Mr Verheugen has just stated , the strangulation of the European automotive industry .
I do not want a Europe in which the only cars on the road are Japanese - or , in the future , Chinese .
I am aware that the politically correct argument insists on promoting so-called ' green ' jobs .
A recent United Nations report estimates the potential for green jobs in the world to be 3 % of global jobs .
This would be very welcome .
However , simple arithmetic leads us to conclude that 97 % of jobs are not green , but fall under the realm of traditional sectors .
This is another reason for us to fight to maintain a European automotive industry which employs 2 million people directly and 10 million indirectly , equating to 7 % of all European jobs .
When the United States , China and Japan are investing massively in economic programmes , Europe cannot afford to sit back and watch passively as whole swathes of its industry disappear .
Those who tell us that we must leave the market alone are naïve ideologists .
Without intervention by the public hand , the hidden hand , dear to Adam Smith , will prefer the short term and will destroy structures that are essential in shaping our common future .
Lastly , we expect the Commission , Madam President , to provide a proactive framework to maintain the competitiveness and the very existence of the European automotive industry .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner Verheugen has very impressively illustrated how the crisis spilled over from the financial market to the market in car sales .
What is more , the reality of the situation is that confidence has evaporated and uncertainty prevails in respect of future regulation on CO2 .
For this reason , I am only able to call on my fellow Members and the Council to come to a clear and reliable regulation in this area of CO2 regulation for cars very quickly - on the basis of what has been put forward by the French Presidency , for which I can only congratulate you , Mr Jouyet .
Yet the absolutely most climate-friendly car we could possibly want in Europe is worth nothing if it is in the shop window and not on the road .
People do not just need to drive such a car , they have to be able to pay for it too .
That is why we are calling for the following three-pronged approach .
First of all , get new models on the streets .
This requires lots of investment in research now , for which reason we welcome the European Investment Bank 's programme .
Ecofin meets on 2 December - we hope that a decision will be made there that will bring about flexible , favourable credit flows in the motor industry .
Secondly , the motor industry financial institutions must be safeguarded .
We cannot do that here , at the European level - it must be included within the national rescue packages , which must remain open .
Thirdly , we must have scrapping premiums in Europe .
Italy has taken a lead in this area , as has Sweden , though perhaps not quite as impressively as Italy .
This is how tax incentives can be used to get new models onto the streets .
It would be good if no European barriers were put in the way on the basis of competition law .
For that reason , it would also have been good if Mrs Cruz had been present .
This is the route to a new way forward !
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , just like yesterday , I feel I have to say that I have great doubt about the honesty with which the Commission is conducting this debate .
It is my opinion , Commissioner , that as the founder of the CARS 21 strategy group , you must , for starters , accept the responsibility for the fact that it has failed to achieve its aim of putting the European motor industry on a proper future-ready footing .
What have you actually done over recent years that there is now a need to use this financial crisis to balance the books ?
The fact that the motor industry in Europe has a strategic problem is one thing .
However , the fact that you do not include your strategic weaknesses , as it were , over recent years - your inability to get behind environmental innovations - on the balance sheet , that I find dishonest .
If thousands and tens of thousands of European families are now to fear for the future of their jobs in the motor industry , the Commission , too , the Commissioner and CARS 21 must all bear some responsibility for this .
How can we actually tell that the Commission , and you in particular , Commissioner , did not do anything to bring about the situation whereby the strategic goals resulting from the volatile oil prices caused by the finite nature of the oil supply and from the exigencies of protecting the climate were not ultimately implemented ?
Commissioner , you personally blocked your fellow Commissioner Mr Dimas 's proposals on CO2 regulation for cars for years .
You are the one with your foot on the brakes in relation to bringing about a binding target for efficient cars - the conversion to a binding agreement by the middle of the coming decade of something which was voluntarily agreed back in the mid-1990s .
You want there to be less environmental innovation than was already taken for granted in the mid-1990s .
Yesterday , we learnt that the Council , under German pressure , is still not prepared to sign up to binding targets for 2020 that are , in any case , still close to those of the mid-1990s .
For me , these double standards , this dishonesty in the debate about environmental innovation is a scandal .
I call on you , in this trilogue , to finally live up to a promise you make in this debate about innovation in the motor industry .
Anything else would mean that you really would assume even greater responsibility for the failure of this industry and its suppliers to be future-ready .
The crisis in the car industry has various causes , but clearly one of the most important is the fall in purchasing power of most of the population as a result of their low incomes , particularly due to low pay , precarious work and unemployment .
As a result , one of the most effective measures would be to increase pay through a fair distribution of income .
However , naturally , other measures are required now .
This is because the halt in production by car manufacturers has repercussions on many other sectors , including the various component industries and transport , which may exacerbate the whole economic and social situation .
Therefore , just as there have been exceptional measures for the financial sector , there should also be exceptional measures for the car sector in order to safeguard employment .
It cannot be said that defending production and employment is not as important as the financial sector .
We must ensure the necessary solidarity to support industry in the European Union , particularly in the more fragile economies and sectors .
In Portugal , this situation is very worrying as the sector is heavily dependent on the strategy of multinationals .
In recent years , we have seen various relocations , both in the production of cars , as in the case of Opel and Renault , and in the production of components , such as the cases of Yazaki Saltano and Lear in particular , in addition to the threat of reduced employment in other companies , such as Sunviauto and Delphi and in hundreds of micro- and small enterprises affected by this situation .
In some cases , production has been halted for several days , as at Autoeuropa in Palmela and at Renault 's component plant at Cacia , Aveiro , due to a lack of orders .
With fewer cars and fewer components coming and going , goods transport is also affected .
Therefore , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , it is vital for the European Union to provide extraordinary support to help industrial production and safeguard employment with rights .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the harbingers of the crisis in the motor industry , such as the first falls in orders , were probably not taken seriously enough .
At first we perhaps hoped it would just be gas-guzzling American cars that would be affected .
Anyone who has spoken a little to car dealers knows diesel vehicles have been hard to shift in the EU , too , for months now .
Therefore , the European Union should not be surprised by the ever-worsening maelstrom of problems since it has worked industriously to bring about the downfall of this once blooming sector through a flood of regulations , for instance , that have been rained down on the motor industry .
Companies need a stable , predictable legal basis on which to be able to make plans .
If the EU constantly changes the rules , it will perhaps eventually drive every industry to ruin .
Nor should we forget the continuous ratcheting up of the tax load on diesel and , recently , the biofuels adventure .
To solve the crisis , then , it will not be enough for the EU to release the planned EUR 40 billion in credit .
The Union must create predictable conditions of trade in future that it is possible to plan around , and it must do so for every industry .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like , once again , to emphasise the importance of the motor industry with its 12 million direct and indirect jobs and its status as a worldwide technology leader in the sector .
We must recall - Commissioner Verheugen and others have done so - that the motor industry is of course dependent on the state of the economy and the price of oil and that buyer behaviour exhibits a dramatic loss of confidence in times of crisis in the financial markets .
That is the main problem in the motor industry .
Competition is very tight , and it simply cannot be possible for an individual company - or even an individual Member State - to put in place measures which distort competition without the European Commission taking care to prevent the distortion in question .
I say this by way of a preliminary remark .
In light of this , the proposals to create a Europe-wide economic stimulus package are just as counterproductive as individual proposals to put up a protective shield over the entire motor industry .
I believe the right course to be to promote research and development into low-pollutant vehicles , either through the research programme or by means of credits , as proposed by the Commission .
I think it is necessary to ensure that aid at the Member State level , equally , is not allowed to lead to distortions in competition .
I am also absolutely convinced that we must not alter competition policy overall , as I have read in recent days in proposals , including from prominent sources within this House .
The Commission is right when it applies the rules on competition strictly .
I would also say , however , that it is possible that we need to come up with European transitional solutions - but not long-term subsidisation - for management errors of the like that have affected GM in the United States and its subsidiaries , and that such solutions must be subject to competition law .
Only in this way can the jobs in this industry be secured in the long term , and I would also say that the best incentive would be to postpone a sensible climate-change policy for cars , make cars affordable , as has been said , and not to make any excessive demands .
I can only describe what Mrs Harms said in this regard as completely removed from the reality of the situation .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the reality is that the motor industry is in crisis and there are many reasons for this .
The financial crisis , in particular , has further accelerated the crisis in this sector and the Member States are currently working on resolutions .
The European automotive industry is a key industry .
For that reason , we need European solutions for this key European industry in order to defeat this crisis .
Nearly all car makers have European structures .
In order to be able to implement the necessary investment in environmentally friendly vehicles - as has been mentioned a number of times today - and low-consumption technologies , car makers need public guarantees or low interest credit from the European Investment Bank .
The supply industry , too - and this is very important - must not be forgotten in all this .
The supply industry contains small and medium-sized companies in which jobs are created and innovation occurs .
Yet what can the European Union do to protect this key industry ?
In the last plenary part-session , the President-in-Office of the Council proposed that key industries should be protected .
For me , this was a good idea , because if you take the proposal to its logical conclusion it means a ' Volkswagen Law ' for the entire European motor industry .
That would certainly be a sound instrument .
The European Commission , however , is currently fighting against this protective instrument .
Therefore , I would ask the Commission this : will it hold its grudge , despite the crisis in the motor industry , or will it change course in light of this crisis ?
( NL ) Madam President , it is telling that the Commissioner for Enterprise and Industry is here but not the Commissioner for Competition .
I have major reservations about helping out the car industry .
Whilst the problems are undeniably very serious , why support the car industry and not other sectors ?
The problems have possibly been exacerbated , but certainly not caused , by the credit crunch , and state aid should not be a reward for bad behaviour .
Although the EU Treaty allows for rescue aid , we should not use tax money - which , after all , is paid for by the public - to keep ailing industries afloat .
Neither should we forget that huge amounts of money have already gone into the rescue of car manufacturers in recent years - not always successfully , I should add .
While we have a short-term responsibility for jobs that are on the line , we also have a long-term responsibility to leave behind a healthy economy , a healthy environment , and also healthy state finances for future generations .
I find it a bit unfair that there has been no money for care , education , child care or the environment for years , and that we are now being asked to pump billions into the car industry to save it from disaster .
If aid is given , there should be stringent conditions for what the car industry must do in return in the form of restructuring , and this should apply only to future-oriented , environmentally friendly and innovative activities ; for , indeed , whilst state aid may be able to rescue companies , it can also ruin other companies as a result of distortions of competition .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this has already been said several times .
The automotive industry , directly or indirectly , accounts for 12 million jobs within the European Union .
That represents 10 % of European GDP .
The automotive industry is today facing a serious crisis : the European market has fallen by around 15 % .
This decline could reach 17 % to 20 % for the final quarters of 2008 .
Manufacturers ' results are falling .
In this context , the lack of funds is the primary danger facing this industry .
Consequently , the manufacturers are cutting production and trying to reduce structural costs .
Jobs become the first victims of the crisis .
As you said , Mr President , faced with this crisis , what is needed is a coordinated response from Europe and the Member States , especially those directly concerned .
The financial support of the EIB that is planned is necessary .
Of course , I endorse your proposals .
Firstly , we must support investment , particularly for the design and development of clean vehicles and the development of hybrid and electric vehicles .
We must also support the market through financial incentives to renew those cars on the road .
As the Commissioner said , old cars account for a significant part of the pollution generated by cars as a whole .
However , we must also set up a stable and ambitious but realistic regulatory framework .
The objectives for reducing CO2 emissions must be upheld , manufacturers have devoted - and are still devoting - large amounts to this , but realism must plead in favour of restraint in the fines imposed for failing to achieve the objectives .
Excessive fines would eliminate general manufacturers .
Let us not forget that the automotive industry is the industry hit by the toughest ecological requirements .
Finally , in the current circumstances , it would be detrimental to the manufacturers to undermine the protection covering external bodywork parts .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think this debate we are having on one of the most critical sectors in the European economy is timely .
The world economy is getting worse and worse and the already negative context for the car industry in Italy and in Europe is also deteriorating .
The minister referred to the data earlier ; there has been a marked fall in sales of 5 % in 2008 .
Italy has seen a fall of over 18 % in October alone , which is the worst figure in over ten years in the sector .
This is thus a crisis which is affecting all the most important European markets , but I would like to stress that it is not just the car production sector that is feeling the effects of the crisis , but the whole supply chain , with a particularly detrimental impact on firms specialising in producing components for cars .
As has been said , the crisis is hitting the whole sector , and merely by way of example I will mention the situation in Italy on the Tuscan coast where , in recent months , following relocation processes , recourse has been had on a massive scale to the wages guarantee fund , imposed on hundreds of workers , and to the dismissal of employees working on temporary contracts .
One example , among many , gives us an idea of how very serious the situation is , and that is the Delfi group , whose workers have been relying on the wages guarantee fund for two and a half years .
Urgent steps are needed to redeploy them , starting with the efforts initiated by local government bodies .
It is now clear , however , that there is a partial impotence on the part of national , regional and local institutions , and hence a need for strong commitment and action by Europe , including confronting the multinationals on the problems of relocations and thus the need to adopt , Europe-wide , measures designed to contain this crisis in order to avoid the impact in social and employment terms .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis is teaching us that we need to go back to the real economy and thus we need to help the European manufacturing industry to recover , particularly at a time when the US , led by Barack Obama , is preparing to change economic relations worldwide to some degree .
There should be no talk of State aid , but we ought to strengthen our manufacturing industry in three areas : recycling , which should be understood in the same way across Europe , the repositioning of production to focus on innovative sectors and the provision of information to consumers and significant action within the World Trade Organisation to rebalance customs tariff barriers , most of all in relations between the European Union and the Far East .
Additionally , we must not forget investment in research in the sector and also in large-scale infrastructure , both tangible and intangible .
We must play a fair game within the world .
Today , the rules are changing , and we need to use the conclusions of the G20 to go back to an equal departure point .
( SV ) Madam President , jobs are what is important around Europe now .
What we are seeing within the motor industry is an industrial challenge that is also characteristic of other parts of the European economy .
What must not be allowed to happen now is for us to have a situation whereby state aid undermines employment in companies in one country but boosts it in another .
We cannot have state aid that is to the detriment of the industry within one area and to its benefit in another area , because that would lead to unemployment and a loss of jobs that would proceed across Europe step by step .
We must not have state aid that makes things more difficult for vibrant companies and keeps afloat companies that can no longer survive alone .
The problem in the motor industry is a long-term one that we have seen more clearly in this financial crisis , but where we have , for a long time , seen large-scale losses and weakening demand around the world , as well as overcapacity .
What is important now , first and foremost , is to ensure that demand exists in Europe .
This means tax cuts in order to make it possible for there to be demand from European households for the products that are produced here .
It means ensuring that European industry is able , in area after area , to be a leader in terms of technology and development , as well as within the environmental and energy sectors too .
That is where public efforts should be focused .
Yet it also means clearing the way for the European motor industry to be a global player .
This means ensuring that we can have open free trade in which the European motor industry has access to world markets .
It is therefore important to remember that those who stand in the way of free trade and progress in the Doha Round today are , in actual fact , hindering the opportunities for the European motor industry to grow in the large markets of the future .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , faced with the extremely serious crisis that is affecting the car sector from the US to our continent , Europe has a very clear choice : either to remain inactive and observe this collapse in demand and production , the effects of which we cannot even calculate today , in the name of an abstract consistency with a theoretical model of market liberalism , with total respect for competition , as some voices have urged here today , or to take on its responsibilities to tackle the situation properly .
We have opted for the second choice and we call upon the Commission and the Council to show decisiveness and determination .
We welcomed what Commissioner Verheugen said and we hope that none of his colleagues hold him back too much in this determination .
This is an exceptional situation and thus exceptional responses are required .
On the other hand , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis has shown us some actions by political and economic authorities who have made choices in terms of conduct and investment of public resources which , up until a few months ago , would have been unthinkable .
Our action should , however - and I am just finishing - be selective , combine strategy with urgency , and should encourage , both through more attractive loans and support for demand , a selective repositioning towards more environmentally sustainable production .
Madam President , in my view , Europe 's car industry has shown remarkable resilience in the past few years , despite some extremely tough economic conditions and a veritable deluge of EU legislation .
Our car manufacturers lead the world for environmental awareness , technical standards and innovation .
It is a record that deserves to be supported and not undermined .
I am particularly proud of the UK car industry and , if I may , would like to make a plug for my local Nissan company - the most productive car plant in Europe - which is located in my region in North-East England .
Nobody would dispute the importance of environmental protection , but I am extremely concerned that , in our rush to prove our green credentials , we are sometimes in danger of destroying a very important and successful industry .
Already we are seeing a massive fall in sales in the UK .
Sales last month were down 23 % .
Rather than imposing a very rigid and inflexible timetable for change in the industry , we should be seeking to support the industry and give it the incentive to make the changes that are necessary to bring about their future .
If the car industry has our political support - and our political support for the supplier and component industries too - we can help them to get through this difficult period .
I hope that the Commission will be extremely vigilant with regard to Member States stretching the limits on state aid to car manufacturers .
In Britain , we have a very long and a very unsuccessful history of state support for the auto industry .
We managed to get out of that in the 1980s .
I hope we will not go back there again because , if we pour public money into the car industry , what about the building industry , the construction industry and the food industry ?
All industries are suffering and we must be extremely careful with the hard-pressed taxpayer 's funds to ensure that we do not throw too much more of it into the car industry .
This did not work in the past and will not work in the future .
I hope the Commission will be extremely vigilant in keeping an eye on errant Member States that might be tempted down this unsuccessful road .

( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has been said before , the car industry is a vital sector ; indeed , it is a key sector for the European economy , providing , as it does , direct or indirect employment to 12 million people .
This is enormous .
I therefore believe that cheap loans for this key sector are more than justified , but this fresh money should obviously be put into new , environmentally friendly technologies .
We can expect the European car manufacturers to join forces to an even greater extent when it comes to developing these new technologies , for example , to create affordable , high-performance batteries for electrical cars .
We should recognise , moreover , that Europe itself has also made its share of mistakes .
We have possibly invested too heavily in hydrogen , while we now need economical , electrical hybrid engines in the very short term .
This is why we should , perhaps , adjust our priorities and projects , particularly in the context of the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development .
It should be our ambition , and indeed why not , to have all new cars in Europe run on electricity , hybrid or not , by 2020 .
Why should this not be possible ?
In order to achieve this , we need a prompt switch-over , which means that we must also invest in training the workers involved .
Commissioner , we are counting on your agreeing that aid for training workers is a future-oriented and justified investment and that it is considered as such .
Moreover , various manufacturers , including Ford in Genk and Opel in Antwerp , are already investing and making huge efforts , including on behalf of vulnerable groups of the labour market .
It is , to my mind , justified to further encourage and reward policy of this kind .
Finally , the CO2 legislation which we shall be approving in the next few weeks is the perfect opportunity to set our sights high .
Crises invariably create opportunities .
We now have to make a combined effort to create these next-generation cars .
If we persevere now , then the European Union will dominate this market for decades to come , hence this appeal to the European manufacturers to abandon the trenches and go on the offensive .
( FR ) Madam President , what should be our strategy to overcome this crisis ?
Right now , the facts are before us .
The crisis is affecting all manufacturers and there is a knock-on effect hitting the 12 million European citizens who work in the automotive industry .
We must think , first and foremost , of these workers and their families and we must make it our priority to protect them by answering this troubling question : what is the strategy needed to overcome this crisis ?
A fast and effective united and structured industrial policy for the medium and long term , a ' new car deal ' , a coordinated response by Member States and the Union that will be equal to the situation .
I hear , in this Parliament , the old dogmatic views of outdated liberalism resurfacing : no help , no subsidies , competition , nothing but competition .
Ladies and gentlemen , the time has come for regulation , for public action .
We therefore need a new car deal , an ambitious and intelligent plan for the automotive industry , first of all to save jobs and develop employment in Europe , with support for training .
Then , to speed up the technological change of these enterprises to clean and intelligent vehicles , with the resolve to revive demand , by simplifying the renewal of old cars on the road , which are generators of pollution , through the creation of a European environmental bonus .
In short , Europe must act and must not fail to respond .
It must act and not be silent and take no action .
We must act and act intelligently to support this transformation .
( RO ) We are living in a world where we have gone from getting around using one horse per person to getting around with tens or hundreds of horse power .
4- and 5-seater cars are carrying just one person more than 75 % of the time .
They have been using 7.5 litres of fuel per 100 kilometres over 100 years ..
The major problems facing mankind are problems relating to behaviour and pollution .
We therefore need to think about and use cars differently .
They need to be much smaller , quite safe , green , using a few litres per 100 kilometres and at prices which will allow human behaviour to be controlled in the future .
( NL ) Madam President , with all due criticism of the car industry and of the way the Commission has operated , we have no choice but to devote attention to the car industry because , like housing construction , it is facing a dramatic decline .
All the alarm bells are ringing , so we must act on time , in the short term and in a targeted manner .
I should like to stress three things : this should involve not only the major car manufacturers , but also suppliers and financing companies .
The restructuring exercise should focus on cleaner , more economical cars , and certain aspects will need to be coordinated at European level .
We must discourage Member States from flying solo , which could exacerbate the problems in neighbouring countries .
This is particularly important to suppliers , because they work across borders .
They operate within the internal market and should be able to enjoy the measures to the same extent , and not just at national level .
This level playing field should be closely monitored by the European Commission .
As such , I support the role which the Directorate-General for Competition has been assigned in this connection .
( FR ) Madam President , having paid to save the banks , we now have to save the automobile industry and once again , of course , with public funds .
For more than ten years , however , we have been alerting the automobile industry of the consequences of CO2 emissions on public health .
For more than ten years , we have been calling for the industry to build clean cars .
For more than ten years , it has turned a deaf ear and has resisted with the powerful automobile lobby .
It has been holding back any development .
Recently , Commissioner , and you are in a position to know this , in this Parliament it opposed ' CARS 21 ' in order not to reduce emissions below 130 grams .
Yet , after making considerable profits , which were not reinvested in industrial restructuring , the financial crisis has become a good excuse to ask for public aid and sack workers left , right and centre .
Are consumers going to be fooled yet again ?
In fact , consumers are going to have to pay so that they can obtain a clean car on the market , with no guarantee that it will be cheaper , just as in the present situation .
It is therefore elsewhere that the automobile industry must be steered to avoid future bankruptcies because we must prepare for the post-car era .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all , we would observe that the markets in Europe that have been less subject to collapse have a clear regulatory environment in respect of legislation on the taxation of CO2 and a clear regulatory environment in respect of what is expected of car makers .
Mr Jouyet , if your Presidency were to succeed in obliging the Member States to create clear regulatory environments as quickly as possible , even the consumer would regain confidence .
That would be the best possible aid for the motor industry .
There is something else we should do .
We should not , at this point , be talking about subsidies amounting to billions whilst , at the same time , threatening the motor industry with fines amounting to billions if targets are not met .
That makes no sense .
It provides a massive amount of uncertainty and makes vehicles more expensive for consumers .
We need to proceed differently , put a vision in place and announce that , by the end of the 2020s , 20 , 25 or 30 % of cars should be emission-free .
That would spark innovation and bring it to the fore , whilst also providing clarity to consumers about the future strategy of the motor industry in Europe .
( ES ) Madam President , in the current crisis situation , the laudable efforts of the French Presidency and the Industry Commissioner , Mr Verheugen , should be congratulated .
However , we need more , and urgently .
We also need to hear the Industry and Competition Commissioners speaking in harmony .
The car industry , which means manufacturers , support industry , distributors and finance companies , needs an urgent and audacious multifaceted aid plan .
People will not understand modesty and reticence when decisions are made about the aid needed to support the car industry , given its direct , mass and high-quality employment , particularly in comparison to the diligence shown in helping the financial sector , in which the most serious errors have been judged with benevolence .
The Opel workers at Figueruelas in Zaragoza , who have assisted and supported the future of their company in Spain and Germany , will not understand , nor will the government of Aragón or the Spanish government which are utilising all their investment resources and hoping for cooperation and leadership from the European Union .
We need a rapid and audacious plan which will quickly help to replace the European car fleet with safer and cleaner vehicles .
We need a European ' Plan Renove ' or renewal scheme , as from December , which will encourage everything from direct investment to consumption .
European car manufacturers , and also the support industry , distributors and finance companies , also need aid and guarantees .
A quick , straightforward and logical agreement on the vehicles and emissions issue would also be helpful .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Juncker , President of the Eurogroup and Prime Minister of Luxembourg , has stated that we need a European strategy to save the car industry in response to the rescue plan announced by the United States .
I am fully in agreement with what has been said and I hope that it will happen .
At the next meeting of ministers of finance of the Member States , the European Investment Bank will propose an increase in loan volumes of 20 and 30 % in 2009 and 2010 , amounting to EUR 10-15 billion per year for the car industry , and this decision is extremely timely .

Some Member States have already taken independent action : the German government , for example , submitted early in the month an aid plan targeting the economy , with the idea of generating new investment amounting to EUR 50 billion over the next year .
Among the key sectors involved is the car industry .
I hope that the European Commission will do the same , acting as a body .
Aid to the sector should be invested within the European Union , and therefore should go to firms that are not relocating their production operations .
Every decision to grant aid to firms is extremely welcome , given the circumstances , and its main goal should be to shore up employment and stimulate investment within Europe .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I actually agree with the comments made by Mrs Harms .
The support that is needed for the car industry indeed represents failing industrial policy .
For years , there has been talk about the need to prepare the car industry for the 21st century , which ultimately did not happen .
Again and again , the car industry has turned a deaf ear to the appeals for cleaner and more economical cars .
Ultimately , we have nothing to show for it .
The car industry has done nothing in the way of innovation to produce cars with less CO2 emissions , and still there is the lobby to ease the CO2 requirements on the car industry , which is a crying shame .
The question is : where do we go from here ?
I think that we can continue to support the car industry , but that this must be coupled with very strict requirements , and that real support should be given only to electrical cars , an entire programme to make the electrification of the car industry possible and , of course , to the retraining of workers .
After all , it is very important that the workers in the car industry should have a future .
They should never be forgotten .
Madam President , I would like to thank all the speakers .
It is a very rich debate on an important matter and I share , like the Presidency , the feeling that has been expressed by the majority of you , namely that it is absolutely vital that we assume full responsibility to face up to this exceptional situation that is hitting a key industry : the figures are , as you pointed out , 12 million jobs in the European Union and an industry hit by the financial crisis , due to the level of consumer credit which is the hallmark of this industry .
Moreover , it is an industry that has to face up to unparalleled ecological challenges .
Falling behind schedule is one thing , not making up the lost time is another , just when we are also committed to adopting the energy and climate change package , which is one of the great challenges the European Union has to face .
This is , therefore , an exceptional situation and the European response , for the Presidency , must be equal to these challenges .
This response must take into account three factors .
Firstly , what our third-country partners are doing .
We must retain the competitiveness of this European industry .
Secondly , we must retain the major objectives of the European Union : the Commission 's proposals must promote the achievement of the energy and climate change package objectives with which you are familiar .
Concerning vehicle CO2 emissions , I believe we are close to an agreement and that it is within reach in the context of the procedures involving your Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Thirdly , we must also respect the integrity of the internal market .
Transparency and equal treatment and coordination are essential but this does not in any way preclude , when there are circumstances such as the ones we are experiencing at present , temporary targeted support , determined and granted on the basis of commitments also undertaken by the automobile industry .
I note the lines of action proposed by Commissioner Verheugen which I consider to be good initiatives and which the Presidency supports , either through loans from the European Investment Bank for the most significant ecological investments , or through tax incentives to make the demand for cars more compatible with environmental requirements , to renew cars on the road that are ageing and therefore move further away from the environmental requirements , to reduce the cost of motor vehicles , which also seems to be an important objective , and to move more in the direction of vehicles that are more economical .
Finally , I consider that when facing crisis situations , developing public guarantees is also important in this sector .
I also think that we need to have incentives to develop training and , in certain cases , retraining , because in the coming weeks and in the first few months of 2009 , we can , unfortunately , expect to see an even more difficult situation .
Everything proposed by Commissioner Verheugen seems to me to be heading in the right direction and we shall support him .
It is now a question of time , we must act fast and I also approve the idea expressed by Mr Goebbels of a stable and offensive European framework so as to retain the competitiveness of this vital industry .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is a shame that Mrs Harms is no longer present .
After such an unorthodox attack - one which was pushing the limits of defamation - it would have been right to have allowed me the opportunity to answer her .
I will now do so in writing .
However , on behalf of the Commission , I reject in the most definite possible terms Mrs Harms 's claims in both style and substance .
( Applause )
That is unacceptable .
On the matter itself , the European motor industry is not on a medical drip .
Some of the interventions gave the impression that what we are dealing with here is a sector that is either dependent on or is calling for subsidies .
No subsidies are paid to the European motor industry , nor has it asked for any .
Our entire industrial policy is , of course , based on the idea that we want to be independent of subsidies .
The only instrument available is low-interest credit from the European Investment Bank .
Let me make it clear to everyone , however , exactly what that means - these credits are at interest rates that are perhaps around 1 % below standard market rates .
This is necessary in order to be able to finance the investments which , for example , you , as the European legislator , demand from the car makers , namely investments in modern , environmentally friendly technologies .
That is why the European Investment Bank does this , and not only for the European motor industry .
The impression has been given in this Chamber that the motor industry is the only European sector able to make use of this credit facility from the European Investment Bank .
No , that is not the case .
It crosses all sectors and is thus not at all specific to the motor industry .
I would ask you all urgently to avoid giving out the impression in this House that the European motor industry is a destitute sector on a state-supplied drip .
The industry is not on a drip , nor does it need to be , because in its technical position and its competitiveness , it is quite clearly the best-performing motor industry in the world .
I am absolutely convinced that it will continue to be so .
We have been working for years - with the industry and with science - on developing the modern technologies of the future .
In the context of the Seventh Framework Programme , we are spending a lot of money on this , and have been for a number of years .
We are working intensively to ensure that the framework conditions for this industry are stable .
It was the first industrial sector for which we developed a sectoral policy of this nature at all , and the reason for this was precisely the fact that we saw future problems facing this sector in good time .
On the case of Opel , I would like to reiterate : it is an absolutely exceptional , extraordinary situation that has nothing to do with the business policy of the company itself .
This is exclusively the consequence of problems that arose in the United States of America which have an impact on Europe and for which we need to find an answer .
One final point - Mr Groote spoke about a subject of special interest to him , namely the ' Volkswagen Law ' .
I am not of the belief that it would be a good idea to launch a European initiative with the aim of setting up similar statutory regulations for all European car makers .
Hardly anyone else would agree with this idea , either .
To my knowledge , Mr Groote , the Commission has not changed its view on this matter .
Decisions can be expected soon , however .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The world 's car industry has got into difficulties , though that is not true for all plants .
Porsche has found a new way of making money , and that is to take up options to buy shares in Volkswagen .
That , however , is not a solution to VW 's problems or those of other car factories .
The bank crisis has brought with it a car crisis : in a deflating economy , people cannot afford to buy new cars or the fuel to put in them .
The European Investment Bank wants to rescue the car industry in the name of the EU , but we need to think again about whether the world is going to need all the capacity that is used today for producing cars .
If EIB loans went towards new energy and environmental technology , that would meet the world 's real needs at the present time more successfully .
The loose money which consumers used to buy new cars in recent years has gone , and it is not coming back .
The car manufacturing industry is one of the driving forces of the European economy .
Approximately 300 000 cars and 300 000 goods and passenger vehicles are produced in Europe every year .
Road transport is responsible for 72 % of all emissions generated by transport , but the time has now come for us to reaffirm the importance of the car manufacturing industry from an economic and social perspective .
The financial crises and economic recession are having a severe impact on the car industry , which guarantees , both directly and indirectly , more than 15 million jobs .
2012 will be a crucial year for Europe 's car manufacturing industry as new requirements will be introduced with regard to fuel quality , pollutant emission restrictions , type certification and the safety of road users .
In order to make our road traffic greener , the Union intends to introduce bonuses for greener vehicles and penalise those which cause more pollution .
The ' Climate Change ' package will therefore become one of the means aimed at boosting demand for greener , safer vehicles .
Social Europe is based on economic development and , in an equal measure , on social values .
The European car industry must be supported to respond to the new challenges so that existing jobs can be preserved and it can remain competitive .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.35 a.m. )

1 .
Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work (
2 .
Publication and translation obligations of certain types of companies (
3 .
European statistics (
4 .
Support schemes for farmers under the CAP (
( The sitting was suspended at 12 p.m. for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )

Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Formal sitting - Sir Jonathan Sacks
( DE ) Chief Rabbi Sacks , Lady Sacks , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour and pleasure to welcome the Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth , and his wife , to the European Parliament in Strasbourg at this formal session as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue 2008 .
A very warm welcome to the European Parliament , Sir Jonathan !
( Applause )
As our first guest in this year of intercultural dialogue , the Grand Mufti of Syria , Sheikh Ahmad Badr Al-Din Hassoun , made a speech in our plenary session .
As the year went on , we also had the opportunity to listen to an address by the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople , Bartholomew I. With your speech today , Chief Rabbi , we will have heard from representatives of Judaism , Christianity and Islam .
Each of these religions has produced its own special contribution to shaping what today 's European society has become and what distinguishes it .
The same is true of humanism and enlightenment .
Even if we live in secular societies in which there is a clear separation of church and state , it is fitting to duly recognise the positive role that organised religion plays in our societies .
This relates not only to the physical contribution to areas such as training , health and social services , but also to the same extent to the development of our ethical consciousness and to the shaping of our values .
The European Union is a community of values and the most fundamental of these is the inherent dignity of every human being .
Chief Rabbi , you are well known as a great author and professor , an unsurpassable man of learning and one of the world 's leading representatives of the Jewish faith .
You have often written and spoken about the danger that a rejuvenation of anti-Semitism poses to our societies .
Last week , at the European Parliament in Brussels , we held a very special commemoration , which we arranged jointly with the European Jewish Congress , in order to remember the 70th anniversary of the Night of Broken Glass .
On that occasion , I pointed out that we in the European Union bear a responsibility and a duty to resist , absolutely without exception and without appeasement , all forms of extremism , racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism and to defend democracy , the protection of human rights and human dignity across the globe .
Chief Rabbi , in your book The Dignity of Difference - and on this point I will close - which was written a year after the terrible events of 11 September 2001 , you tackled one of the most fundamental questions of our day , namely : can we all live together in peace and , if so , how ?
It is now with great pleasure and honour that I ask the Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth to address us .
( Applause )
Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth . - Mr President , Members of the European Parliament , I thank you for the privilege of addressing you today , and I thank you even more for undertaking this vital initiative of intercultural dialogue .
I salute you all , but in particular your visionary , wise and deeply humane President , Hans-Gert Pöttering .
May I - in what I hope will be today my only breach of the separation between church and state , religion and politics - give my prayer and my blessing that God will bless all of you and all you do . Thank you .
I speak as a Jew from within the oldest continuous cultural presence in Europe .
I want to begin by reminding us that European civilisation was born 2 000 years ago in a dialogue , a dialogue between the two greatest cultures of antiquity : Ancient Greece and Biblical Israel - Athens and Jerusalem .
They were brought together by Christianity , whose religion came from Israel but whose sacred texts were written in Greek , and that was the founding dialogue of Europe .
And some of the greatest moments in European history in the intervening 2 000 years were the result of dialogue .
I will mention just three .
The first took place between the 10th and 13th centuries in al-Andalus , in the great cultural movement initiated by the Umayyads in Spain .
It began with an Islamic dialogue on the part of thinkers like Averroës with the philosophical heritage of Plato and Aristotle .
The Islamic dialogue inspired Jewish thinkers like Moses Maimonides , and the Jewish dialogue inspired Christian thinkers , most famously Aquinas .
The second great moment of intercultural dialogue took place at the beginning of the Italian Renaissance when a young Christian intellectual , Pico della Mirandola , travelled to Padua , where he met a Jewish scholar , Rabbi Elijah Delmedigo , who taught him the Hebrew Bible , the Talmud and Kabbalah in their original languages .
Out of that dialogue came the most famous statement of Renaissance values : Pico 's Oration on Human Dignity .
The third and most poignant of them all has been the dialogue between Christians and Jews after the Holocaust , inspired by Martin Buber 's philosophy of dialogue and by Vatican II and Nostra Aetate .
The result has been that , after almost 2 000 years of estrangement and tragedy , today Jews and Christians meet in mutual respect as friends .
But I want to say more than this .
As I read the Hebrew Bible , I hear from the very beginning God 's call to dialogue .
I want to draw attention to two passages .
I am not quite sure how this will go down in translation , so I hope anyone who is listening to me in translation will get it .
I want to draw attention to two passages in the opening chapters of the Bible whose meaning has been lost in translation for 2 000 years .
The first occurs when God sees the first man isolated and alone and He creates woman .
And man , seeing woman for the first time , utters the first poem in the Bible : ' Now I have found bone of my bone , flesh of my flesh .
She shall be called Aisha , woman , for she was taken from Aish , man ' .
Now this sounds like a very simple poem .
It even sounds rather condescending , as if the man was the first creation and women were a mere afterthought .
However , the real meaning lies in the fact that biblical Hebrew has two words for man , not one .
One is Adam , and the other is Aish .
This verse that I just quoted to you is the first time the word ' Aish ' appears in the Bible .
Listen again .
' She shall be called Aisha , because she was taken from Aish ' .
In other words , the man has to pronounce the name of his wife before he even knows his own name .
I have to say ' you ' before I can say ' I ' .
I have to acknowledge the other , before I can truly understand myself .
( Loud applause )
That is the first point the Bible makes : identity is dialogical .
The second occurs soon after , in the first great tragedy that overcomes the first human children Cain and Abel .
We expect brotherly love .
Instead there is sibling rivalry and then murder , fratricide .
And at the heart of this story in Genesis , Chapter IV , is a verse that is impossible to translate and in every English Bible I have ever read the verse is not translated , it is paraphrased .
I am going to translate it literally and you will see why no one translates it that way .
Literally the Hebrew means as follows : ' And Cain said to Abel , and it came to pass when they were out in the field that Cain rose up against Abel and killed him . '
You can see immediately why it cannot be translated because it says ' and Cain said ' but it does not say what he said .
The sentence is ungrammatical .
The syntax is fractured .
And the question is , why ?
The answer is clear : the Bible is signalling in the most dramatic way , in a broken sentence , how the conversation broke down .
The dialogue failed .
And what do we read immediately afterwards ?
' And Cain rose up against his brother and killed him ' .
Or to put it simply : where words end , violence begins .
Dialogue is the only way to defeat the worst angels of our nature .
( Loud applause )
Dialogue therefore testifies to the double aspect of all human relationships , whether they are between individuals or between countries or cultures or creeds .
Our commonalities , on the one hand , and our differences on the other .
What we hold in common and what is uniquely ours .
Let me put it as simply as I can .
If we were completely different , we could not communicate , but if we were totally the same , we would have nothing to say .
( Applause )
And that is all I have to say about dialogue , and yet I want to add that dialogue may not be quite enough .
You see , between the late 18th century and 1933 , there was dialogue between Jews and Germans , just as there was dialogue and even friendship between Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda , or between Serbs and Croats and Muslims in Bosnia and Kosovo .
Dialogue brings us together , but it cannot always keep us together when other forces are driving us apart .
Therefore , I want to add one other word , which played a significant part in healing fragmented societies .
The word is ' covenant ' .
It played a major role in European politics in the 16th and 17th centuries in Switzerland , in Holland , in Scotland and in England .
Covenant has been part of American culture from the very beginning to today , from the Mayflower Compact in 1620 , to John Winthrop 's speech aboard the Arabella in 1631 , all the way through to the present .
I do not know what Barack Obama will say when he makes his inaugural speech but he will either mention or allude to the concept of covenant .
Covenant is , of course , a key word of the Hebrew Bible for a simple reason : biblical Israel was formed out of 12 different tribes , each of which had insisted on retaining its distinct identity .
What is a covenant ?
A covenant is not a contract .
A contract is made for a limited period , for a specific purpose , between two or more parties , each seeking their own benefit .
A covenant is made open-endedly by two or more parties who come together in a bond of loyalty and trust to achieve together what none can achieve alone .
A contract is like a deal ; a covenant is like a marriage .
Contracts belong to the market and to the state , to economics and politics , both of which are arenas of competition .
Covenants belong to families , communities , charities , which are arenas of cooperation .
A contract is between me and you - separate selves - but a covenant is about us - collective belonging .
A contract is about interests ; a covenant is about identity .
And hence the vital distinction , not made clearly enough in European politics , between a social contract and a social covenant : a social contract creates a state ; a social covenant creates a society .
( Applause )
You can have a society without a state - that has happened at times in history - but can you have a state without a society , without anything to hold people together ?
I do not know .
You can hold people together in many different ways : by force , by fear , by suppressing cultural difference , by expecting everyone to conform .
But when you choose to respect the integrity of many cultures , when you honour what I call - as the President reminded us - the dignity of difference , when you honour that , then to create a society you need a covenant .
Covenant restores the language of cooperation to a world of competition .
It focuses on responsibilities , not just on rights .
Rights are essential , but rights create conflicts that rights cannot resolve : the right to life against the right to choose ; my right to freedom against your right to respect .
Rights without responsibilities are the subprime mortgages of the moral world .
( Loud applause )
What covenant does is to get us to think about reciprocity .
Covenant says to each of us : we must respect others if we expect others to respect us ; we must honour the freedom of others if they are to honour ours .
Europe needs a new covenant and the time to begin it is now .
( Applause )
Now , in the midst of financial crisis and economic recession , because in bad times people are aware that we all share a fate .
The Prophet Isaiah foresaw a day when the lion and the lamb would live together .
It has not happened yet .
Although there was a zoo where a lion and a lamb lived together in the same cage and a visitor asked the zookeeper : ' How do you manage that ? ' .
The zookeeper said : ' Easy , you just need a new lamb every day ! ' .
( Laughter )
But there was a time when the lion and the lamb did live together .
Where was that ?
In Noah 's Ark .
And why was that ?
It was not because they had reached Utopia but because they knew that otherwise they would both drown .
Friends , last Thursday - six days ago - the Archbishop of Canterbury and I led a mission of the leaders of all the faiths in Britain , leaders of the Muslim community , the Hindus , the Sikhs , the Buddhists , the Jains , the Zoroastrians and the Baha 'i , and together we travelled and spent a day in Auschwitz .
There we wept together , and there we prayed together , knowing what happens when we fail to honour the humanity of those not like us .
God has given us many languages and many cultures , but only one world in which to live together , and it is getting smaller every day .
May we , the countries and the cultures of Europe , in all our glorious diversity , together write a new European covenant of hope .
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation . )
Sir Jonathan , on behalf of the European Parliament , I am honoured to thank you for your important message .
I would like to thank you for your great contribution to the intercultural dialogue .
You spoke about the mutual respect and acknowledgement of others .
I think this is what we have learnt from our European history .
You said that what unites us is much more than that which divides us .
This is the principle - and you finished with this - of our European engagement for a strong , democratic European Union which is based on the dignity of each human being .
Sir Jonathan , thank you for your great message .
All the best to you , the religion you represent and the peaceful living together of all religions on our continent and in the world . Thank you , Sir Jonathan .
( Applause )
1 .
Modifications to the common agricultural policy (
2 .
Support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (
3 .
Community strategic guidelines for rural development ( 2007 to 2013 ) (
Voting time ( continuation )
We now continue with the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Kauppi for her report on the electronic company register , which I fully support .
It is a brilliant idea and an excellent report , and Parliament stands united in support of its implementation .
I hope we will have electronic company registers in the Member States as soon as possible , as well as a Europe-wide electronic platform that contains all information companies are required to disclose .
The proposals , if implemented , would mean less bureaucracy , more transparency , a diminished administrative burden , lower costs for companies and , as a result , enhanced competitiveness of European companies .
( LT ) I voted for the report on the Regulation of European Statistics prepared by Andreas Schwab .
The reason I voted for it is the fact that the content of the new regulation is really important , significantly improving the existing regulation .
I have in mind the definition of the European Statistical System , its place in Community law .
The regulation also sets out the functions of national statistics institutions in the European Statistical System in solving matters of statistical confidentiality and statistical quality .
This is undoubtedly a step forward compared to the current situation and the regulation now in force .
In fact , the European Commission 's proposal to split the European Statistical System Committee into two parts seems controversial to me and the rapporteur 's position of not separating functions seems more acceptable and worth supporting .
However , I trust that , in future , if the European Parliament , Council and Commission work together , we will overcome these disagreements .
( DE ) Mr President , I have an explanation of vote to make on the report in respect of modulation .
In the most recent agricultural reform , it was decided that farmers would have planning certainty until 2013 .
For that reason , I was opposed to implementing modulation on a scale that would result in farmers losing larger amounts .
I am pleased with the result and would like to thank all my fellow Members who voted in favour of raising the allowance from EUR 5 000 to EUR 10 000 , meaning that less modulation funding is taken away from small businesses .
If we , in politics , talk of planning certainty , this is something we should also grant to the farmers .
I am therefore pleased about the result of today 's report on modulation and hope that the Council accepts our results .
( PL ) Mr President , today 's vote ended almost twelve months of work on the preparation of our opinion on the operation of the common agricultural policy .
It is important for the changes we have made to contribute to simplifying this policy .
At the same time , we should retain its Community nature and ensure equal conditions of competition .
I hope that EU agriculture ministers will read the opinion and accept our proposals .
What I have in mind in particular are proposals dealing with the simplification of cross-compliance requirements , including postponement until 2013 of the implementation of requirements relating to the area of animal welfare , area C , by new Member States .
Regrettably , many solutions have been designed in a way which does not take into account the situation or the model of agriculture existing in new Member States .
We are now starting to discuss the future of the common agricultural policy after 2013 and to review the financial perspective .
Much work remains ahead of us .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to express my appreciation of the very positive vote that took place here today in relation to the Common Agricultural Policy , and I would also like to welcome the policies that were presented , such as providing fruit and vegetables to schools .
However , in relation to the policy itself , I would like to draw attention once more to the obligatory modulation recommended by the Commission and to state that I am totally against it .
The policy must be flexible and the Member States must be permitted to raise or lower that modulation as they wish .
In my opinion , the EUR 5 000 threshold is too low .
It should be raised to EUR 10 000 to protect and support farmers on low incomes that are suffering already - I do not think money should be taken from them for obligatory modulation .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wanted to speak to state publicly the reasons for my final vote against the Santos report 0401 and 02 .
The report is merely dependent on the health check on the common agricultural policy , which takes no account of the changed world conditions .
We are discussing the details without seeing the main problem .
The CAP that we are using the health check to verify was created to reduce agricultural production in order to promote environmental protection , because those were the conditions under which it was established .
Today , we all know that the economic conditions have changed drastically , but the CAP remains more or less the same and all we are discussing is whether the first or the second option is better , whether we need less or more , this or that measure , when they have now become inadequate to meet the challenges of the future .
I cannot accept this endless dealing with small , specific interests , ignoring the general good .
I am convinced that the prime victim of this lack of courage is agriculture itself .
In order to provoke dialogue and a debate , I voted against this report ; I am leaving on my website the technical details that cannot be included in a one-minute speech , and my specific reasons will be published there .

( FR ) Mr President , the Hungarian Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament voted in favour of the reports by Mr Capoulas Santos because these reports are much more positive for new Member States , and for Hungary as well .
Compulsory modulation and gradual modulation are less brutal than in the Commission 's proposal .
I regret there was not a vote in favour of the ALDE amendment regarding compulsory modulation .
It is regrettable but , in spite of that , it is a good report .
With regard to the second report , Amendment 67 was proposed by the Socialist Group .
With reference to the intervention system , it is very important not to intervene on the basis of tendering procedures .
Maintaining the current system is very positive .
This is why we voted in favour .
Mr President , I compliment Mr Capoulas Santos on his very complex work .
The Fine Gael delegation supported these reports with caveats .
On the issue of milk quotas , we voted for greater flexibility and a higher percentage increase in quotas , giving farmers the opportunity to produce milk should they wish .
We regret that this was not the view of the plenary and that we are now back with the Commission 's proposal .
Secondly , on modulation , we are concerned about the transferring of funds from pillar 1 to pillar 2 because it takes income from farmers to be used in schemes which require cofinancing by Member States , and this is something that may not be guaranteed into the future .
The raising of the franchise to EUR 10 000 , on which Parliament has voted in favour , is welcome .
I would like to clarify that our vote on Recital 6 - Amendments 190 and 226 - should read ' + ' ( in favour ) .
I hope that the Council will assist the ailing sheep sector in its deliberations of tomorrow and today .
( BG ) I would like to draw your attention to proposed amendment 54 tabled by Mr Deß and a group of other MEPs .
If this amendment was adopted , it would result in an appalling double standard between the old and the new Member States , because by increasing the quota , the new Member States would need to increase it only if the financial year allowed it .
I see that Mr Deß is still in the auditorium - so perhaps he would be able to explain to me whether the financial year allows the quota for the new Member States to be increased .
Thankfully , this amendment was not adopted but rejected by this House , which has allowed me to vote for the entire report , and I am very happy that Parliament has not allowed two categories of Member State to be created in respect of increased milk quotas .
( DE ) Mr President , the report on the milk quota argues for milk quotas to be raised .
Along with all my CSU colleagues , I voted against all the amendments in which quota increases are called for .
The milk quota due to apply until 31 March 2015 is designed to stabilise European milk markets .
There is currently a surplus on European milk markets .
This has put serious pressure on milk prices .
Any further increase in the quota will intensify the fall in prices faced by milk producers .
Many farmers ' livelihoods would then be in jeopardy .
We do not need an increase in the quota but rather a system that reacts flexibly to the situation in the market .
If , however , a majority here in Parliament and in the Council decides to phase out milk quotas by 2015 , a milk fund will be necessary in order to ensure the continued survival of milk production in the disadvantaged areas and grassland areas in future .
Mr President , if I were to set out to design the most expensive , wasteful , corrupt , immoral , bureaucratic system of farm support that I could , I am not sure that I would have come up with anything as ingenious as the common agricultural policy , a system that penalises us , as taxpayers , to subsidise the production of food for which there is no market and then penalises us again , as consumers , to sustain prices for it .
It often penalises us a third time , as taxpayers , to destroy the food which could not be sold .
In the meantime , it causes environmental destruction because output-based subsidies encourage the felling of hedgerows and the use of pesticides and unfriendly fertilisers and , of course , causes terrible starvation in Africa .
This is particularly harmful , I have to say , for a country such as yours and mine , which is a food importer with a relatively efficient agrarian sector , and which is therefore penalised both positively and negatively , paying more into the system and getting less out of it than other EU Member States .
Almost anything we did would be better than the common agricultural policy , be it direct support or any other system .
And in case you thought I had forgotten to say it , it is high time we put the Lisbon Treaty to a referendum .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the Capoulas Santos report and of Amendment 186 , which recommends a franchise of EUR 10 000 for the modulation .
This concerns small-scale agriculture in Europe .
The modulation process must be applied in moderation .
Small farms in Europe need the support of the EU , so that they can continue to exist within the EU 's wage structure .
We want healthy food to be produced in Europe and to be available at reasonable prices .
We also want the countryside to be managed .
If we really do want all of this , then we must give our farmers support , so that we can continue to produce healthy food in future in Europe , which is an area with one of the most favourable climates in the world .
This is why I have voted in favour of the Capoulas Santos report .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the report prepared by Capoulas Santos on the European rural development fund .
We created this programme just two years ago and it actually came into operation just last year .
The applicants have begun to draw up their projects and to learn the rules of the fund .
Now , after just one year , we are changing these rules .
I cannot support such a step , because it will bring only losses and delays in financing projects needed by rural areas .
Such a frequent change of rules cannot bring any benefit and therefore I have voted against it .
( PL ) Mr President , this is a very important subject .
Assessment of the common agricultural policy shows that it will make sense in the future if it is based on fair principles .
The common agricultural policy should , above all , ensure food security for Europe , self-sufficiency and production of food for export , economic security for farming families , profitability of agricultural production , equal subsidies for farmers from old and new Member States , safety of the environment , preservation of biodiversity , putting a stop to the cultivation and farming of genetically modified organisms throughout the whole of the European Union , developing rural areas , ensuring the advancement of the most deprived regions , protection of cultural heritage and preservation of traditional culture , and equal access for inhabitants of rural areas to education , culture and technical developments .
These goals can be achieved only if we learn the right lessons from our existing experience and reach for courageous solutions .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ?
( LT ) The European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 recognises the necessity to improve the quality , ability to compare and accessibility of data on health conditions and disorders linked to the environment by using the Community statistical programme .
I believe that this is a very important regulation .
We must know our society 's perception of health , its susceptibility to different illnesses .
This regulation establishes a joint system for organising Community statistics on society 's health and workers ' health and safety .
It is very important that the data is collected in the European Union on citizens ' perception of health , physical and mental activities and disability , about cases of illnesses which are increasing or decreasing , about injuries , damage done by alcohol and drugs , lifestyle and the accessibility of health care institutions .
Statistics will have to include information essential for Community actions in the area of society 's health , aimed at supporting national strategies which are developing high quality and stable health care accessible to all .
This regulation establishes a common framework for a systematic production of Community statistics in public health and health and safety at work .
At the moment , statistical information on public health and health and safety at work is collected mainly on a voluntary basis .
The adoption of this regulation will formalise the current ' gentlemen 's agreement ' and guarantee the continuity of data collection as well as the quality and comparability of data .
At first reading in 2007 , the European Parliament adopted 12 amendments to the Commission proposal .
Most of the amendments dealt with horizontal issues , like the inclusion of gender and age in the breakdown variables and the use of additional and complementary financing provided by certain Community programmes in the two areas covered by the regulation .
Some amendments were adopted to the annexes dealing exclusively either with public health or health and safety at work , such as the collection of data on protection against pandemics and transmissible diseases .
In subsequent negotiations with the Slovenian Presidency , almost all amendments adopted by the European Parliament were agreed to be incorporated in the common position .
The Council also made some other changes to the text but , in broad terms , these changes were acceptable .
This regulation establishes a common framework for a systematic production of Community statistics in public health and health and safety at work .
The statistics should take the form of a harmonised and common data set and should be produced by Eurostat together with the national statistical institutes and other national authorities responsible for the provision of official statistics .
At the moment , statistical information on public health and health and safety at work is collected mainly on a voluntary basis .
I agree with the proposed regulation because it aims to consolidate the progress made in regular data collection in the two areas in question , by formalising the current informal agreement between the Member States , guaranteeing the continuity of data collection and establishing a regulatory framework for improving the quality and comparability of data through common methodologies .
It will certainly ensure greater clarity in terms of planning , sustainability and stability of European requirements for statistics on public health and health and safety at work .
in writing . - At present there are no harmonised standards with regard to Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work .
The harmonisation of such statistics will hugely improve comparability and enhance policy development .
The common position on the whole accepts the amendments forwarded by this House at first reading and accordingly I was able to support the Scheele report .
The stress of modern working life with its new types of employment contracts , job uncertainty and poor work-life balance is leaving its mark .
Statistics show that mental health problems are currently one of the main causes of an early exit from working life .
Job uncertainty is , of course , accompanied by an increase in cases of bullying .
Health problems , such as back pain , are also constantly growing .
In addition , in recent years , the number of cases in which employees have been dismissed while on sick leave or following an accident at work has risen .
We have many problems that we need to confront and we need statistical data in order to keep up with the latest developments .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the Scheele report .
It is obvious that we need Community statistics for public health and for health and safety at work in order to provide support for the strategies which are aimed at developing high-quality medical care , which is viable and accessible to all .
Health and safety at work is an area which promotes the protection of workers ' lives , integrity and health , and creates working conditions which will ensure their physical , psychological and social well-being .
In order to do this , we need a coherent , sustained programme which will protect employees against the risks of accidents and work-related illnesses .
I support this draft resolution because , at the moment , we do not have a harmonised and common data set capable of proving the quality and comparability of information from the statistical systems in each country .
Community statistics on health should be adapted to the progress made and results achieved from the Community measures implemented in the area of public health .
In today 's vote , I voted to accept the recommendation on the Council 's common position on the acceptance of the Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council concerning Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work .
It is my view that our health promotion strategy should place a special emphasis on disease prevention and early diagnosis .
This strategy will be effective if we provide people with appropriate health care and treatment facilities , and if we reduce differences in access to health care between European Union Member States .
We will not be able to develop a joint health care strategy if the appropriate statistical institutions do not have the relevant data .
Consequently , adopting the regulation will represent a step towards better coordination of Community action on health care statistics .
Collecting information on pandemics and infectious diseases will undoubtedly contribute to their improved control .
It should also be noted that at present , public health and health care statistics are collected only on a voluntary basis .
This being the case , the regulation aims to formalise existing solutions and to ensure continuity of data collection .
The unanimous vote of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety points to the importance and rightness of the report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Kauppi report .
Companies throughout Europe should be able to operate in an environment free from excessive burdens .
Nevertheless , Member States must be allowed to formulate their own requirements and the principle of subsidiarity should be respected .
I am satisfied that the Kauppi report strikes the correct balance .
I voted in favour of accepting the report on the Parliament and Council Directive concerning information disclosure and translation requirements , intended to reduce excessive administrative burden imposed on certain types of companies .
The proposal has as its objective the elimination from national law of all additional information disclosure requirements which increase business costs .
Under existing regulations , information must be entered in the commercial registers of Member States and published in national official gazettes .
At present , at a time when commercial registers publish information on the Internet , publication in official gazettes does not , in most cases , create added value , simply exposing companies to high costs .
The proposed changes give Member States flexibility in setting additional information disclosure requirements and ensure that companies will be relieved of additional , frequently unnecessary , payments .
The task of statistics is to provide objective and quantitative data , which can be referred to in processes involving the formation of public opinion and decision making .
EU and Member State statistics are a direct supporting measure when making political and administrative decisions .
Hence , when harmonising EU statistical systems , we must take their importance into account .
The scientific independence of statistical research in Europe must be ensured .
In addition , the regulations should not contradict the principle of subsidiarity .
I support the Commission 's proposal on the Regulation on European Statistics , which is a legal basis for collecting statistical data at a European level and which reconsiders the legal system in force , according to which the organisation of statistics at a European level is regulated .
Voting against a report that initially appears to be technical , since it relates to the generating of Community statistics , may appear absurd .
Indeed it is not without interest to have such data to help in making decisions .
However , in spite of the declared intentions , this new regulation leads to the generation of new convoluted statistics , an increase in the statistical burden on national institutes and businesses , whether in terms of red tape or financial costs , contrary to the commitments made on several occasions to simplify and reduce this load .
Moreover , the Europe of Brussels shows on a daily basis what it thinks of the figures that it is supposed to use .
I shall only take two examples .
Firstly , the limited proposals to support the real economy , which is entering into recession , support which , in any case , will be subjected to the dogmatic primacy of sacrosanct competition , global free trade and the ' stupid ' Stability and Growth Pact .
Secondly , the denial of the inflation suffered by households since the introduction of euro coins and notes .
The price for certain basic commodities has in fact doubled , or even tripled , in 6 years , while the ECB focuses on global and misleading aggregates , and calls for wage moderation .
in writing . - The collection of data plays a vital role in policy development and decision making .
The Commission 's proposal in this area will give a firm legal status to data collection and I voted in favour of Mr Schwab 's report .
On the basis of the report by the Portuguese Member , Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , I voted in favour of the legislative resolution amending the proposal for a Council regulation establishing common rules for direct support schemes in favour of farmers within the context of the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes in favour of farmers .
To exclude any threat to supplies , in the context of balanced and sustainable land management , it is essential to affirm the concept of food safety .
I welcome and support the requests to simplify the procedures .
I support the Community 's crisis management instruments .
This vote confirms a favourable change in how agriculture is taken into account in Community policies .
However , the problem of the future of farming has not been solved : this will be the electoral debate in 2009 and in the political negotiations that will open immediately following the elections .
I confirm that I voted for the Capoulas Santos report , but I would like to point to two aspects that may become untenable for farmers in my country .
The first relates to milk quotas : the one per cent rise , the product of the compromise reached , is really too small a step and is not enough to satisfy the farmers ' legitimate demands .
The other unsatisfactory area is the funding for tobacco .
Although I am going against my political group 's position here , I am firmly convinced that the aid ought to be extended .
A cut in subsidies would , in reality , do nothing to combat smoking , but would have a negative impact on the protection of jobs in a sector with over 500 000 workers in the 27 Member States .
I hope for an improvement in the proposal during the course of the steps that will follow today 's adoption
in writing . - ( NL ) The CAP ' health check ' is an extensive and important area .
Whether we like it or not , we indicate the course which agricultural policy should take after 2013 .
Allow me to mention two aspects in this respect .
Decoupled support allows for more market-oriented , and therefore more competitive and more innovative agriculture , but we should not veer the other way to a fully liberalised agricultural market .
We should not throw away the umbrella the minute the sun appears .
Intervention mechanisms , insurance cover and so on should be organised in such a way as not to distort the market , and should , at the same time , be a real safety net .
The proposals to channel considerable amounts to the second pillar via modulation do not receive my support .
It appears that the funds in the first pillar are spent more wisely than the rural development funds .
Moreover , I foresee all kinds of cofinancing problems in relation to a level playing field .
The June Movement has voted against Amendment 208 in the report , as the outbreak of infectious animal diseases is due to insufficient veterinary separation of the animals .
The problems arise in connection with the commercial utilisation of animals .
It is therefore farmers and their industry that bear the responsibility and the risk associated with the proper handling of the animals to avoid disease .
A draft law on a common economic allocation of costs is a bad idea since , at the end of the day , it will mean that citizens will pay for something they are not responsible for .
The aim of reforming CAP should be to improve policy so that rural life throughout Europe would be more sustainable on a social , economic and environmental level .
The ' health check ' measure is a mixture that contains some improvements but which fails in other ways to deal with the challenges ahead of us .
Rural life , and farming in particular , is facing many threats at the present time .
Young farmers have to leave the land while , at the same time , large landowners are remunerated for leaving valuable agricultural land uncultivated .
Biodiversity is under threat as well .
I agree that it should be possible to use the reserve funds for new farmers and for young farmers , and for categories in the areas under greatest disadvantage , such as sheep - which have an important role as regards the preservation of biodiversity .
I also support the application for payments to farmers to be brought forward earlier in the year so that farmers would have increased stability .
Our rural communities require stability to enable them to plan for the future .
in writing . - While I supported the Santos report on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing common rules for direct support schemes for farmers under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers , I am not in favour of the amendment that passed on increasing modulation .
It will result in extra funds being transferred from pillar 1 to pillar 2 taking income directly from farmers ( particularly small farmers ) in countries such as Ireland .
Funds will go to schemes which require cofinancing by Member States - a source of funding that is uncertain and cannot be relied on .
I chose to vote against the report as it was clearly a step in the wrong direction from the Commission 's proposal in a number of areas .
One example is the watering down of the changes to direct aid for rural development .
The majority agreed to reduce direct aid by only 6 % for 2009 and 2010 .
The Commission had proposed to reduce aid by 7 % in 2009 and 9 % in 2010 .
Personally , I would have liked to have seen greater cuts still .
In addition , it raised the threshold at which direct aid is to be switched to rural development aid .
Under the original proposal , this switchover would have applied to subsidies from EUR 5 000 per annum and upwards .
The majority has now voted to increase that threshold to EUR 10 000 .
This has the consequence of reducing the proportion of passive agricultural aid converted into active aid for rural development .
The money would be better spent on starting up businesses in rural areas rather than producing crops that already reap a good profit .
Despite improvements made to this report , to which we contributed , not least with the adoption of our proposal to increase the modulation exemption from EUR 5 000 to EUR 10 000 , in order to promote greater social justice in the payment of aid to farmers , we regret that other proposals were rejected , even though some received more than 200 votes in favour , such as support for sugar production in the Azores .
We also regret that the proposal of simplified aid for farmers receiving sums of up to EUR 1 000 was not adopted , despite having received 175 votes in favour .
This would have been a way of combating the lack of social sensitivity of the Commission proposal , by simplifying the process and cutting red tape , which was actually used as a pretext by the European Commission to propose that aid of less than EUR 250 per year should be ended .
This may harm around 90 000 small Portuguese farmers .
As a result , despite our final vote against the report , we continue to defend our proposals as we consider that these are the best way to support Portuguese farmers and our family-based agriculture .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party had a number of serious concerns regarding this report that will perpetuate and increase distortions within the European Union and on a global level regarding agricultural production .
In view of today 's vote where a series of amendments were carried to reinforce and worsen this situation , I was unable , on balance , to vote in favour of either the amended proposal or the draft legislative resolution despite the fact that the report has other detailed elements I support .
Despite agreeing with the need to revise the support schemes for farmers , I consider that the Commission 's proposals go well beyond what is needed , thereby seriously impacting on the income of farmers who are the guardians of the European rural landscape and of crucial importance to our food sovereignty .
In many ways , the Capoulas Santos report improves the Commission proposal , particularly by giving greater flexibility to Member States in terms of setting minimum thresholds for payments .
I therefore voted in favour of the threshold of EUR 10 000 / year for the application of modulation , which will favour many small and medium-sized farmers , and the non-application of higher modulation rates to cooperatives and other legal entities made up of several farmers who , taken in isolation , do not receive more than EUR 100 000 , in order to avoid unfairly penalising farmers .
Although the report is not ideal - for example it does not allow the redistributive effect of additional modulation - I am pleased with the final result of the vote in plenary which is why I voted in favour of the legislative resolution .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as usual , has chosen a different route from that chosen by the Commission .
Instead of reforming the common agricultural policy , the committee wants to increase the subsidies and ensure that taxpayers increase their economic stakes .
The June List absolutely wants to abolish the export refund on agricultural products and has voted in favour of those proposals that recommended this .
We believe that the EU is doing great harm abroad by dumping agricultural products in poor countries without paying any attention to the social consequences .
The June List wants to abolish the common agricultural policy and we would observe that it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to all the various groups within the agricultural industry .
Before the great budgetary turning point of 2013 , which may signal the end of the CAP through creeping re-nationalisation , Member States are trying to reach agreement on a new reform of the CAP , subsequent to the covert one in 2003 .
The declared objective of the Commission is to adapt even further to the market by reducing direct subsidies for environmental and rural development policies .
The reform , unfortunately , is not equal to the challenges facing Europe in the agricultural sphere : feeding nine billion people in 2050 , occupying limited agricultural areas , the dependence on prices linked to speculation on agricultural raw materials , and so on .
In this fluctuating and uncertain context , we must defend the exception made for agriculture at the WTO insofar as agriculture and the food processing industry are not businesses like any others , but non-transferable production resulting from the know-how and genius of generations of farmers .
And what if the health check on the CAP were only the first step towards the complete liberalisation of the CAP , with no regulation and no safety net ?
We must be vigilant and denounce any liberal drift on this issue , which does not mean failing to act .
I am not happy with the result of the compromise of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but I am reasonably satisfied .
We have been able to avert the most serious damage which would have been caused to our farmers as a result of the disastrous proposals put forward by the EU Commission , by ensuring that the direct payments are not reduced by 13 % between 2009 and 2013 .
These direct payments , which are essential to our farmers , should only be reduced by 1 % in 2009 and 2010 and 2 % in 2011 and 2012 at the most .
If this money finds its way into the milk fund , as we have proposed , for example , in order to pay grass premiums to milk producers , the cut in direct income will be less painful .
The milk price is falling again , but not the production costs .
For example , the price of fertiliser has risen by 40 % .
Unfortunately , the Commissioner is once again up in arms against the milk fund .
Even if we do not cut these direct payments to farmers , which amount to up to EUR 5 000 or even up to EUR 10 000 per year , as is being demanded in the amendments which go beyond the compromise proposed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , this will not have a major impact on farmers in Luxembourg , because only farms managed on a part-time basis fall below the EUR 10 000 threshold .
The priority must be to keep the cuts as small as possible , otherwise there will be no future for full-time farmers in Luxembourg , which is unacceptable .
in writing . - I support a 2 % increase in milk quotas over four years as I believe the 2 % will give the smoothest landing ahead of the abolition of the milk quota system in 2015 .
I voted against the report by Capoulas Santos on the new support scheme for farmers under the Common Agricultural Policy , because I consider that the sustainability of agriculture cannot be safeguarded at European level .
The agricultural sector does indeed need to be financed in order to safeguard the sustainability of the sector and food security in Europe .
However , financing should be provided from the Community budget and should not penalise small and medium-scale producers by adopting , for example , minimum aid limits .
On the contrary , the criterion of personal work should be of prime importance for the payment of support and an upper limit on support per holding should be set .
However , the crisis management system proposed by the Commission falls short .
It would make more sense to create a public safety fund which is based on Community financing and which is designed to prevent crises and plant diseases and guarantee a minimum income for farmers .
Finally , the report contains no proposal for setting up mechanisms to address climate change , which is directly affecting European farmers .
in writing . - Conservative MEPs voted against this report as it is a step in the wrong direction .
We consider it to be essential that the decoupling process initiated in the 2003 Reform be extended to all sectors so as to allow farmers to produce what the market demands and achieve a genuine level playing field .
This report resists decoupling and even tries to reverse decisions already taken , notably the inclusion of the tobacco regime in the Single Farm Payment .
The report would see production-linked tobacco subsidies extended until 2012 and clearly we cannot accept this .
The report also allows too much flexibility in the use of Article 68 which we fear will distort the market , will allow coupled payments in through the back door and may be challenged at the WTO .
Finally , the exemption of the first EUR 10 000 from modulation , combined with a very low level of compulsory EU modulation , will simply not generate sufficient revenue for a strong rural development policy and will hit UK farmers disproportionately .
The debate on the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) health check offered an excellent opportunity to launch an in-depth discussion of its reform , which must take place in 2013 .
To successfully achieve this , we need to proceed with caution , placing the emphasis on both competitiveness and also on the environmental and social dimensions , rural development and food security .
The agreement reached between the main political groups , which was really down to the determination of the rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos , already provides some solutions and approaches which it is hoped that the Council will take on board .
Although this is not currently an area of codecision , Parliament has worked in this spirit and this fact should be utilised by the governments .
I voted in favour of the package because of the importance of the result achieved in terms of the Community contribution to insurance premiums and the retention of lower subsidies which are extremely important in countries such as Portugal .
This is also the case with the balanced solution for modulation in rural development support .
In the case of milk quotas , regrettably we have not achieved a balance avoiding potential harm to producers in regions such as the north and centre of Portugal and the Azores .
I am voting in favour of the rejection of this report and in favour of the report being referred back to the committee since it has further weakened the reforms put forward by the Commission , which were already too small in scale and too slow .
The enormous amount of aid the EU gives to its domestic agriculture is immoral and directly harmful .
This aid is to the detriment of global competition , which we know is a precondition for prosperity , it justifies the reforms that are required in the agricultural sector and it reduces the choice available to us , the consumers .
The proposal that the Commission has produced is important for further measures of liberalisation in line with the reforms of 2003 .
I cannot , therefore , vote in favour of those of Mr Santos 's reports that would , to a large extent , mean the watering down of the Commission 's proposal .
in writing . - Today , an important vote was held .
It was important for all farmers in the European Union .
However , there are farmers who are not as strong as others because they have not had time to adapt to the agricultural structures of the European Union yet .
They used all the capacities they had to build up sustainable agricultural enterprises after they got the chance to do so after 1989 .
These farmers are not the big producers that we know from France and Germany ; they are still small .
But they are extraordinarily important for my country , Poland .
We need them if we are to have a rural area where people want to live and work in future .
And therefore they need our special support .
So I voted today to help small producers , i.e. in Poland , to show that they can count on our and on my support today and in the future .
I voted in favour of the report on support schemes for farmers as part of the CAP .
I support the common agricultural policy .
The European Union needs to support farmers by granting direct payments and developing the rural infrastructure .
The EU has to invest in agriculture , especially with a global food crisis looming .
I supported Amendment 23 which recognises the need to support the sheep sector at Community level , which is in serious decline .
I also feel that Member States should be authorised to use , as a supplement , 5 % of their ceilings to support farmers or groups of producers in the form of financial contributions to expenses related to insurance premiums .
Particular attention must be given to small farmers , which is why I supported Amendment 211 , which introduces a derogation from the additional reduction in direct payments in the case of cooperatives or groups of farmers paid directly and which centralises grants for distribution to their members .
I voted in favour of Amendments 114 and 118 which allow Member States to use up to 15 % of their national ceilings to grant support to farmers to compensate for the specific disadvantages affecting those in the dairy sector , as well as producers of beef and veal , sheep meat and goat meat .
The regulations for the application of the CAP ' health check ' are a decisive step in the control of agricultural production by monopoly business groups , in the aim of increasing their profits .
At the same time , they are paving the way for an all-out attack in 2013 on small- and medium-sized enterprises , which have already been weakened .
Big business is exerting pressure for greater and faster reform of the CAP and for it to be adapted to the rules of the WTO , so that the multinationals can garner even more land , consolidate their sovereignty in the production and marketing of food and strengthen their position in international competition .
The consequences of the CAP are already visible to small- and medium-scale farmers , especially following the decoupling of aid from production in the 2003 reform : the abandonment of farms , the decline in the rural population , grubbing up , the abandonment of the countryside and adverse environmental effects .
They are also visible to workers , who face the unbearable cost of higher prices for foodstuffs and increased risks to public health arising from dangerous substances and dubious raw materials and production methods .
We are radically opposed to the proposed regulations , which reveal the anti-rural character of the CAP .
We call on small- and medium-scale farmers to join with the workers in the common fight against the anti-rural policy of the EU and capital .
( Written explanation cut short in application of Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
I voted today against the report on the Council Regulation amending the common agricultural policy .
It is my view that the Regulation fails to meet the expectations of many producer groups and to reduce the gulf between farmers in the old and the new European Union states .
I greatly deplore the fact that most MEPs do not perceive the problems facing European and Polish agriculture , which does require changes .
However , I find the trend of the changes proposed by the European Commission impossible to accept .
in writing . - With regard to the Santos report on the CAP Health Check , I need to clarify that , while I voted for the report , there is one aspect of the CAP , namely subsidies to grow tobacco , that I cannot support , nor have I ever supported .
Tobacco is the most heavily subsidised crop per hectare in the EU .
Since the early 1990s , the EU has spent about EUR 1 000 million annually on subsidies to tobacco growers .
Despite the effort to reduce these subsidies , tobacco subsidies are still given out to tobacco farmers by the hundreds of millions ( EUR 963 million in 2002 ) .
This is by far the highest support , compared to other agricultural sectors , creating distorted incentives and high levels of inefficiency .
It has been costly , the policy has not worked from a trade point of view , and it has been bad for the EU 's reputation , exposing an awkward ambivalence in the EU 's health goals .
Subsidies should be removed completely from tobacco ( but not from tobacco farmers ) and switched to support healthy agriculture much quicker than is currently planned .
The Commission 's proposal to phase out milk quotas has been watered down by means of a requirement for a review as soon as 2010 .
What is more , the majority pushed through the establishment of a special milk fund .
I believe that this report could have been better if we had managed to get a number of amendments aimed at greater market adaptation , such as a greater increase in the milk quotas , adopted .
Unfortunately , none of these amendments were adopted , and I therefore voted against the report .
We regret that our proposals were rejected .
These argued for a different common agricultural policy based on providing support to producing farmers , in order to combat instability in productive sectors due to price variations , and on market regulation mechanisms guaranteeing a dignified income for small and medium-sized farmers , in order to prevent the decline in the rural world and the desertification of many regions .
We also regret that our proposal which aimed to guarantee financing by the European Union of public insurance in the Member States was rejected .
The aim was to guarantee farmers a minimum income in certain circumstances such as public disasters like droughts , storms , hail , forest fires or epizootic diseases .
We reject the announcement of the end of the milk quota system , the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy and the continued injustices in the allocation of aid .
The insistence on defending the European Commission 's proposals , even with certain amendments , does not provide a firm enough basis to demand a different position from the Council .
In its proposal , the European Commission is taking several important steps in the right direction in terms of creating a more competitive agricultural sector through further decoupling of aid and the abolition of compulsory set-aside , export subsidies , milk quotas , production aid and market support .
The proposal also means a transfer of money from direct aid for agricultural production to rural development , with the focus on the four prioritised areas of climate change , renewable energy , water management and biodiversity .
Since the European Parliament wanted to see fewer reforms and a slower pace of change , we chose to support the Commission 's original proposal and to vote against Parliament 's changes .
Despite agreeing that the modifications recommended by the Commission to the common agricultural policy are necessary , I feel that , with regard to milk quotas , the Commission proposal is very harmful to less competitive European regions which are heavily dependent on the milk sector .
I therefore feel that the dismantling of milk quotas through Regulation ( EC ) No 248 / 2008 should not have been started and that this dismantling should not continue as proposed by the Commission and accepted by the rapporteur .
The Capoulas Santos report contains one positive element in that it calls for the preparation of a report in 2010 to analyse the state of the milk market .
As a result , I did not vote against this report because I support the changes to sugar refining in the Azores which will allow this activity to continue in a region without any major economic alternatives .
In today 's vote on the health check for the Common Agricultural Policy ( CAP ) , I voted against the report on the milk sector .
I am of the opinion that there should be no further increases in the quota without a market analysis .
I believe that Parliament 's demand to raise the quota by 1 % in five stages , as proposed by the Commission , will send out completely the wrong signal .
However , I very much welcome the fact that Parliament has spoken out once again in favour of the milk fund .
The funds which will be saved from the agricultural budget and , in particular , in the milk sector , will be an efficient way of relieving the burden on this sector and of restructuring it .
In addition , I support the call to the Commission , Parliament and the Council to produce a report on the milk market by 31 December 2010 which will form the basis for the discussion on further measures for controlling milk quotas .
I also welcome the fact that the franchise for the modulation has been raised from EUR 5 000 to EUR 10 000 per year .
This means that Parliament is in favour of giving further support to small farms , the majority of which can be found in our areas of Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria .
in writing . - Conservative MEPs supported amendments allowing for milk quota increases of at least 2 % per year before the abolition of the quota regime in 2015 as a means of preparing the ground for a liberalised , market-orientated dairy sector .
We did not support those amendments which aimed to constrain quota increases .
Ultimately , no significant amendments were adopted in either sense , which means the Commission proposal stood effectively un-amended .
While the 1 % annual increases proposed by the Commission are preferable to no increase , we still consider this to be too timid a step .
We also reject the report 's reluctance to do away with certain coupled payments and market support measures .
As a result , we voted against the report overall .
I voted in favour of the report on amending the ' Regulation on modifications to the common agricultural policy ' .
I supported Amendment 4 which allows dairy quotas to be increased by 2 % for 2008-2009 and by 1 % for the marketing years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 .
This will provide the elements required for a suitable evaluation of the market situation in the milk sector .
I also supported the fact that in cases where the situation in the milk market for the relevant marketing year will allow this , increases in milk quotas will be possible for the 12 new Member States .
Against this background , we need to guarantee that the decision to amend the milk quota is taken in good time , before the start of the marketing year in question ( 1 April of the relevant year ) .
The payments from the European Agricultural Fund are intended to provide support for farmers , in order to ensure that the countryside remains in a good agricultural and environmental condition .
While strict regulations apply to foods produced in the EU , goods are being imported at give-away prices which are not subject to these regulations .
In addition , the milk quotas have been increased and will come to an end altogether in 2015 , which will lead to falling milk prices and will leave small farmers in dire straits .
Finally , the supermarket chains , such as Hofer , receive EU subsidies and further increase the pressure on domestic farmers , for example , by using milk as a loss leader .
The ones who suffer the most are small farmers in rural areas who are dependent on milk production , but who do not have the opportunity to produce milk on a large scale .
Consumers have to pay the increased prices for milk and food , but none of this extra money feeds back to the small producers .
However , when prices fall , it is the farmers who feel the effects .
This must change , otherwise we will be dependent on food imports because of the huge number of farmers leaving the land .
Our farmers rely on subsidies and this is why I have voted in favour of the Capoulas Santos report .
I voted in favour of the report on support for rural development given from the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) .
I voted in favour of Amendment 24 which specifies the start-up aid for young farmers amounting to EUR 75 000 .
This may be granted in the form of a single premium , the amount of which will not exceed EUR 50 000 , or of an interest subsidy , the capitalised value of which will not exceed EUR 50 000 .
Where the two forms of aid are combined , the total amount will not be able to exceed EUR 75 000 .
I also voted in favour of Amendment 12 which , in order to ensure adequate funding for rural development programmes , maintains that greater flexibility should be introduced to enable the use , within the same Member State , of unspent resources from the Structural Funds for this purpose .
Of course , it is important that different areas of policy are coordinated with one another , but this should not only be restricted to funding .
In the EU , you have the feeling that the right hand does not know what the left hand is doing .
We promote the transport of goods all over Europe and then we promote environmental protection measures in order to combat the negative effects of the transport .
Another example is the support for tobacco production being put in place at the same time as measures to reduce tobacco consumption .
The same principle applies to rural areas .
On the one hand , there are additional subsidy funds and , on the other hand , as a result of the requirements of the Maastricht Treaty and the boundless enthusiasm for privatisation , the infrastructure outside the main centres of population is being dismantled and rural areas are becoming increasingly cut off .
If the post office in Austria is privatised as expected , within a decade , the post offices outside the cities will be at least 20 kilometres apart .
Rural areas are increasingly becoming the place where the elderly live .
The removal of this important point of contact for older people will lead to them becoming more and more isolated , not only elderly people , but also the socially disadvantaged and people with impaired mobility are particularly affected by the infrastructure cuts .
I have voted in favour of this report in the hope that it will form the basis for better coordinated strategies in future and will counteract these negative developments .
I voted in favour of Mr Capoulas Santos 's report .
One of the reasons why I voted in favour is because , in a particular way , during periods of crisis , agriculture is one of the areas which need to be given special attention .
In periods like this , consumption generally decreases .
This is why investment in agriculture needs to be aimed at reducing operating costs , but without affecting the quality of agricultural produce .
I also feel that during the forthcoming period , we should reconsider and determine the real value of agricultural produce . This is because , otherwise , more and more farmers are going to give up farming land in conditions where they will no longer be able to sell their produce at a realistic price .
There are frequently cases where the cost of agricultural production does not even cover the investment .
On the other hand , let us not forget that in the agricultural sector , we need to identify and use alternative fuels , a strategic area for the whole world .
This report is relevant based on the issues which it raises .
Agriculture needs to feature among the EU 's priorities .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment - Single application procedure for residence and work
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs E. Klamt , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment - C6-0011 / 2008 - ;
by Mr P. Gaubert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State and on a common set of rights for third-country workers legally residing in a Member State - C6-0470 / 2007 - .
The House services tell me that Mrs Klamt 's father has died and she is therefore not present .
Naturally , we send our condolences to Mrs Klamt and thank Mr Weber for assuming the responsibility of acting as rapporteur in this debate .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , the reason why I am speaking today has already been mentioned .
This is because Mrs Klamt has had a close family bereavement .
We would like to convey our condolences to her .
I would like to start by expressing my gratitude on behalf of the rapporteur for the excellent cooperation in this area .
As you know , the report has been produced in close cooperation between the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs of the European Parliament , as part of the process for increasing collaboration .
For this reason , I would like to thank the fellow Members who were involved and also the shadow rapporteurs on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
The rapporteur would also like to thank in particular the French Presidency , with which she has had close contact over recent months .
However , as a Member of the European Parliament , I would like to emphasise once again that it would have been better if the agreement at the level of the ambassadors had taken place after the deliberations in the European Parliament .
This would have been a pleasing indication of the close cooperation .
To come to the point , we are in competition with countries throughout the world for highly qualified workers .
With a proportion of 1.72 % of the total workforce , the European Union is far behind all its competitors .
Australia , Canada , the United States and even Switzerland have a higher proportion of highly qualified workers in their workforces .
In the competition for the best and cleverest brains , we in the European Union are starting from an unfavourable position .
We all know that this question plays a decisive role in our future and in the ability of our national economies to introduce innovation .
Using eight compromise amendments , Ewa Klamt was able to come to an agreement with the other groups in the Parliament on the essential criteria .
The report by Ewa Klamt , which was agreed on by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , contains the main criteria for the admission of highly qualified workers from third countries .
The first aspect is the definition of ' highly qualified workers ' and here it is a question of the wages that are paid .
The scope of the directive includes , on the one hand , people who have a higher education qualification and , on the other , people who have comparable professional experience covering a period of at least five years .
The Commission had initially proposed three years ' professional experience .
The European Parliament has also gone one step further on the salary criterion .
The lower salary limit should be 1.7 times the average gross annual wage .
The Council has chosen a factor of 1.5 .
I would therefore like to emphasise that the European Parliament is calling for a higher-level definition of ' highly qualified workers ' .
The next issue is the question of the brain drain , which is an important consideration .
How should we approach this challenge ?
We should not be recruiting highly qualified workers from third countries where they are desperately needed .
An application for a Blue Card can be rejected if the brain drain is a genuine problem .
However , we must also be honest with ourselves .
Although we take the issue of the brain drain seriously , we are competing on a worldwide market and therefore , a time limit on the Blue Card is necessary .
Of course , administrative factors are not the only ones which play an important part in attracting highly qualified workers to Europe .
Cultural issues , such as openness to immigration and attracting the best people , are also important .
However , we must not disregard the added value which the Blue Card can bring to Europe .
For the first time , we have succeeded in creating a standardised admission system covering the whole of Europe .
This represents genuine added value .
Tomorrow 's vote is also important for us because we have introduced a special amendment which emphasises Community preference .
This means that when European workers who are qualified for a specific job are available , they must be given priority over issuing a Blue Card .
We should also emphasise that we were all agreed , and we should make sure that the home countries are informed of this , that although we have standardised the procedure , we do not want to lay down any European quotas .
In other words , we do not want to specify what the levels of immigration should be .
This must , and should , remain under national control .
On behalf of the rapporteur , I would once again like to thank everyone involved .
I hope that the result tomorrow will be as good as the result we have already achieved in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly happy that our legislative debate today is dealing with legal immigration as this enables us to take part in a debate here that is not focusing on or is no longer focusing on the criminalisation of illegal immigration , but which highlights , rightly , the positive aspects and considerable contribution of legal immigration to our European businesses .
It is important , in the current demographic context , to remind Europeans of the significant contribution of immigration to the economic prosperity and development of the European Union .
The latest demographic forecasts in our possession reveal major risks concerning the viability of the pension , health and social security schemes .
Faced with these situations , the European Union has made a clear choice : to promote a common immigration policy encouraging legal , economic immigration , managed efficiently in line with national market requirements .
Therefore , we are debating today two far-reaching , pragmatic legislative texts , which are meant to meet the labour requirements clearly defined by our Member States .
By adopting these two texts simultaneously , the European Parliament is sending a clear message of openness , that we must seize upon fully to explain to public opinion , to our fellow citizens , and to third countries the positive things we are doing in terms of immigration .
We need not be ashamed of our choices in this matter and we have no need for lessons on this point from third-country leaders who are unable to conduct the appropriate policies to avoid their populations risking their lives to seek better conditions in Europe .
To focus on the directive on the single procedure , for which I am the rapporteur , firstly , the proposal creates a one-stop shop system for third-country nationals who want to reside in a Member State country in order to work there .
It provides for a single application procedure that is simpler , shorter and faster , both for the employer and for the migrant , the objective being to reduce the bureaucratic procedures and simplify the administrative actions .
This procedure and single permit will also facilitate permit validity checks , both for the administration and for employers .
Secondly , the draft directive will ensure equal treatment for all third-country nationals in a certain number of areas .
Recognising the fundamental social and economic rights of immigrants legally present within the territory of the European Union and of new arrivals will help improve their integration and will therefore lead to better social cohesion .
Equal treatment concerns working conditions , health , safety in the workplace , education , vocational training , recognition of qualifications , social security , including health care , the export of pensions paid , access to goods and services and fiscal advantages .
Realistic restrictions are indeed planned , but we shall ensure they are not greater than what is planned in the Blue Card .
The interests of immigrants must be taken into account and their rights must be protected .
In fact , the figures reveal that the unemployment rate amongst immigrants is higher than that of European Union citizens , that they are often in insecure employment and that mastering the language of the host country remains a significant barrier .
The two texts proposed by the Commission , and I take this opportunity to applaud their common sense , correspond to our idea of immigration policy : a reasonably firm and humane policy .
I would also like to thank the Council and the French Presidency for the exceptional and fairly swift efforts made to pave the way for the rapid adoption of these two perfectly complementary texts .



Mr President , rapporteurs , Manfred Weber and Patrick Gaubert , honourable Members , Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Barrot , Mr Weber , please pass on our condolences and all our sympathy to Mrs Klamt who obviously cannot be with us .
Almost four years ago , in January 2005 , the European Commission announced an important debate on the prospects of a proactive European policy on economic migration .
It was noted that the resistance and reservations were still numerous and extensive efforts were still needed to reach a consensus on this point . Patrick Gaubert pointed this out .
He also reiterated how striking it was to note how opinion has changed since that date .
Economic migrations have become the first pillar of the common immigration policy , that Member States have chosen to adopt by approving the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum at the European Council of 16 October .
The European Parliament will vote today in plenary on the first two Community texts that set up common tools on economic migration .
The first , the Blue Card , allows access throughout Europe to highly qualified workers and will guarantee a set of rights and administrative facilities .
The second , the single permit , which merges a residence permit and a work permit , will significantly reduce the administrative difficulties for all persons coming to work legally in the European Union and will guarantee them a set of rights throughout the Union .
These two texts demonstrate that the Union is truly committed to promoting legal migration , as the rapporteurs have pointed out , that it wants to make the lives of third-country nationals legally resident on our territory easier , in short that it is not the ' Fortress Europe ' that some people would like to see .
I , too , would like to pay tribute to the work carried out by the rapporteurs on these two proposals .
Their work has opened the way for very active cooperation - and I am delighted to emphasise this - between the Council and the European Parliament throughout the work .
First of all , I shall deal with the Blue Card issue .
Less than a year after the presentation of the Commission 's proposal , the Council managed to provide a general approach .
This was no easy task given the unanimity rule .
The Council took into account , thanks to the excellent cooperation we have had with Mrs Klamt , numerous areas of discussion from the European Parliament , be it the definition of the card beneficiaries , its delivery conditions , the attention paid to the ethical recruitment method and the possibilities for circular migration , as well as the elimination of discrimination based on age or the necessary flexibility regarding card validity .
There is one point on which the positions of the European Parliament and the Council differ considerably and that is the wage criterion question .
The Council accepted a lower threshold , with further possible derogations for sectors experiencing shortages , which opens up the advantages of the Blue Card to more people .
Given the proposals that have been made , I hope that the European Parliament will be able to accept the position of the Council and thereby broaden the scope of this Blue Card .
This work promises success that will send a triple message to our fellow European citizens , a message about the determination of Europe to organise the possibilities for legal migration , especially for professional purposes .
It is really the first text in the context of this specific objective .
It is also a message about the responsiveness of European integration , with this symbol that the European Blue Card will become , offering real mobility within Europe for highly qualified third-country nationals and members of their families , in accordance with the powers of each Member State , for the Member States will , of course , retain control of their labour markets .
The third message relates to the importance that the Union attaches to enhancing the draw on skills and talents in a world that is now globalised , in accordance with the efforts undertaken to stimulate Europe 's competitiveness within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy .
In this way , the European Union reconciles its wish to increase its attractiveness with its faithfulness to commitments to promote the development of the poorest countries .
The Council ensured that a whole series of proposals , aimed at preventing and restricting the brain drain , was included in the directive .
I should like to state this solemnly here and I shall , of course , return to this in response to the different speeches that I am sure you will make , because I am aware of your entirely legitimate attachment to effective and equal cooperation with countries of origin , in particular African countries .
I now turn to the directive establishing a single permit , which merges the residence permit and the work permit .
This is also an important text which makes economic migrations considerably easier , in a context that is legal , transparent , responsive and predictable , while reducing administrative procedures which , too often , hamper the migrations that are necessary to the economic and demographic balance of the Union .
Above all , this text creates a common set of rights for all third-country workers who work and reside legally in the European Union .
The initial reception given to this directive did not make it possible to envisage substantial progress in the near future .
The work carried out on the Blue Card has , nonetheless , little by little enabled the ground to be cleared in this difficult matter .
The Presidency has spared no efforts in making as much progress as possible in finalising this proposal , and has naturally taken the utmost account of the positions of this House .
Work on this text has been stepped up and we are confident that the main elements will be established by the end of December .
The proposal will be examined for the first time by the ministers during the ' Justice and Home Affairs ' Council session on 27 and 28 November .
Quite clearly , a strong signal from the European Parliament regarding the appropriateness and added value of this text will enhance the movement that is starting to take shape and which can pave the way for the final adoption of this directive which , clearly , simplifies migrants ' lives .
Mr President , I , too , would like to extend my warmest thanks to the rapporteurs , Mrs Klamt - and I wish to echo the expression of sympathy that Mr Jouyet addressed to her - and , of course , Patrick Gaubert .
Their reports are of high quality and I thank the two rapporteurs from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mrs Jeleva and Mr Masiel .

I also thank Manfred Weber , who stood in for Mrs Klamt .
The two proposed directives are the first in a series announced by the Commission in 2005 in its action plan on legal migration .
They are important not just for the migrants themselves but also for our Member States and their companies .
To echo the words of Patrick Gaubert and the speech you have just made , Mr Jouyet , they show the true importance of this pact on immigration and asylum , which the French Presidency saw through to completion , and they prove that this pact is , in fact , balanced and also demonstrates the desire of Europeans to open up to these migratory flows which may be particularly useful and prove to be very positive for the future of our European society .
These two texts , therefore , allow us to show the face of an open European Union , welcoming the citizens of third countries , who may thus legally take up residence and work at whatever level at which they are qualified , and , needless to say , in full enjoyment of their rights .
They also prove the European Union 's ability to agree on common economic immigration instruments and thus find an appropriate balance between the expectations of a society , the rights of migrants and the needs of their country of origin .
I will begin with the horizontal instrument , the Directive on the single permit and the rights of migrant workers .
I am pleased that the broad outlines of the Commission 's original proposal have been confirmed , especially in relation to the single procedure , the single permit for citizens of third countries admitted as workers , and the common set of rights for all , for all migrants working legally , whatever the initial reason for their stay .
It is absolutely fundamental to ensure that all citizens of third countries who are working legally should enjoy the same minimum set of rights in all Member States .
This , it seems to me , is in line with all the great European principles relating to fundamental rights .
Also Mr Gaubert , your report suggests new or additional features that the Commission can support .
I wish to mention three amendments in particular : the amendment to grant a temporary residence permit where there is a delay in the administration 's consideration of a request for renewal , the amendments strengthening the procedural rights and , finally , the amendments which provide for the option of applying for the single permit when already residing legally in a Member State .
The Commission understands and also shares the European Parliament 's desire to eliminate any restriction in the article providing for equality of treatment and , turning to the Presidency , I obviously hope that , as far as possible , the Council will prove open to all of these amendments .
I now come to the proposed ' European Blue Card ' in Mrs Klamt 's report , of which Mr Weber reminded us .
The aim of the European Blue Card is to make the Union more attractive , to increase its ability to attract highly qualified workers from third countries , so that legal immigration can help to strengthen the competitiveness of our economy , as a complement to the Lisbon Strategy .
The report set before your House supports the Commission on the need and urgency of introducing this common system in Europe .
The Commission willingly subscribes to the report 's conclusions , therefore , but with some reservations .
Firstly , the Commission is certainly favourable to the amendments which make the system more attractive , for example , those aimed at removing any restriction on equality of treatment and access to the labour market after two years as a holder of a Blue Card .
Secondly , the inclusion of refugees in the category of legal residents able to benefit from this system .
This facility was missing from the initial proposal but we find it valuable from every aspect , be it political , humanitarian or economic .
Finally , the retention of the criterion on professional experience in certain professions .
In the new technologies sector , in particular , a person 's experience and capabilities are more valuable than any diplomas .
In contrast , the Commission cannot accept the amendment limiting the provision of the Blue Card just to citizens of countries with which the Union has signed agreements .
True , this amendment is aimed at reducing the negative effects on developing countries , but the Commission believes that this would lead to an excessively restricted application of the directive .
In addition , this would risk discrimination against highly qualified migrants who could then use the national systems , over which neither the Commission , nor your Parliament , exercises any control .
Similarly , you can see my reservations about making the derogation of the right to circular migration an option .
Frankly , this is more of a disagreement than a reservation .
The option of returning to the country of origin for two years without losing long-term resident status is essential if we wish to allow exchanges of staff between universities and hospitals , for example , or even to encourage the diasporas to make a commitment to developing their countries of origin .
This would restrict circular migration which we increasingly want to see developing .
Finally , I will say a few words about the obvious need to take account of the state of the labour market .
As Manfred Weber reminded us , we have a Europe whose labour markets are separated and it is up to each State to determine how many immigrants could be allowed in .
Obviously , we must also not forget that , in the labour market field , there is the duty to allow in all the European citizens of the other Member States .
To conclude , I turn to the Presidency , to Mr Jean-Pierre Jouyet , and hope that , as far as possible , the ministers meeting in the Council next week can take as much as possible from the amendments of the European Parliament which , certainly , provide added value , and I hope that , before the end of the year , we can show that this Europe , far from turning in on itself , wishes to open up to these migratory flows , in the knowledge that we increasingly wish to move towards concerted management of migratory flows with the countries of immigration .
( Applause )
?
With the Blue Card proposal , it is hoped that the qualified workforce will be attracted to the EU and be given conditions to come temporarily but , at the same time , to remain long term .
The proposal states that no brain drain will occur , but rather a brain return - circulation .
This is hardly likely .
How does the proposal appear in the context of the development cooperation policies ?
With the introduction of the Blue Card , developing countries will lose specialists , in whose training the EU also participated , particularly from the most sensitive areas - education and health .
The shortage of those specialists , perhaps , will have to be filled by volunteers from our countries .
Furthermore , the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark are not participating in the Blue Card with its ethics of not inviting specialists from sensitive sectors in developing countries .
In this case , initiatives to support developing countries seem false .
Apparently , the interests of business still prevail .
In reality , the Blue Card may cause developing countries great intellectual damage .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , the Directive on the admission of skilled third-country nationals to the EU is the first valuable step towards a common European Union immigration policy .
It is the first serious attempt to restrict illegal immigration and promote legal immigration in Europe .
In preparing the Blue Card scheme , we were torn between the fear of its abuse by third country nationals and the hope that the new arrivals will meet the needs of our labour markets and contribute to the development of our economy .
The Blue Card is intended to become Europe 's calling card , making it an attractive place to work and live for the skilled workers needed by our small and medium-sized enterprises .
From the point of view of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , which I represent today , it was important to ensure that workers from outside the European Union are not treated less well than our own citizens .
For this reason , we needed to make provision for equal pay for equal work , ensure that families could be united and provide access to basic social benefits , so as to achieve rapid and complete integration of the arrivals .
In conclusion , may I thank the shadow rapporteurs for their assistance and inform the French Presidency that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs worked fast to assist it in the achievement of its goals before the end of its term of office .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( BG ) I would like to congratulate Mr Gaubert on his report on the Council Directive on a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of the European Union .
I was draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs regarding this directive .
As an MEP for Bulgaria , one of the ten Member States which have been subjected to transitional periods , I am strongly opposed to restrictions on free access to the labour market for a considerable part of the European workforce .
For this reason , I welcome the efforts by European institutions to secure equal treatment for everybody who resides and legally works in the European Union .
The purpose of this directive is to act as a horizontal tool , bearing in mind that particular directives are already in effect or are to be adopted .
I have in mind the Directives on seasonal workers , workers who are long-term residents and ' EU Blue Cards ' which we are discussing today .
While formulating our stance , I had the support of colleagues from our parliamentary commission and believe that the texts we have proposed set the rights of third-country workers in a balanced way .
I would like to mention here the right to education , the recognition of degrees and certificates , working conditions , access to social security , tax rebates and others .
This directive provides a minimum , general selection of rights to third-country workers in relation to work .
Consequently , the rights given to them should therefore not exceed the rights guaranteed under particular directives .
Namely , it is for this reason that the European Commission 's proposal envisages particular conditions for exercising these rights .
In the final version of the stance , which was put to the vote by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , these conditions are , however , lacking .
This has put us in a situation where there are blatant discrepancies such as with the ' EU Blue Card ' as well as with that guaranteed under other particular directives , including the Directive concerning third-country nationals who are long-term residents of the EU .
Ladies and gentlemen , at this time of financial and economic crisis , it is necessary that we be realistic .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I appeal to you that we take a responsible outlook and vote for a logically sound and consistent document .
Thank you very much , Mr President , for the floor .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of the present migration directive package , today Parliament is debating and tomorrow it will adopt important and long-term reports .
Currently , there are 27 different systems within the European Union for regulating the status of third-country nationals .
The two new directives guarantee a simpler procedure for highly qualified workers , and include the possibility for a simpler system of entry and residence .
We can see that these two directives can introduce an effective compromise system in place of today 's fragmented regulations .
The rapporteurs for the European People 's Party have done serious and important work in this regard .
The report on the employment of highly qualified workers , which has come to be known as the ' Blue Card ' report , is a good , balanced report .
Rapporteur Ewa Klamt deserves special praise .
We likewise congratulate Mr Gaubert for his report .
At the same time , the People 's Party is committed to making sure that the clause regarding preferential treatment for EU nationals is an important part of the Directive .
I therefore wish to draw the attention of those fellow Members who object to the principle of preferential treatment and who propose amendments seeking to remove the establishment of this principle from the report to the fact that , as a Hungarian citizen and in the name of the citizens of all the new Member States , I consider it unacceptable not to establish firmly the principle that workers from Member States are given preference over workers from third countries .
This approach is particularly unacceptable and reflective of hypocrisy when we , as nationals of the new Member States are still - to this day and for who knows how much longer - discriminated against in numerous old Member States when it comes to access to the labour market .
It is shameful that Europe speaks of our Union in such a way that it still treats the citizens of the new Member States as second-class citizens in this regard . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I would ask that my initial words are not taken into account by the infernal time machine as they are intended to add to the message of condolence conveyed by this House to Mrs Klamt and , in particular , to congratulate the rapporteurs .
I will now start .
I congratulate the rapporteurs because , with these two proposals , we are taking a qualitative step towards a common immigration policy and we are promoting legal migration which is a key element of our global approach .
The common set of rights and the single residence and work permit for legal migrants must be extended to the highest possible number of workers .
As a result , we socialists ask that no category of workers is excluded .
The ' Blue Card ' offers an opportunity for migrants to settle with their families and work in our countries .
It opens a single door to 27 labour markets .
However , it cannot be solely highly qualified workers who enter through this door .
Commissioner , we therefore expect the Commission to shortly present its proposals on other labour categories .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must avoid a brain drain .
This Blue Card must not become a passport encouraging vital human resources to leave developing countries .
For every qualified professional who comes to Europe , the PSE Group wants us to fund the training of a new professional in the country of origin .
Finally , Europe must be an attractive destination , not only for talent coming from outside the Union , but also for our own European talent .
In 2007 , nearly 300 000 highly qualified Europeans left to work outside the Union .
We must do everything we can to keep them in the European house .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it seems as though Conservatives and Socialists are hand in glove with each other on the Blue Card , leaving my group lost in amazement , to be honest .
For a while now , the EU has been trying to come up with a comprehensive package on migration , including measures to tackle illegal migration as well as measures to push Europe 's forward-looking strategy on legal migration .
You might remember the very emotional debate on the Return Directive .
At the time , the ALDE Group said that the return policy could not be looked upon in an isolated way : it should be seen as an integral part - a necessary part - of a total package for migration , which is still very true .
Today , we finally have the chance to give a strong message on the need for better opportunities for legal migration , to address the demands of businesses in urgent need of qualified workers .
The fact that we could not expect too much from the EPP on legal migration is unfortunate but could , in a way , be foreseen .
The fact that the PSE is , broadly speaking , happily in line with the EPP on the Blue Card amendments makes my hair stand on end .
Following the vote in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the scheme has been watered down significantly .
Far too many restrictions have been introduced , which do not help in any way when trying to make the EU more attractive to highly qualified workers .
It must be clear that the intention of the Blue Card is to increase the competitiveness of the EU economy .
The Blue Card proposal is not an easy attempt to take the best and leave the rest , thereby creating a brain drain from developing countries .
The current trend is that the vast majority of the highly qualified workers emigrate to the US , Canada or Australia instead of the EU .
If we want to reverse this trend , we have to be ambitious .
This House is about to adopt a report that would weaken an already very modest Commission proposal even further .
To be clear , the ALDE Group is a very strong supporter of the Blue Card .
However , we feel that the current text does not bring about the much-needed change for legal migration but that it confirms Member States ' protectionist practices instead .
We all know that the Council has been excellent in making ambitious statements , but we also know that , too often , effective decision making is constrained by the inability of the Member States to really work together in their mutual interest , and that effective decision making in this field is being undermined by a very emotional and muddled debate on legal migration , owing to a lack of focus .
The Tampere Programme , the Hague Programme , the French immigration pact , the Stockholm Programme coming up - at the end of the day , it all comes down to the transposition of these basic commitments into concrete and effective measures .
If we want the EU to benefit from the proposed scheme , we have to be ambitious and therefore I hope you will vote accordingly tomorrow .
Mr President , the available data alerts us to the fact that the European Union is not a location commonly chosen by skilled third-country workers , unlike countries such as the United States , Canada or Australia .
For instance , only 5.5 % of skilled migrants from the Maghreb countries come to the EU , whereas United States and Canada accept approximately 54 % .
This is due to the huge differentiation of the migrant reception systems in the EU , which greatly hampers movement between countries .
Only six Member States have special skilled migrant employment programmes .
It is therefore vital to introduce a more coherent approach by Member States to the European migration policy , incorporating integration and political issues .
We must standardise regulations , so as to be able to control migrant flows both into and inside Europe , and thus give skilled migrants a better chance .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their positive approach on these partial - but very long-awaited - more positive measures on migration and the position of third-country nationals within the European Union .
I welcome , too , the Commission 's more positive view of certain of Parliament 's amendments .
The starting point for my group , the Greens , has been to have rights which are as equivalent as possible to those of EU nationals - a common set of rights - and for the system to be as open and as welcoming as possible .
I thoroughly agree with Members who have said that it is a scandal that EU nationals are not , at present , treated on an equal basis , but I would urge Members not to share the cautious approach of our Member States in giving our own nationals equal treatment by penalising third-country nationals .
There is absolutely no doubt that the EU has a need for workers at a variety of skill levels .
We want people who want to come to use and develop their skills from a wide variety of countries - India , New Zealand , Ghana , China , wherever - and that is why we will not be supporting Amendment 84 , nor indeed Amendment 24 , which talks about granting Blue Cards only to those highly qualified migrants from countries with which we have previously concluded partnerships .
I am not sure what the United States would say about that .
It is true that we need to be careful regarding certain sectors in the world 's poorest countries , but we also need to be careful that these are not the only people who cannot develop their skills in the European Union .
We also need to take care that we are not using this particular proposal in order to write a general development policy .
This is a global proposal .
It covers all potential countries in the world .
Yes , we also need to maximise the skills in our own Member States , and that is why we support the amendment recalling , for example , the anti-discrimination legislation , which we also hope will be ambitious in its next stage .
So we will support all amendments which safeguard the rights of individuals and we will vote against those which try to delete those rights .
We welcome the efforts to simplify procedures , but we too regret that Parliament has not been more ambitious , especially on the Blue Card , and that it has , in fact , put further hurdles in the way .
So it is unlikely that we will be supporting that proposal as it is , although we certainly support the idea in principle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I would also like to express my condolences to Mrs Klamt .
I would like to immediately examine the substance of today 's debate , since the European Union is continuing to adopt a schizophrenic policy with regard to immigration .
This is happening in the Member States ' policies : they have signed the pact on immigration and asylum , which expressly states that zero immigration is harmful and unrealistic for the European Union , but then we discover that my country 's minister of home affairs is advocating the closure of the borders for the next two years .
Community policy on immigration continues to be schizophrenic .
Mr Gaubert is right in saying that we are facing a demographic crisis in Europe and that we need more immigration .
The Commission has explained it to us : we need 50 million immigrants by 2060 , but we are doing nothing to encourage them to come , and instead we have made it a priority to harmonise the return policy .
Today , we are debating a single residence and work permit exclusively for those who are already in European Union territory and we are creating the Blue Card for highly qualified workers , which will have an impact of only between 1.5 % and 3 % on the immigration rate in Europe , and thus will play a minimal role as compared to our real requirements for workers in Europe .
Currently , there are approximately 6 million unauthorised workers in the European Union who have already been absorbed into the labour market and who are kept in unauthorised positions because , clearly , such a situation is convenient in keeping down labour costs and cutting down on social welfare protection .

We think that we ought to start with a regularisation programme for these workers who have already been absorbed into the labour market : we think that the Blue Card is a mistake , in making a selection upstream of immigration ; we think that the definition of highly qualified workers is too restrictive and we think that Community preference is a form of outright discrimination .
We believe that there ought to be a complete change in direction for immigration policy .
We know how to read the fact that the Blue Card is the first signal in opening up legal immigration channels , but this is not enough to ensure that our group will vote in favour .
Mr President , Member States should continue to decide for themselves about the right of entry of migrants to their territories , and as long as there are people without jobs in our Member States , I continue to be doubtful as to the need for stimulating legal immigration .
The Commission proposal , contrary to what is being suggested , does not bring a simple procedure any closer .
Alongside the Commission proposal , national regulations remain in force for migrants with sound qualifications , and additional requirements are possible .
What value then does a European regulation add ?
This does not answer the question of educational establishments and industry .
They want an unambiguous system for workers and students from outside the European Union , and this is set to create additional red tape , while less was promised .
I should like to call for a system whereby immigration policy is left with the Member States .
In that way , every Member State can have its own clear set of procedures .
In an EU context , we can then agree on whether people are allowed to travel freely and to move to other countries .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Commissioner , I thank you most sincerely .
Through your points of view , you have just provided me with the arguments for my next electoral campaigns , relative to this question of immigration , since you yourselves speak of - and I quote - ' an open European Union , opening up to migratory flows , the advantages of the Blue Card opened up to as many people as possible , attracting skills , not hindering immigration ' .
See nothing , hear nothing , know nothing - that could be the motto of the European institutions regarding the immigration question , while the people of Europe have been suffering daily for 20 years in relation to this question , with all the social and economic consequences in terms of identity , security , job insecurity , poverty and unemployment .
I hear references to the rights of immigrants , but who mentions the social rights of the workers ?
Who speaks of those who , in their millions and tens of millions in Europe , are in a difficult social situation , who do not access employment at any level of hierarchy or qualifications ?
Furthermore , the integration policy conducted in Europe is a true national disintegration policy , of which we have fallen foul through excessive Communitisation .
The Blue Card that you are proposing is nothing but an indraught to the entire world to attract millions of new immigrants , whereas it is not this policy that needs to be pursued , but a policy for returning immigrants to their countries , a policy of national and Community preference , a policy of national and Community protection .
Finally , by plundering the elites in the developing world , you are going to prevent the economic development of these countries .
These peoples and these countries need capital and skilled workers .
You are depriving them of both .


( PT ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , unlike the previous speaker , I am clearly against Fortress Europe and therefore support active policies to admit economic migrants .
The only way to have a balanced immigration policy is to be firm in combating illegal immigration and to boldly regulate legal migration .
In this context , we approve the Directive on the ' Blue Card ' .
However , we do not want to limit migration solely to highly qualified people , thereby shutting the door on all other migrant workers with fewer qualifications .
Over the next few years , both categories will be essential to the economic and social development of Europe .
In this respect , we are talking about millions of people .
For this reason , I also support the proposal for a directive which aims to establish a single application procedure for a single residence and work permit .
In addition to offering clear benefits in terms of simplification , cutting red tape and facilitating control of their status , it allows a single common set of rights to be recognised to migrant workers legally residing in the Union territory .
With the exception of seasonal and highly qualified workers who will be covered by specific directives , all migrants will benefit from a set of labour rights equivalent to those enjoyed by nationals of the host Member State .
This equal treatment throughout the Community area should help to combat situations of labour exploitation and improve integration of these workers , thereby leading to better social cohesion .
I agree with what Ewa Klamt has said : it is useful to create a common system for the admission of highly qualified workers , instead of having 27 different systems .
I agree with the proposals made by Mrs Klamt in terms of tightening up the admission conditions , at the same time as improving prevention of the brain drain .
While applauding the efforts of Mrs Klamt and Mr Gaubert , I should like to end , Mr President , by regretting that , once again , the opinion of this Parliament does not seem to particularly count .
Everything indicates that a political decision has already been taken by the Council without waiting for the vote in Parliament , which I regret .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all I would like to express my deepest condolences to Mrs Klamt and to congratulate her on this report .
We need highly qualified workers from third countries on our labour markets , partly because we have invested too little in education and training and have made too many skilled workers unemployed , who are now no longer available on the labour market .
Therefore , we must do more for education and training at home and we must also open up our labour markets to highly qualified immigrants .
The Blue Card is the first step in the right direction and represents a possible triple win situation .
Firstly , in the medium term , companies can fill some of their vacancies with skilled workers and benefit from new international expertise .
Secondly , the highly qualified workers and the members of their immediate families can gain a different perspective which they may not have experienced in their home country .
Thirdly , when they return , either temporarily or permanently , to their country of origin , they can make a significant contribution to economic growth there .
The concern that this may lead to a brain drain is well-founded .
Therefore , we recommend not actively advertising in the education and health sectors , in particular in those countries which have been hit by emigration and the lack of skilled and unskilled workers .
However , this is question of development policy which we will not be able to resolve here .
In addition , we must remember that individual citizens are not owned by states .
Just as our citizens are able to look for work in other countries or leave their country of origin without facing major obstacles , it should be possible for people from other countries to work in the EU .
The principle of equal pay for equal work is , of course , important to us .
It is true that things can always be improved and improvements are necessary .
However , I believe this to be the first step in the right direction .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to express , like many others , my congratulations to our two rapporteurs , Mrs Klamt , to whom I present the condolences of my group , and Patrick Gaubert .
However , Mr Jouyet , I should also like to include the French Presidency in this because , regarding the Blue Card at least , the French Presidency has demonstrated a high level of commitment which has enabled a political agreement to be obtained at Council level .
I might add that I do not think there was the same resolve on Mr Gaubert 's report .
As fellow Members have pointed out , the European Union is taking , with these two reports , an important step in its migratory policy .
We all know , and we have often regretted this over the last few years , that most of our time and resources have been spent in combating , necessarily , illegal immigration .
Today , however , with these two texts , the European Union is sanctioning the need and importance of an active legal economic immigration policy .
We all know that legal economic immigration is a necessity for the European continent , and it is not the obscurantism of a few fascists that is likely to make us change our opinion .
By introducing the obligation for Member States to grant a single residence and work permit , Patrick Gaubert 's report also aims to ensure the right of immigrant workers to equal treatment in as many areas as possible .
I should like to send a message to my friend Giusto Catania .
Giusto , you made a silly mistake .
The single permit does not just apply to workers already within the territory of the European Union .
Equal rights also concern those who will come and not only those already here .
Therefore , when you criticise something in order to have arguments to reject a report , I am sorry but you really should try to read it correctly .
For its part , Mrs Klamt 's report sets out to define the entry conditions for highly qualified nationals on to European soil and this is something we absolutely need .
One final remark on this matter , since fellow Members of my group focused on this , is as follows .
I share with them a certain number of regrets .
The system - I am not talking here of principles - , the system is slightly overcautious , at times too protectionist , but fundamentally it represents a necessary step forward , and that is why I , personally and as Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , shall vote in favour of the two reports .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for many years we have been hearing , on the subject of immigration , a series of calls accompanied by schedules , telling us the lovely fairytale of the need - also stated by the UN - for the continuous expansion of the Western economy and , in particular , we have heard European countries claim there is a need for tens or perhaps hundreds of millions of new workers for Europe .
Now , unfortunately for everyone , the financial crisis is squeezing everyone in our country , and even the CGL , which is the biggest trade union , is saying , at least via some of its leaders in the Veneto regions : ' Honestly , our workers are at risk of losing their jobs , and we need to start thinking seriously about their jobs ' .
The Commission is therefore doing well to repudiate all these lovely fairy-tales of the past and to work on that 3 % of immigration that can still be useful , where there can be good grounds for people to enter the EU .
Europe certainly still needs qualified immigrants , and they can be useful to us , but there is a huge obstacle in terms of the rights of the immigrants ' countries not to have their best brains taken away from them .
This proposal then is , in itself , a good one , but what is missing is its final development , which would be to encourage and facilitate the return of these specialised workers to their countries to protect them from the effects of globalisation .
( FR ) Mr President , six months after the shameful vote on the ' Return ' directive that received so many jeers and criticisms internationally , I very much doubt that the Union will be able , by adopting these two texts on the Blue Card and the single permit , to redeem itself on the international stage .
Why ?
Because it was announced , very pompously , that a genuine European policy on legal migration would be established , and we now find ourselves with a third-rate status for workers , which provides no social support , the loss of the residence permit if they lose their job , limited access to unions and restricted freedom of movement .
This is not the hallmark of a great ambition and the Union is far from rivalling the United States or Canada with this Blue Card , assuming moreover that that is itself a laudable objective .
Is it really asking too much to grant genuine social protection guarantees and equal treatment , the same as for national workers ?
Do we prefer to reduce these workers to a workforce liable to the corvée ?
Would ratifying the UN Convention on the protection of migrant workers and members of their families have guaranteed them too many rights ?
Finally , I ask myself - I ask you - what is the logic in wanting to attract migrant workers into the Union while refusing to regularise those persons already working on our territory , who are working legally and doing so with no residence permit ?
The Union is embarking on a legal migration policy , but under protest , and it is the utilitarian logic and the exceptions to equal rights decided by each Member State that are liable to assert themselves .
When are we going to understand - and above all accept - that migration is a chance , an opportunity in terms of human development , in terms of economic and social development , in terms of the development even of countries of the South and in terms of intercultural dialogue , of which we have been making so much this year ?
( SV ) Mr President , through the likes of Frontex , highly vulnerable people are being turned away from the EU and the Union is building walls that are hard for many people in great need of protection to penetrate .
At the same time it is now being proposed , through the ' Blue Card ' , to grant certain people special access .
There would be special access for highly educated workers , with very high requirements in relation to the level of education and professional experience of the person in question , and with a minimum salary that , in Sweden for example , would have to amount to at least SEK 43 000 or EUR 4 300 per month .
Ordinary workers or people needing protection need not bother , whereas highly educated people - the very people the developing world needs if its countries are to be able to improve their situations domestically - these people are welcome .
I , for one , welcome openness and immigration , but with the prerequisite that no one is discriminated against on the basis of their country of origin or level of education .
Mr President , the European Union prefers to import yet more migrant labour rather than try to deal with the problem of those Europeans already unemployed in Member States .
Successful applicants for the so-called Blue Card work permit , who are allowed to enter one Member State , will be permitted , after 18 months , to move to another Member State .
This includes their family and dependants .
This is part of the European Union 's emergent common immigration policy , in which it will dictate who can and cannot migrate to Member States and on what terms .
Britain claims to have an opt-out from this policy , but the Queen has given royal assent to the Lisbon Treaty , and we face the prospect of its full ratification by the other Member States .
If and when the Lisbon Treaty is fully ratified , Britain 's opt-out will prove to be worthless and it is almost certain that we will be forced to comply with this directive .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that it is a strategic mistake on Europe 's part to think that we should import qualified staff from other nations , and from other continents , when it ought to be our institutions , our schools and our universities training highly qualified workers , in accordance with a new strategic approach .
Thus , what is missing is an idea of what the future of Europe will be and therefore nobody is thinking of who we will need to call upon over the next ten or fifteen years to lead our high-level factories or facilities .
We should also say that this will certainly involve a lowering of welfare benefits for those doing these jobs in Italy and other European countries .
There will be a dumping of salaries , and this is typical of certain immigration policies .
Furthermore , at a time of dramatic crisis resulting from the financial collapse , it is impossible to imagine that , in addition to our own unemployed , we will have the problem of the unemployed from outside the EU who will , by force of circumstance , pose a problem to civil order and the security of our peoples .
( RO ) ' We are not Fortress Europe , ' said Mr Jouyet .
This is indeed the case , as the two reports we have had this afternoon provide evidence of Europe 's openness and that it accepts and supports the process of globalisation .
I think that this European work permit will resolve the whole range of problems linked to illegal immigration which Europe is facing .
The US has demonstrated this with the Green Card scheme it launched in the past .
Europe needs to prove that it is in favour of openness , all the more so as , according to the report , only 5.5 % of immigrants headed for the European Union , while 50 % of highly qualified immigrants headed for the US or Canada .
Why are we not an attractive destination ?
Why is there a large discrepancy between the salaries here and those in the US and Canada , making the lack of attractiveness even more glaring ?
In the context of the current crisis , it is a gesture of fair play , a normal gesture , on Europe 's part , which needs to be balanced with being open to third-country workers .
However , this policy on European cards needs to be implemented in a logical manner so that it does not cause any serious imbalance or trigger major problems in the countries where the specialists originally come from .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group is fairly satisfied with these two proposals .
The fact that we are fairly , not completely , satisfied is demonstrated by the number of amendments by means of which we have tried to help to improve these texts .
We are also only fairly satisfied because there has been a lack of ambition ; we believe that more could have been done , and that it could have been done better .
There are signs of opening up and of a civilised attitude , which are quickly followed , even at times in the debate within this Parliament , by signs of rigidity , particularly from the Council , and of considerable protectionism .
This also applies to the Blue Card : there is resistance on some central principles , such as ' equal pay for equal work ' , which is a sacrosanct , natural principle .
Even on this , however , we have encountered certain areas of difficulty .
We believe that it is vital to overcome the principle of Community preference , to overcome the idea that there is a two-speed Europe , which is the reason why it is necessary to make use of the principle of Community preference .
We believe that reference to the labour market is important , but the labour market cannot be the only governing principle .
There are other inclusive principles relating to political and social welfare attitudes that ought to form part of immigration policies .
Legal immigration means equal dignity and equal opportunities , or else we are going back to selective , partial and discriminatory immigration .
We would like to avoid that .

For this reason too , on behalf of my group , I support the proposal that Mr Moreno has put to the Commission : let us try to design a Blue Card that is not linked solely to the 3 % of highly qualified immigrants , but one that seeks to find specific legal instruments with which to open up the market to immigration .
Immigration ought to be inclusion .
If it becomes selection , then it is no longer a positive policy .
( EL ) Mr President , the proposals for a directive and the two reports implement the general immigration policy of the European Union , the aim of which is to secure cheap manpower for European capital in order to increase its profits .
The directive on the granting of a blue residence and work card in the European Union to highly qualified immigrants allows brainpower to be stolen from poorer countries so that European monopolies can acquire a better position in global competition , especially with the United States of America .
It does not offer any particular rights or benefits to card holders , because it requires a contract of employment to already be in place .
Their salary will also be institutionally lower .
The second directive and report on a standard residence and work permit moves in the same direction .
Only those who have secured employment will be able to enter the European Union and obtain a permit .
Thus , immigrants are at the mercy of employers .
Dismissal will be equivalent to deportment .
For illegal immigrants , there is the axe of the European Immigration Pact , with 18 months ' detention , deportation and a ban on entry for 5 years .
The overall policy of the European Union legalises the harsh and savage exploitation of immigrants and workers as a whole in the European Union .
We support the fight by immigrants for equal employment and social rights , the fight to defend and extend workers ' rights throughout the European Union .
( SV ) One of the arguments that is put forward for why the EU is not an attractive immigration destination for qualified workers is the fact that there are different entry and residence rules in the different Member States .
The explanatory statement to this report goes on to say that the differing rules in the Member States actually give rise to competition between the Member States .
This is said to be a bad thing .
I would like to say that it is exactly that fact - the fact that the system has not been forced into the straight-jacket of a single format without various solutions being allowed to compete - that has made Europe successful .
We can see that certain countries have been more successful .
Sweden , for example , is one of them .
Sweden has invested in education and language teaching , amongst other things , which has made Sweden one of the most competitive countries , with companies such as Ericsson , Volvo and Ikea .
The problem of a lack of competitiveness in many of the Member States relates , rather , to the fact that the Union is shot through with protectionism and subsidies for industries that are far from competitive .
We have gone in for life support rather than focussing on structural changes .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here is another absurd initiative from the EU : introducing a Blue Card that will promote the entry of immigrant workers , incorrectly referred to as highly qualified .
According to the rapporteur , this will help to tackle the falling demographic trend .
She says : ' in Germany , for example , there is a need for 95 000 engineers ' ; if they were well paid , I am sure that we could send several thousand from Italy .
This absurd initiative not only uproots qualified staff from developing countries , but ignores the unemployment suffered in Europe by qualified persons , and the justified fears of our young degree and certificate holders , and instead of promoting their entrance into a profession , boosting their capacities for study and research , and ensuring that they have futures that include work and professional qualifications , we are introducing a further cause for doubt , competition and undoubted exploitation .
The line between foolishness and crime in human action is often a grey one , and it seems to me that the EU is today giving us another example of that .
( MT ) I welcome the report by Ewa Klamt and Patrick Gaubert on the Blue Card and single application procedure .
This is the first time that we are opening a window , so to speak , on legal migration policy .
These reports are therefore very relevant , because through them we can build up future policies on this extremely important issue .
Furthermore , for the first time , this gives immigrants a legal means by which to enter European Union territory , in order to be able to work amongst us .
However , we must place this within the context of our clear policy .
As I understand it , the immigration policy that we must align ourselves to has to be based on the rights of the European Union 's Member States to retain full control over the number of workers who are granted right of entry .
As was previously mentioned , we must adhere to the principle of Community preference , whereby European Union citizens are given preference over non-European Union citizens .
On this basis , I believe that not only can we develop a policy on legal migration that deals with the granting of the Blue Card to highly qualified workers , but that down the line , we can begin work on other proposals that I know the Commission will put forward in the coming months , and which concern the possibility of employment for less qualified workers .
Our discussions today must also be seen in light of our policies on illegal and not legal immigration .
I say this because if we fail to be credible on our immigration policy , we cannot expect our citizens to trust us to open up our markets to legal migration .
I believe the two go hand in hand and should work in parallel with one another , otherwise we will not be able to move forward .
In the area of illegal immigration policy , there are a number of issues pending that we still have to consider , such as the law on sanctions against employers who illegally employ third country citizens or , effectively , illegal immigrants .
We need to work upon this law if we want to properly penalise these employers , as this will , in addition , serve as a deterrent to the influx of illegal immigrants .
There is another proposal that the European Commission has already announced it will be putting forward in the coming weeks .
This regards the revision of the Dublin law on the responsibility countries must assume when processing asylum applications by immigrants who have already entered their territory .
We eagerly await the tabling of this proposal .
To conclude , it would be worth noting that , had the Lisbon Treaty been in force today , the legal basis of these proposals would be different to what we have now .
The Lisbon Treaty would have breathed new impetus into the European Union so as to come up with a solution in the area of immigration .
I believe that those who oppose the Lisbon Treaty have no reason to be pleased with the fact that today 's current European policy on immigration is not as strong as it should be .
( FR ) Mr President , at European level , we need to equip ourselves with effective immigration tools , and our world requires protection methods to provide help at an early stage to those who are suffering .
The international community , in general , and Europe , in particular , are unfortunately unprepared , despite living in a century which , with globalisation , will inevitably be one of population movements .
We absolutely must consider this reality in all our outlooks .
As for the Blue Card , we must be able to welcome migrant workers , while making sure we do not pillage countries by holding on to the players needed for their development .
This is why we want to help in the training of highly qualified workers in key sectors , in their countries of origin , and we must promote circular migration .
I want to end my brief speech by reminding you that we need European solidarity to be extended to the developing countries .
If we are to talk in terms of feasibility - the ability to react to the current financial crisis attests to this - , if we have the political will , we have the material resources .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , the discussions among the fellow Members are clearly polarised .
The Right is afraid of illegal immigration on a huge scale .
Mr Romagnoli is no longer here to take the discussion further .
The Left is concerned that illegal immigrants will not be able to find employment .
We do not want either of these things , in other words , neither illegal immigration on a huge scale , nor the employment of illegal immigrants which will give them legal status .
What we really want to achieve with the Blue Card is a step towards the controlled immigration of highly qualified workers into individual Member States of the European Union .
The Blue Card and the standardised residence and work permit regulations represent precisely the tool which will allow Member States to react and to bring highly qualified workers into the country just when they need them .
We are also putting in place standardised rules for issuing the Blue Card and for monitoring it throughout Europe .
I am pleased that the Council has included my proposal in the implementing rules to label the Blue Card with the symbol of the state which issued the card and to which the work and residence permits apply .
This means that for Austria , there will be a red , white and red Blue Card and the other states will have a similar solution .
I believe that the incentive which allows people to start working in another Member State after three years , provided that the requirements have been met and that a need has been identified , is a positive move .
Another important rule is that the Blue Card will expire when there is obviously no further need for the worker .
This becomes clear when the worker has been continuously unemployed for more than six months .
At this point , it is obvious that the worker is no longer needed and the Blue Card then becomes invalid .
I would like to propose to the Council that workers are required to register with the national authorities when they become unemployed , otherwise it will not be possible to check whether the six-month period has come to an end .
Finally , I would just like to say that the Blue Card is a tool for the Member States which will allow them to react flexibly .
It represents an opportunity for the European Union to become and to remain an attractive business location .
It is an incentive for highly qualified workers to move not to the USA , Canada or Australia , but instead to choose the European Union as the place where they will live and work , at least for a certain period of time .
I believe that the Blue Card represents a positive step in the direction of controlled immigration based on the requirements , opportunities and needs of the Member States .
( EL ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , for over a decade now , there has been no substantial debate on how Member States can cooperate in order to make Europe a more attractive destination for the legal immigrants which our communities require and a more humane place for those already living among us .
The recent ' return directive ' which , as we know , treats many poor immigrants as common criminals , is indicative of the almost monomaniacal way in which Europe is focusing on a policing approach to immigration policy .
The basic reason for this is as follows : most Member States of the European Union have not yet managed , firstly , to apply effective immigrant integration programmes and , secondly , to persuade a large section of the public that the inevitable increase in multicultural communities is a desirable development which promotes our economic and social growth .
Within this framework , one cannot but welcome the legislative initiatives which we are debating today .
This is perhaps the first serious effort to create a common European legal immigration policy , despite the relative timidity of some proposals and despite their problems , some of which we have addressed in amendments such as - as many have quite rightly said - the risk of depriving poor countries of their qualified workers .
At the same time , however , these individual regulations concern a minimum number of what one might call privileged legal immigrants .
We now need bold legislative initiatives in order to introduce European rules on legal work and for the millions of others whom our economies and communities need .
( EL ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the European Union is still seen as an unattractive place by highly qualified workers from third countries , while unskilled immigrants arrive in their thousands .
The European immigration policy therefore needs a broad and consistent general approach to peace and security , European development policy and integration and employment policies .
The legislative proposal is an effort to lay down common criteria for a fast-track immigration procedure for highly qualified immigrants .
We need common , uniform definitions for access to 27 labour markets .
Everyone acknowledges the fact that the European Union needs the facility to use skilled manpower from third countries on a long-term basis in order to improve its competitiveness and boost economic growth .
However , we need preconditions .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I consider the first precondition to be the recognition of the university education of highly qualified persons or three years ' experience .
Development policy must guarantee the availability of manpower from third countries .
The rapporteur , with whom I commiserate on the unfortunate occurrence , emphasises that immigration for the purpose of highly qualified employment is not a long-term solution to economic and demographic problems , given that , generally speaking , economic immigration affects national labour markets in the Member States .
The principle of subsidiarity must be applied until such time as we have uniform social systems and uniform labour legislation .
The European Parliament therefore recommends strict adherence to the principle of Community preference .
Member States must determine the numbers of third country immigrants admitted within the framework of their national sovereignty and must also be entitled to set a zero quota .
Blue Cards should only be issued , even if the preconditions are met , at the discretion of each Member State , with European added value in the form of mobility after two years ' legal residence in another Member State .
( DE ) Mr President , in order to bring illegal immigration under control , to meet the challenges represented by demographic change , to increase our competitiveness and , at the same time , to ensure a high level of social harmony , we need a joint immigration policy more urgently than ever .
This House is in agreement on this point .
For this reason , I would like to thank all four rapporteurs for their close cooperation .
However , for my group , a joint immigration policy must include all migrants , otherwise it will fall short of our requirements .
This means that the principle of equal treatment must apply to everyone without restrictions , in the case of employees ' rights , access to education and access to social security systems .
Therefore , I would ask you to vote in favour of my group 's amendments tomorrow .
The Framework Directive must also apply to seasonal workers , refugees or temporary asylum seekers .
As far as the Blue Card is concerned , I would like to change the outcome of the vote of the committee responsible tomorrow in order to open up the European labour market not only to migrants from countries with which we already have partnership agreements .
There must be no restrictions of this kind and it pleases me to hear that the Commission shares this view .
Finally , another word to the Council .
In view of the occasion , I urge you to adopt both directives together .
If we are serious about equal treatment , we cannot adopt the principles of equal treatment first of all just for highly qualified workers and then later perhaps for other migrants .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Klamt , and the shadow rapporteurs , for an interesting report .
As a Nordic Social Democrat , I had hoped for your backing so that collective agreements , too , would apply to the EU Blue Card .
I believe this will be necessary , but I am not particularly alarmed by the fact that it is not to be implemented .
Parliament should have taken the lead on this , however .
What is good now is that it is clearly laid down that it is a criminal offence for employers to break the rules and to fail to check whether they are employing illegal workers whilst , at the same time , they may be liable to make up short pay and the like in retrospect .
It is also good that the citizens of third countries can go home during the period in question and then return to the EU .
This shows that we are taking third countries ' concerns about brain drain seriously .
I am also satisfied with and support the decision that Member States must take account of national and regional labour markets .
This shows that those who are already in our home countries and who are unemployed will be first in line for jobs .
This is particularly important in these days of rising unemployment in the wake of the credit crunch , especially , too , when xenophobia represents a threat to democracy in many of our Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs for their spirit of cooperation .
This directive is the first major text concerning legal immigration .
It aims to promote the arrival on EU soil of highly qualified workers from third-party countries , the great majority of whom , at present , prefer to go to the United States or Canada .
Thanks to the Blue Card , these workers will now be able to take advantage of numerous rights for themselves and their families .
Of course , we run the risk of being accused of supporting the idea of selective immigration , but I wish to point out that it is the Council that is systematically opposed to a horizontal directive applicable to all immigrant workers .
The Commission therefore had no other option if it was to hope to move forward slightly in the field of legal immigration than to start with highly qualified workers , for whom it knew it would be easier to obtain the agreement of the Member States .
Obviously I regret this sectoral approach , but we , in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , have for so long been denouncing the exclusively repressive nature of European policy regarding immigration and calling for a legal immigration policy worthy of the name that I feel it is important to validate this first step .
Let us not forget that other texts are already in the process of being prepared concerning , for example , seasonal workers and trainees .
( NL ) Mr President , an important step has finally been taken .
Europe is of one mind when it comes to conditions for a single system for recruiting top people .
This is the added value this card offers .
This step is a necessary one , even though , in my view , it is just the first one .
Once we have gathered some experience with the Blue Card , we must look at subsequent steps in the next term .
We must not forget that we live in turbulent times .
There may well be redundancies in the short term as a result of the financial crisis .
This is why it is important that the Blue Card system , as described in Mrs Klamt 's report , leaves room for policy from national Member States .
The Member States must be able to decide how many migrants with sound qualifications are needed and to set to work in their countries without causing a brain drain in sensitive sectors , such as health care , in the third countries .
We should also look ahead though .
Europe desperately needs migrants with sound qualifications .
This is why the best solution is the simplest possible arrangement for the Blue Card by which actual talents are attracted .
I think this solution is included in the present proposal , thanks in part to the amendments by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Accordingly , it is important for people who are already residing legally in the EU not to have to return to their home countries first in order to apply for a Blue Card for an EU Member State if they meet the other conditions .
( DE ) Mr President , within the next 20 years , the European Union will need more highly qualified workers from third countries .
Other states have been making disproportionate use of the potential in this area for years .
The regulations produced by the EU are balanced and are intended to prevent the brain drain from third countries .
The requirements at any given time will be determined by the Member States .
This all sounds very sensible but , on the other hand , we are currently threatened by recession because of the financial and economic crisis .
Unemployment will increase throughout Europe and some Member States already want to restrict the freedom of movement of workers within the European Union even further .
Would it not be more sensible , in a situation in which we are being forced to change our industrial policy because of environmental issues , to invest in more and better training programmes for highly qualified employees who have significant potential for innovation ?
We must focus all our efforts on this issue instead of poaching top employees from third countries .
That alone will not be enough to secure our future in the long term .
( PL ) Mr President , we all remember the labour camps opened in the autumn of 2006 in several European Union Member States .
In those camps , illegal immigrants worked in terrible conditions side by side with citizens of European Union Member States .
This situation pushed forward our work on the immigration package , some of which we are discussing today .
It seems to me that we are moving in the right direction .
The proposal makes for more civilised working conditions and simplifies the rules governing the employment and residence of legal immigrants .
As a Polish woman , I would also like to emphasise our solidarity with third country citizens legally residing in the European Union .
We must not discriminate against them .
Nor do I think that the Blue Card will threaten the economic interests of the citizens of the new Member States , or constitute competition for them .
The fact is that most European labour markets are now open to us , and , as is well known , all transition periods will end before the Blue Card comes into effect .
( LT ) Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the world is becoming more and more open , not just Europe .
Modern technologies and globalisation make it such and fighting this reality is counterproductive .
I congratulate France which , during its Presidency , took the important initiatives we are discussing today .
The interest of the European Union is clear : we lack , we need workers , as well as highly qualified specialists , because our citizens use their right to leave , live and work elsewhere , somewhere they prefer .
Legal immigration into the EU is a completely acceptable solution to the problem .
It is also our response to the challenges of globalisation and the EU aim of becoming more competitive .
I agree that the proposals must be coordinated with each other , coordinated with other legal acts , but there is no doubt that we had to solve these problems and I once again congratulate both rapporteurs and the presiding country .
( RO ) The draft resolution which aims to introduce the Blue Card for highly qualified immigrants is intended to attract a highly qualified professional workforce from outside the European Union , offering these immigrants the chance to settle and work legally in the European Union .
This initiative is beneficial in the situation where it is anticipated that during the next 20 years , there is a risk that 20 million jobs will remain unfilled .
However , I would like to remind you that Romanian and Bulgarian citizens still face restrictions on the labour market , with fears already that some countries are going to extend the transitional period for another three years .
This is why , against this background , it is vitally important that we do not add to the discrimination against European citizens as well .
( PL ) Mr President , demographic changes in the European Union and the ageing population are circumstances causing a demand for skilled workers from outside European Union countries .
Economic migration is a challenge which must be met by the European Union in a rapidly globalising world .
It is my view that Member States must develop an integrated and coherent approach to European migration policy .
Engineering and computer technology are areas which must be given special attention within the context of development and employment .
The adoption of Community regulations is necessary if we are to restrict illegal immigration .
I agree with the rapporteur and with the consultant , Mr Masiel , and support the introduction of the European Blue Card scheme for skilled immigrants , intended to facilitate employment of skilled workers from third countries .
( CS ) The mobility of persons from third countries within the territory of Member States of the European Union presents a major challenge for Europe in a globalised world dominated by tough economic competition .
We are adopting common European rules making it possible to manage migrant flows into Europe and to limit illegal migration .
It is right to welcome the Commission 's suggestion to speed up the reception process for workers and to provide them with better conditions of residence in order to increase the attractiveness of the EU to highly qualified workers from third countries .
The deciding factor is not only a rapid reception process for workers , free of bureaucratic obstacles , but common and unified conditions of access for all of the 27 different labour markets .
Whilst debating both reports , one must mention that in the EU , barriers to the employment of people from new Member States still exist .
Mr President , the European Union Blue Card is a much-appreciated initiative from the position of the developing countries .
As the EU Blue Card will be issued by the Member States , one might speculate that a Member State may far too often find , after examination of its labour market , that it is not in a situation which allows the facilitation of foreign labour , or that a Member State 's public policy poses some obstacles to the full implementation of the EU Blue Card policy .
I am afraid that some Member States may undermine the purpose of the EU Blue Card .
The EU Blue Card has not been created only to satisfy the labour demand of Member States , but also to start ' brain circulation ' .
In a way it is a supportive measure to the EU development cooperation policy , as the Blue Card workers eventually return to their countries of origin with the experience that is vital for progress .
( RO ) I believe that it is extremely important for the European Union to become more attractive to highly qualified workers , especially bearing in mind that the majority of immigrants at the moment are unqualified .
These workers need to enjoy favourable conditions , a harmonised system for regulating emigration , and movement from one country to another , as well as salaries which reflect their qualifications .
The European Blue Card must also be seen as a way of discouraging illegal immigration , as part of the agreement for immigration and asylum , as well as part of the solution to the problem of the labour shortage which will affect the European Union in the coming decades .
I would like to focus on the notion that citizens from the new Member States must not be in an inferior position to those from third countries .
It is not acceptable for some states to keep their labour market closed to citizens from the new Member States but , on the other hand , offer jobs requiring high qualifications to workers from countries which are not EU members .
( PL ) Demographic problems and the ageing of the European population are not the only reasons why the Blue Card should be introduced as an instrument controlled by the EU .
The enlargement of the EU was followed by a huge outflow of specialists from new Member States .
The outflow of skilled workers is today the greatest problem for employers , holding up investment and thus restricting economic development .
If our companies cannot find skilled workers in their domestic markets , they will lose out to Chinese competition .
Polish employers want a broader opening up of the labour market .
They are willing to employ workers from countries such as Ukraine and Belarus .
At the same time , we should remember that all benefits must be consistent within the EU .
We must remember that some of those who will come to us under the Blue Card scheme will return home , taking with them the experience they have gained in the EU .
We must work simultaneously to strengthen the education and continued development schemes for specialists needed by the labour markets in our Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to two dangers which have emerged during the debate and in proposed regulations .
First , the excessive requirements for third country citizens taking up employment here .
The requirement of at least two of five years of professional experience being in a managerial position seems to me to be definitely too high .
In the case of a nurse or an IT specialist , this is not needed to enable them to play a useful role in our companies .
The other danger is the attempt to set a uniform minimum rate for the workers .
This regulation is certain to destroy the basic principle which really should apply , that of equal pay for equal work , since it could result in someone coming to the EU to work earning more than someone who is working here already .
Mr President , this rich debate shows the quality of the reports made .
I would once again like to thank the rapporteurs and the draftsmen of the opinion , Mr Masiel , Mrs Jeleva and Mrs Panayotopoulos , and say that , indeed , as our debates have shown , this is a great step forward for agreement on legal immigration .
Four years ago , no one wanted to hear about community tools .
We know that in a few years ' time , we will be able to go further .
I also congratulate the Commission , through Mr Barrot , who was able to launch this debate and ensure that our ambitions in this area grew rapidly .
Well done to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs too .
Mr Deprez found the right words , balance and the voice of reason ; he supports an open Europe and I welcome that .
One or two nuances aside , Mrs Roure also wants Europe to be ready for the century of population movements , which is what we are trying to achieve .
As Mrs Lefrançois pointed out , these two texts are a start and not an end , and do leave room for circular migrations .

On the question of Community preference as raised by Mrs Grabowska and Mrs Gál , and by Mr Fava and Mr Catania , in particular , I would point out that the Blue Card will not apply until 2011 , by which time the transitional measures of the accession treaties will have come to an end , and that it offers a status that is not equivalent to the status of EU citizens .
Furthermore , we are ready and wish to include in the text the principle of Community preference enshrined in the accession treaties .


As for the numerous remarks about the brain drain - in particular those of Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mr Borghezio , Mrs Budreikaitė , Mr Moreno , Mrs Lambert and Mrs Roure , I believe the European Parliament has expressed its legitimate concerns about including in the Blue Card safeguards to transform the brain drain into a brain gain , and it seems to me that there are three main ways to do this .
First of all , the directive does not , in any way , prevail over European agreements or agreements between certain Member States and the countries of origin , who draw up lists of professions to be excluded from its scope to ensure ethical recruitment in sectors hit by a labour shortage .
Secondly , Member States must be offered responsibility in the context of case-by-case examination : they must be able to reject a Blue Card request to ensure ethical recruitment .
Finally , the directive must be able to promote the circular migration of highly qualified workers and , of course , emphasise , as has already been pointed out , the requirements for training in the country of origin .
On the other hand , it does not seem to me necessary to prevent issuance of Blue Cards systematically if there is no agreement with the country of origin .
As Mr Barrot pointed out , I think that this would create discrimination and transfer the requests to national systems , and that it is therefore preferable to negotiate on a case by case basis .
Concerning the distinction made between highly qualified workers and unskilled workers , a subject mentioned by Mr Busuttil and Mrs Lefrançois , in particular , and by Mrs Lambert , I believe we must move forward by stages .
At present , there is unfortunately no consensus on legal migration to act at Community level on all labour market segments .
Nonetheless , we are moving forward since there is a single set of rights for all third-party workers in the European Union , and we must start with the highly qualified , seasonal , posted and trainee workers .
The Stockholm programme may enable us to make progress .
Contrary to what was stated by Mrs Flautre and other speakers , the rights guaranteed by the Blue Card do not include any restrictions regarding freedom of association or the rights attached to employment , quite the opposite , and this Blue Card will be the only tool allowing migrants to exercise a right to mobility to undertake qualified professional work in the European Union , which is not possible today via national systems .
This is the major advantage of this text .
Also , to answer Mr Pirker regarding the period after which these benefits will cease in the event of unemployment - it is true there is a three month period - the Presidency of the European Union would have liked this period to be longer than what is proposed , but no consensus was reached in this area .
Indeed , some Member States even wanted there to be no period at all , which , clearly , was not the wish expressed by the Presidency .
Finally , to answer Mr Fava , recital 16 of the Council text does include the principle of equal treatment in terms of pay for third-country workers and Community nationals for equal work .
This is implemented by Article 15 ( 1 ) of the same text .

Mr President , I am going to confine myself to completing the remarks of Mr Jouyet , that seem to me , this afternoon , to well present our mutual interest in your work .
I would like to thank all the speakers and all the rapporteurs , who have done a good job .
I should just like to state again that the draft directive respects Community preference fully .
Moreover , this Community preference is enshrined in the European Union accession treaties and the treaties state that if a Member State applies temporary restrictions on the freedom of movement of workers who are nationals of another Member State , it must grant them priority , in terms of access to the labour market , over workers who are third-country nationals .
I say this for the benefit of Members from new Member States as this must be emphasised .
Next , I also need in turn to reply to those who are concerned by the risks of a brain drain .
I would remind you that the proposal recommends a clause on ethical recruitment in order to restrict and even ban active advertising that might be undertaken by Member States in developing countries , which are already facing a serious brain drain .
In this proposal , there is also the possibility for a Member State to reject Blue Card applications based on ethical recruitment considerations .
We have measures intended to make circular migration easier and we have an obligation , for Member States , to provide the Commission with annual statistics on the application of the directive to enable it to monitor the impact of this legislation .
It is true that we must avoid active recruitment in countries suffering from acute shortages , especially in the health sector in Africa , and all this will find its solution in the development of partnerships with the countries of origin .
Thirdly , I obviously want to say that this text will be followed by other proposals from the Commission .
In March next year , I shall be presenting a text on legal migration for seasonal workers , paid trainees and employees in plurinational or multinational groups who may be transferred .
Here too , as Mrs Lefrançois said , this is a start and we must continue towards a complete framework for legal immigration .
I too , shall just repeat what Mr Jouyet said so well , that there is a very definite desire to treat all these immigrants and new arrivals in the European Union with equal rights which , once again , also reflects the ideal of our European Community .
In any case , I have taken note of many comments and remarks .
During the coming months , we shall be having further discussions on these migratory issues .
Indeed , I feel that we must get used to dealing with them dispassionately , with great objectivity and with a great sense of justice , while recognising that we also need immigration , but an immigration which , specifically , is covered by a legal framework that is reliable and fair for all .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say first of all that I am happy to convey to Ewa Klamt your best wishes and also your sympathy .
I would also like to thank you for the debate and to emphasise three points .
Firstly , I would like to repudiate the nationalistic rhetoric which we have heard in some cases today .
This definitely does not represent the opinion of the majority of Members of this House and should be rejected out of hand .
Secondly , I would , of course , like to refer to the question of legal immigration , which we need in order to ensure that our national economies retain their innovative abilities , and to the fight against illegal immigration , which are two sides of the same coin .
The citizens of Europe expect us both to be open to immigration which is useful and legal and also to combat illegal immigration .
Thirdly , this was to be expected when it came to the question of the Blue Card , but I would also like to say that this is a positive first step towards presenting a common image throughout the world .
For this reason , I believe that we should take this step together , so that we can move one step further along the way .
Let us vote in favour of this legislation tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have heard a number of things ...
I shall begin by talking about the debate .
The debate was quite interesting .
I shall not quote anyone , but will say that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has no need for lessons where respect for human rights is concerned .
The PPE-DE Group is happy that Europe is able to reach agreement on common instruments relative to managing migratory flows , as it is also happy that Europe is not turning in on itself .
We have a migratory policy that is both humane and firm ; humane because it rejects the disgraceful living conditions of the illegal immigrants who are living in our countries - we are doing all we can to stop men and women boarding boats and risking their lives - and firm because it condemns the traffickers and rogue bosses .
Concerning the Blue Card and the residence permit single procedure , I say to our friend Mr Catania that we need the elite and the others in our countries .
As we are on the subject , the rights of legal immigrants will be the same as those of Community citizens , neither more nor less .
Europe has no need to redeem itself with respect to others insofar as its migratory policies are concerned .
Europe does not consider immigrants as crooks or criminals or as a threat to our security or workforce .
They are men , women and children , flesh and blood , seeking a better life on our territory , because at home they have nothing .
Our common aim is to help and support them , even if this means encouraging them to stay in their countries .
Our migratory policy is dignified , open , perhaps security conscious , but for them , and for us , we can be proud of this policy - as we can take pride tomorrow when voting on these two reports on Europe 's migratory policy .
I should like to express my personal condolences to Ms Klamt on the sudden loss of her father last week .
I saw her shortly after she had heard the news , so my sympathy goes out to her .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
First of all , I welcome both the Commission 's initiative and the rapporteur 's position as I feel that substantial progress has been made on the migration of highly qualified workers , which is essential to achieving the Lisbon objectives .
However , I believe that the EU needs to be attractive not only to highly qualified workers from third countries , but also to young Europeans .
Bearing in mind that the EU 's competitiveness is at stake , we do not want to see either a brain drain in favour of the US or Canada to the detriment of the EU .
Consequently , the current initiative needs to be consolidated by a policy to encourage young Europeans .
Furthermore , we need to implement this measure with special care and responsibility , taking into account the situation in terms of human resources in certain fields in the countries these migrants originate from , so as not to deepen the human resources crisis further , particularly in the education and health sectors .
Finally , I support Mrs Klamt 's position with regard to applying Community preference during the recruitment process and to the idea of giving priority to citizens from the new Member States who are still subject to restrictions concerning access to the labour market .
If these restrictions need to be retained , granting priority seems to me to be a minimum condition for ensuring that citizens from these countries do not feel like second-class European citizens .
I would like to draw your attention to certain provisions which may have a discriminatory impact and therefore , I would ask you to consider granting priority to citizens from the EU 's new Member States in terms of access to the EU labour market , in relation to immigrants who have come from outside these countries .
The ' Blue Card ' initiative is beneficial as it will partially resolve the problem of the shortage of highly qualified workers and may play an important role in reducing illegal immigration .
However , there are also provisions which put the citizens from the countries which recently joined the European Union at a disadvantage .
In a situation where access to the labour market in most of the EU 's states is still restricted for Romanians , either totally or in certain areas , I feel that it is necessary to oblige Member States to reject Blue Card applications for those sectors in which access for workers from the countries which have recently joined the EU is still restricted by the current transitional provisions .
Inhabitants of EU States , even if they only joined recently , must be given priority over those from outside the EU .
I also need to warn about the risk of a brain drain from underdeveloped countries , which will affect key sectors in these countries , such as health , education and research , giving rise to a boomerang effect with complex implications at a global level .
With regard to the establishment of ' conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment ' in the EU ( the ' Blue Card ' ) and the creation of a ' single application procedure for residence and work ' , we consider , among other worrying aspects , that these initiatives must be viewed in the context of the EU 's overall immigration policy .
In other words , they only make sense and their full scope is only revealed if they are integrated within the other pillars of this policy , as reaffirmed in the ' European Pact on Immigration and Asylum ' : criminalisation of immigrants , detention centres , ' return ' directive ; border control , creation of Frontex ; ' readmission agreements ' as a clause of ' cooperation ' agreements .
By introducing discrimination between immigrants , this ' Blue Card ' seeks to respond to the neoliberal objectives of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' and to the EU 's labour needs ( set by quotas ) , thus reducing immigrants to ' labour ' , promoting the plundering of human resources from third countries - particularly their most qualified workers - and implementing dangerous centralised systems in the EU for the storage and collection of data on immigrants .
In other words , the ' Blue Card ' and the ' single procedure ' form one pillar of the EU 's inhumane immigration policy which criminalises and expels or exploits and discards immigrants .
Immigration has long been one of the most important economic and social issues in the European Union .
In an ageing Europe , everybody agrees on the need for reinforcements to the labour force in order to maintain and boost our competitiveness .
Promoting immigration as a joint response requires not only regulation by the EU , but an even-handed strategy that takes into consideration sustainable development and social equilibrium in equal measure .
Mrs Klamt 's report on the European Blue Card is to be commended because it lays down more acceptable conditions of employment for highly qualified workers from third countries , taking into account family circumstances as well as their possible temporary return home .
I am especially pleased , however , that we are dealing with this matter alongside the Gaubert report on the single permit for residence and work , so that we can avoid even the appearance of opening Europe 's doors just to highly qualified workers .
For the sake of the EU 's internal social equilibrium , we need to think through the extent to which a financial and economic crisis like the current one impacts on Europe 's interests .
Rising unemployment in itself leads to social tension , and so we must prevent further heightening of existing domestic ethnic and racial tensions through immigration .
This may not only fuel the growth of the far right but , in the long run , may be a source of animosity towards the EU - in spite of the fact that the European Union played nothing but a stabilising role in the crisis .
The introduction of the Blue Card , which the EU needs because it is facing a shortage of highly qualified workers in certain sectors , is a step forward for the economic migration of highly qualified workers from third countries .
However , the Blue Card may represent a step backwards if Member States are not going to reject applications for exemptions from this for those sectors of the labour market where access is restricted for workers from the new Member States , based on the transitional measures provided for in the accession treaties .
I feel I need to remind you that the UK and Ireland have already expressed the desire to maintain the labour market restrictions for Romania and Bulgaria for another three years .
I would like to stress that applying the Blue Card directive policy would disadvantage European citizens in relation to those from third countries .
Although this directive refers to the principle of Community preference , it is obvious that this cannot be applied to those European citizens who are subject to restrictions in certain sectors of the European labour market .
Please vote for the amendment on this clarification so that we do not end up in a situation where economic migration from third countries takes precedence over the free movement between states within the EU .
The logical desire of new Member States is not to feel like second-class EU members .
in writing . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Blue Card will relieve several labour and immigration problems .
The Blue Card is a so-called ' carrot ' in the struggle against illegal immigration .
By promoting and facilitating legal immigration , Europe will not only be combating the shortage of specialists , but also the trafficking in human beings and illegal immigration .
I support the idea that Member States must have the right to decide how many cards they wish to issue each year .
At the same time , we should not become protectionist due to the present economic crisis .
We must be prepared to receive highly qualified workers from third countries .
We should not close the door to talented citizens of third countries as a result of the present economic recession .
We need a uniform approach in order to remain internationally competitive .
The European Union system of 27 different permits is an obstruction to ' brains ' coming to work in Europe .
A uniform system may be one solution that would help surmount the present period of recession , not to mention the improvement in competitiveness today and , especially , in the future .
Europe now needs , and will need in the future , both a more and less trained workforce from beyond the borders of the EU .
For the EU to be able to compete with the United States of America for trained and educated immigrants , the Union needs to become a more attractive prospect .
Facilitating the mobility of workers from outside is a step in the right direction for the EU , and so I would like to thank Mrs Klamt for her commendable report .
The Blue Card would enhance the mobility of trained workers from third countries in the EU .
Making the EU a more enticing place to work in should not be allowed to happen , however , at the expense of developing countries .
Unfortunately , the brain drain often takes the skills and know-how needed for development away from those countries , and when the EU makes the new rules , it should take this problem clearly into account .
There also needs to be active continued development of higher education in Europe , however , even if it is easy to acquire trained and educated people from elsewhere .
The new rules for immigrants must not result in any significant inequality between third country and EU nationals .
Parliament 's strict definitions of a professional workforce will create a scenario of inequality if unreasonable demands are made of those coming in from third countries in terms of their educational and employment background .
The dearth of labour is threatening the European Union as a whole , and not just in the highly trained sectors .
The EU should therefore extend the scheme for facilitating the movement of a workforce from third countries to the entire spectrum of workers , instead of skimming the cream off the top of the cake .
The demographic deficit and ageing of the European Union 's population put us at risk of the labour market , health care and pension systems being jeopardised .
In this situation , the Blue Card will act as a counterbalance to the US Green Card system , which has proven to be a real success , bearing in mind that approximately 50 % of highly qualified workers choose either the US or Canadian market .
I believe that it is vital for us to have a uniform immigration system for all 27 Member States so that every state in the European Union can benefit from the added value contributed by a highly qualified workforce .
It seems to me just as important that the EU gives these professionals the recognition they are due by offering them fair and non-discriminatory salaries .
Before I end , I would very much like to mention the fact , however , that the EU 's labour market is not fully open yet to workers from the new Member States .
We therefore need to be very careful that the measures we adopt do not discriminate against de facto citizens of the European Union .
There are two problems that concern me in connection with the Blue Card .
From the European point of view , the inflow of brains is excellent .
In comparison with America , Australia or Canada , the number of specialists that have come to our country is significantly smaller .
Such ' enticement ' is , however , in conflict with our other principle , which speaks of the fact that the issue of migration must be resolved globally , and that the economic development of third countries must be assisted , in order to reduce migration , particularly illegal migration .
Whether we wish to admit it or not , the ' brains ' that we dream of here are needed in third countries in order to promote life there .
From the European perspective , in which there is strong competition , it would naturally be favourable to acquire new specialists , all the more so given that research shows that their integration into a new society is a much easier and quicker process .
This is not a secondary issue either .
Another problem that I see is that in connection with economic difficulties and increasing unemployment , the negative attitude towards migrants will become even more acute .
And I also fear that EU internal immigration .
I do , however , hope that supporters of far right-wing political parties do not take advantage of this , and that the restrictions that now apply to some Member States will be removed in the near future .
The EU as a whole would benefit from this .
European Space Policy : How to bring space down to earth ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council ( B6-0482 / 2008 ) by Mr Pribetich , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the European space policy : How to bring space down to earth , and
the oral question to the Commission ( B6-0483 / 2008 ) by Mr Pribetich , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the European space policy : How to bring space down to earth .
As a native of Toulouse , I am delighted to chair this debate .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , Minister , ' it is high time to rekindle the stars ' .
I wanted to begin my speech with this line from a Guillaume Apollinaire poem , to emphasise the importance for the European Parliament of relaunching its space policy .
For more than thirty years , the European Union and its Member States have worked together in financing , drawing up and developing space policy .
Alas , this policy has progressively lost its luminescence and radiance .
It is true that in 2003 , the foundations of a European space policy were set out by the EC-ESA framework agreement .
It is also true that the ' Space ' Council of 22 May 2007 was in line with the political continuum of this framework agreement .
However , the light emitted by this star remains insufficient .
For Europe 's independence , its role on the international stage , its security and prosperity all come together to make this major policy an incomparable trump card for an industrial policy that creates both jobs and stimulates growth ; an ambitious policy for cultural , economic and scientific influence that is reinforced on the international stage and is an essential vehicle for society to acquire the knowledge that we wish to gain .
In the institutional triangle of the Union , and to ensure that this does not turn into a Bermuda triangle , the European Parliament , on behalf of European citizens , must play an important and increased role in the drawing up and definition of this policy .
It is high time to rekindle the stars .
On 26 September 2008 , the Council participated in this act and we want to make our mark on this policy .
Of course , this address here and now on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is made in this same spirit .
To follow the correct route , it seems to me essential to remember the fundamental elements in the creation of this space policy .
Firstly , there is the question of the budget .
We call for , from this point onwards , the creation of a specific budget line to reflect and demonstrate our commitment to European space policy .
The space industries need sufficient public support to increase their research and development capacity and , quite simply , to remain profitable .
International competition is hard and fierce .
Whilst the United States , Russia , Japan and even India are significantly increasing their budget dedicated to the space industry , and multiplying public orders , us Europeans are still searching for the appropriate funding to achieve our ambitious aims like others search for lost time .
Consequently , what initiatives can the Commission take to improve the contribution to the European space sector , and be not just an actor , but the major actor responding to this growing , global demand , across all aspects of space policy from beginning to end ?
The second point is the issue of strategic options for those applications linked , on the one hand , to Galileo and EGNOS and , on the other , to GMES , through the prism of governance to create an efficient structure generating a clear governance for a reinforced efficiency across all European space programmes .
The final issue is the exploration of space .
What is the long-term vision for our European space policy , and for what ends does it exist ?
Embarking on the long-distance conquest of space is a project for several decades and requires both long-term vision and ambition
At this point , I see an echo of the speech made by President Kennedy , focusing the American people on a new uncrossed frontier .
Made sacred on 21 July 1969 , this step was , without a doubt , in the technological history of our civilisation , the most fabulous catalyst for progress for all space-related and even everyday industries .
Give us , in this concert of nations , this long term vision .
Here we find ourselves at a milestone on this long journey .
Europe is at a crossroads with regard to space policy .
Space has , from now on , multiplied its spheres of action and application .
From scientific to defence activities , space covers sectors of activity as vast and as varied as environmental protection or the development of SMEs .
Let us get closer to users and increase the viability and quality of the collected data .
Let us become the leaders in the space market .
It is a duty that we owe to future generations to fortify this European space policy and make the vital choices to place into orbit an avant-garde and futuristic Europe for subsequent generations to live in .
Space is our new European frontier .
The great history book lies open with its dizzying array of blank pages .
Europe must not only play a part in it , but be the major actor .
Therefore , it is high time to rekindle the stars .

Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Verheugen , honourable Members , your speech , Mr Pribetich , and questioning are particularly pertinent and given the élan with which you have posed and supported them , your speech will be particularly difficult to follow .
They are pertinent , because space has become , as you have pointed out , an essential tool for all European countries .
These missions contribute to our acquisition of knowledge , whether this concerns the observation of the earth or oceanography or meteorology by satellite .
It also corresponds to the growth of our economies through satellite telecommunications and navigation .
It has become , in a discrete yet essential way , an integral instrument for modern life .
Space is also a tool , as you have indicated , that allows Europe to be united around a common ambition and to develop a European identity .
It is in this spirit , therefore , that the French Presidency organised , last July , with Valérie Pécresse , the first informal meeting of European space ministers at Kourou which , as you know , is the European spaceport .
I know that the European Parliament was represented by Mr Rovsing at this event , and I thank him for that .
This meeting allowed us to set out a common vision for Europe in space built around the three principal actors of European space policy : the Union , the European Space Agency , and the Member States - while recognising the Union 's increased responsibilities .
Together , these three actors will make Europe one of the main space powers on the international stage , of that we are certain .
To develop a European space policy of benefit to all Europeans , first of all we need to guarantee open and equal access for all Member States of the Union to the advantages that are brought by space activities .
Secondly , we must reinforce existing coordination mechanisms in the space sector , European expertise and investments financed by both the Community and by intergovernmental and national sources .
Finally , it is necessary to improve the synergy between civil and defence space programmes .
Therefore the Union , the European Space Agency and the Member States will ensure that we benefit from an access to space that is autonomous , viable and at the best price , which is necessary with regard to our biggest partners .
Of course , this requires a reinforcing of the role of the European Union in the sphere of European space policy .
It is for the Union to unite demand for space applications , to take stock of users ' requirements , to establish priorities and to look after the continuity of services .
Also , at Union level , we have developed instruments and Community financial schemes to take into account the characteristics of the space sector with respect , in particular , to forthcoming financial perspectives .
The ' Space ' Council that took place on 26 September made it possible to send into orbit , if I dare say , and to confirm the importance of the two flagship programmes , Galileo EGNOS and GMES .
With regard to Galileo EGNOS , the European Union can congratulate itself on having signed a significant number of cooperation agreements with third countries such as the United States , China , Israel , South Korea , Ukraine and Morocco .
This same Council of 26 September underlined the importance of increasing the coordination between the Commission , the European Space Agency and the Member States in the sphere of research and development , notably for satellite navigation systems .
With regard to the GMES programme , the forthcoming Councils on 1 and 2 December are expected to set out the applicable lines and define the terms of the partnership between the Union and the Member States and to lay down legislative proposals formalising the programme before the end of 2009 .
I can already inform you that the Council believes that an approach based on the public good must be maintained for this programme to develop successfully .
Furthermore , a data policy must also be put into place swiftly .
Finally , there must be four priorities that have also been cited by Mr Pribetich : the first concerns space and climate change , inasmuch as the contribution of space applications is unique in this sphere .
The second is the contribution of space activities to the Lisbon strategy .
The third covers space and security with respect to having monitoring and surveillance of European space infrastructures and space debris at European level .
Finally , the fourth priority remains space exploration , this is a political and planetary policy and Europe should act within the framework of a worldwide programme .
In this respect , Europe must develop a common vision and a long-term strategic plan and must also have the necessary political dialogue with other states within an enlarged framework of international cooperation and , in this respect , the Council is very pleased that the Commission has announced that it will be organising a high level political conference in 2009 concerning the long-term worldwide vision for space exploration .
And so , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this renewed vision of European space policy demonstrates a new commitment from the Member States , a commitment that , in the interests of unprecedented European ambition , I have no doubt will resonate across your House .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I am very grateful to Mr Pribetich for giving me the opportunity to begin a speech on a highly technical subject with a line from a poem by my favourite French poet Guillaume Apollinaire : ' Il est grand temps de rallumer les étoiles . '
I believe that the French Presidency has already taken considerable steps towards giving European space policy the importance which it genuinely deserves .
We have made major progress in recent years and , for the first time , we have a European space policy , which we have never had before .
We have a framework for a common European policy in which the Commission plays a coordinating role .
We have achieved a high level of agreement on the strategic , environmental and economic importance of the space policy for Europe .
No one opposes this .
I would like to highlight specifically the meeting of the European Space Council at the end of July at the Kourou Space Centre in French Guiana , where , for the first time , it became clear that Europe is ready for this new departure into space .
We have also been able to demonstrate that the European space industry is highly competitive .
When we compare the money which Europe can spend on activities in space with that which our American friends spend , for example , we are in a good position .
Europe plays a leading role in satellite technology and in carrier rocket technology .
We have the best carrier rocket systems in the world .
In Kourou , we have an infrastructure which is not to be found anywhere else in the world .
Our contribution to the International Space Station in the form of the space laboratory demonstrates the high level of European space technology .
I am also very pleased that the ESA has carried out a whole series of successful research expeditions within our solar system which other countries have not been able to achieve .
As Europeans , we have absolutely no reason for hiding behind others .
The collaboration between the European Commission and the ESA is excellent and the division of work is functioning smoothly .
Against the background of this effective cooperation , there is not the slightest reason to consider changing the structures in this area .
However , there are problems which we still have to solve .
As Europeans , we have no independent access to space .
We cannot send people into space or bring them back again .
We have to decide whether or not we want to be dependent on others in the long term .
I do not want to hide my own opinion from you .
Europe needs an independent and secure means of access to space .
We will also have to consider what form the next major missions to research the solar system should take .
In my opinion , the next large-scale missions can only be regarded as tasks carried out on behalf of the whole of the human race .
We should avoid all types of national or regional competition .
In any case , our policy aims to achieve the highest possible level of cooperation .
This will be the subject of the conference which Mr Jouyet has just been speaking about and which the Commission is organising next year .
To ensure that it is clear to everyone , we want to discuss what will be the next major mission that goes beyond the pure technical application of space-based technologies .
What is the next large-scale mission , the next major objective which will satisfy the human urge to explore space ?
Space-based technology is completely indispensable to our civilisation , our security and our economy .
You only need to think of all our communication technology or the financial markets , which would not function at all without satellites .
It is right that there should be a strong security component to this policy .
We are not trying to ignore that .
We have been able to establish a regular and structured dialogue between the Council and the Commission , which includes the European Defence Agency and the EU Satellite Centre .
This dialogue is intended to result in improved coordination between civilian , security and defence-related space activities .
From the perspective of the environment , the GMES ( Global Monitoring for Environment and Security ) system , which is currently under development , represents the European response to the global environmental crisis .
This system will provide us with the data and information we need to act and react with foresight when disasters occur .
Of course , our two flagship projects - GMES and Galileo - are making an important contribution to the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy by ensuring that there is a strong industrial and technological basis in Europe for space-based applications .
As far as GMES is concerned , I am very pleased to be able to tell you that , only a few days ago , the Commission accepted a communication at my suggestion which relates to the organisation of the funding and the questions of cooperation with GMES .
The Competitiveness Council will be looking at this in a few days .
It is true to say that GMES is on the right track .
The first demonstration projects have started and , as far as I can see , we will be able to meet the schedule .
We are in full agreement with the ESA about the space-based infrastructure of GMES .
The ESA has already made good progress on the development of the European satellites which we need for this system , so the prospects are good .
However , one thing still needs to be resolved .
The Community budget only provides research funding for GMES .
We have no operational funds .
Next year , we will need a small amount of operational funding for the first time and this has already been cleared with the budgetary authority .
However , we need to find a long-term solution , because it is clear that GMES is not a system which will fund itself .
It will generate an income , but this will never cover the costs .
GMES is a European infrastructure project and this is how we need to look at it in order to ensure that long-term funding is available .
Next year , we will draw up an accurate schedule and action plan for the future implementation of the GMES initiative .
In summary , in 2009 the Commission will present a proposal for financing the initial deployment of GMES in 2011 on the basis of a detailed impact assessment and cost-benefit analysis .
Galileo has already been discussed .
I simply want to say here that , as a result of the effective cooperation between the institutions , the Galileo and EGNOS programmes now have a solid legal basis and can be put into operation .
The implementation of Galileo and EGNOS also forms part of the plan but , of course , we need to find out whether the requirement in the GNSS Regulation to complete the Galileo system by 2013 can also be met by industry .
This will become clear in the course of the tendering procedure .
I would like to urge the European space industry to make use of the major opportunity presented by Galileo , to work together with us as closely as possible and to mobilise all of its resources .
For us , Galileo is one of the most important , if not the most important , industrial policy projects and we must ensure that it runs smoothly .
This involves issues raised by the resolution , such as the questions of competition which arise in relation to international business practices and public procurement markets .
It is true that different international regulations govern the procurement practices in the space industry .
These practices differ depending on whether services or goods are being procured and , above all , depending on which countries have signed the relevant agreements .
During the process of awarding contracts for the Galileo deployment phase , the Commission has strictly applied the principle of reciprocity and we hope that this has given a boost to the negotiations with third countries on the mutual opening up of markets .
One final point , and I am very grateful that Parliament has considered this , is the question of the involvement of small and medium-sized companies in European space activities .
This is very important to me , because there are only a few large-scale European players in the space industry .
There are only a handful of European countries which can really have a presence in space .
However , many others are making contributions and I am very pleased to see that specialist space technology is increasingly being developed in a number of Member States , particularly the new Member States , by small and medium-sized companies which are providing often extremely complex and highly advanced products and services .
For this reason , it is important that we ensure that small and medium-sized companies are given an appropriate proportion of the orders on major projects .
This proportion is set at 40 % and the Commission will do everything in its power to make sure that the proportion is adhered to .
This is not a purely economic issue , it is also a political question , because this will allow us to ensure that European space-related activities are not regarded simply as the privilege of a few large European countries , but are seen as something which all 27 countries are involved in and can benefit from .
Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
The title of our parliamentary decision is ' How to bring space down to earth ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , the average citizen of Europe makes use of 50 satellites a day .
The utilisation of space has quite imperceptibly come to be part of daily life .
The question is : can Europe cooperate in that process , can it actively shape the utilisation of space ?
A few remarks are in order .
Space is our common and global asset .
Therefore , international cooperation is of paramount importance to Europe .
However , Europe can participate meaningfully only if it has established its autonomy in the political , technological and operational fields .
Hence , it has relevance for Parliament .
In light of the global financial and already partly economic crisis , we now see clearly that high-technology initiatives such as space utilisation add a significant edge to our competitiveness .
Moreover , given the challenges we face and the related tasks to be tackled , we rely increasingly on space technology , for example , to understand and monitor climate change or achieve security by means of defence , the prevention of increasingly frequent catastrophes or the provision of ever broader communication and navigation services .
Thus , we are dealing with strategic questions here .
The European Parliament wishes to play a constructive part in this process , primarily by fostering a structured dialogue between the EU and government institutions .
In our opinion , this will provide all Member States with the opportunity to participate and gain open and fair access .
Galileo , our joint European project , was a pioneer in many respects .
To name but a few : it set up the operational model of the Galileo Interinstitutional Panel to create closer cooperation , and in the case of larger projects , we were able to secure joint funding built into the Community budget .
This is only the beginning , however .
The Galileo programme , as Commissioner Verheugen mentioned , secured the participation of SMEs because we know by now that spin-off companies are the ones most capable of accomplishing great things in the high-tech world .
The European People 's Party and European Democrats have made countless proposals , concerning , in part , our industrial policy where we still have a lot of catching up to do before it might serve as a solid base .
Furthermore , we have to strengthen our role in research and development .
Besides , these competencies are essential for defence and security policy as well .
In this way , the European space policy will come to be part of Europe 's identity . Thank you for the floor .
Satellite navigation systems and satellite-based telecommunication networks , services and applications are tools which the European Union needs to invest in .
Research is one of the fundamental pillars on which the Lisbon Strategy is based .
The GALILEO programme is one of the priority projects for European research in view of its potential use for managing traffic , monitoring the effects of climate change and for intervening in situations involving emergencies and natural disasters .
Last year , the European Parliament , along with the Commission and Council , managed to identify sources of funding for the GALILEO project , which was regarded as one of the Union 's strategic projects .
I would like to stress the importance of developing a space-related industrial policy .
I would also like to remind you that the GALILEO Regulation sets a benchmark for the involvement of SMEs in European space-related industrial policy .
It is time for Europe to develop a common vision and strategic planning for space exploration .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems that we are all in agreement here on the fact that space policy has become an essential component of the future of our society .
We could sum up three important strands to this : security and defence , protection against environmental crises and the supply of new services to human activities .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , we must , as Europeans , recognise that space is taking on a strategic defensive dimension .
I know that some of my fellow Members dispute this .
Yes , the observation of the planet must be assured in the long term so as to study its slow , dynamic variations and , in particular , those caused by the actions of man that affect the global climate , natural resources and biodiversity .
At the same time , a large number of public policy groups and economic activities need information and forecasts from observation systems based in space .
This , in particular , is the importance of Europe 's GMES in the world GEO process .
Yes , space policies are having a growing impact on scientific research , technological innovation and , beyond that , on the stimulation of imaginations .
In this respect , space and planetary exploration programmes have an essential role to play from now on .
Telephony and television , GPS , but also weather forecasting or even long-distance medical care have dramatically changed our way of life .
We can no longer imagine what would happen if satellites stopped working .
The experience acquired in space technologies - notably through the success of the Ariane rocket - in itself justifies implementing a real European space policy .
To respond to our ambition of independence , it will be necessary to achieve not only good governance , but also , of course , good funding .
In conclusion , the space policy that Europe pursues will demonstrate its willingness , either to remain an influential actor on the world scene , but one that is more or less reduced to a partner role , or to be a strong Europe , a major player in world governance capable of resolving the key problems facing the future of humanity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my former capacity as rapporteur for the Committee on Transport , I held a enthusiastic viewpoint on the Galileo project .
Today , we see that this central project was bogged down due to the omnipotence and technocratic inertia of our institutions .
Every time that the Union refused free and variable cooperation between States , they sterilised private initiative , increased costs and impeded the emergence of rival , competent and coherent consortiums .
Yet on each occasion that states have united together freely , projects have succeeded .
Hence , here , as elsewhere , the role of our institutions is to maintain a simple substitute role , wishing to be the manager of all , whereas we ought to be the guarantors of little .
We should bear one thing in mind : when dealing with space matters , Europe must , first of all , keep its feet on the ground .

Mr President , I had a childhood ambition of being one of the pioneers in space - I daresay many other children had the same - and when I grew up , in 1969 , I was inspired by those images that came back to us from the Lunar Landing Project , particularly the television image of the Earth from space .
Space is now less of a headline grabber , but it is extremely important for all the reasons that other colleagues have given and I applaud the European Union commitment to a space policy .
I visited the NASA Goddard Center in Washington a year ago and , very recently , ESA , the European Space Agency Centre in Rome , and to me the images they can show us of the work that they undertake make space as exciting as ever .
In fact , the more people see these images , the more perhaps we will bring space down to earth .
But what it also showed me anew was the relevance to science , to research and to the economy of the use of space , and the importance of the satellites and their launchers .
Commissioner , I have been made aware of concerns felt by satellite operators about the need to observe international agreements with regard to spectrum usage and satellite footprints .
There is a concern that if any breach of international arrangements is tolerated , other regions will breach them too .
It seems to me that effective exploitation of space depends crucially on observing common agreed laws and principles , so I hope the Commission can reassure us and them on that point .
We have a good story to tell of achievements and prospects in space .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Pribetich , in my opinion your proposal is very comprehensive and balanced .
I therefore want to congratulate you on shedding more light so that we can see the stars better .
The European Union must , without question , be responsible for defining Europe 's political aspirations in terms of space , by using it for the European people and economy , and by guaranteeing independent and reliable access to it .
I am also pleased with the Council 's conclusions from September which make a useful political commitment to develop the European Space Policy .
The priorities must clearly be the timely application of the Galileo and EGNOS programmes and the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security programme which will assist in the assessment and implementation of European policies impacting on the environment .
As regards financing , we must find instruments appropriate to the European Space Policy which , in addition to that specified in the Seventh Framework Programme , will enable medium- and long-term planning .
The possible inclusion in the budget of a specific chapter will show the European Union 's commitment to this policy and increase its clarity and transparency in anticipation of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty provisions .
( PL ) Mr President , I am very pleased that we are developing our space programme in cooperation with the Russians .
However , we must remember that in the background there is another partner with which we need to establish cooperation - Ukraine .
The best Soviet rockets were built in Ukraine .
Its potential in this area is enormous .
I think that we need to recognise it and use it for our common good .
My other comment relates to the Galileo programme .
We must remember that this programme can and should be extremely important to our military operations and our military missions as well .
The important thing is that the use of this system for military purposes must be adequately safeguarded , so as to ensure that other programme participants - I am thinking of China above all - should not know how to and should not be able to block it .
Before handing over to the Council , may I bring to your attention ladies and gentlemen the fact that there are three Members of this House born on 5 August - that is to say , the birthday of Neil Armstrong .
I happen to be one of them , which is why I am aware of this .
I will leave you to reflect on this while listening to the Council .
That does not surprise me , Mr President , and I am very happy for you , you are well worthy of it !
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , honourable Members , I will be very brief as much has already been said .
Firstly , your speeches and debates have shown the mobilisation of your House around the issue of European space policy .
We are in search of a unifying European project .
We are in search of European projects that truly stimulate and ensure that new generations of Europeans can take part in this unique adventure .
We are , as has been underlined , in search of projects targeted to improve the practical lives of our fellow citizens .
We are in search of projects with a real purpose to develop competitiveness , to associate different European industrial partners and to support activity during this period of depression .
We are in search of projects aimed at improving research , development and innovation .
We are in search of projects - to be truly comprehensive - that make Europe more visible , make it a global actor and influential in dealing with the global challenges that await us , whether they be the fight against climate change , or matters of development , or the strategic balances with our other partners .
I believe that your debate shows us clearly that we absolutely must not relax our efforts .
On the contrary , we must concentrate all of our means , all of our abilities of cooperation on that most symbolic of European projects : the European space policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful for the broad support for European space policy demonstrated by this debate .
I would very much like this broad support to be shown during the process of creating the financial foundations for a permanent and lasting European presence in space .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that our competitors are not sitting back and doing nothing .
Other regions in the world are already far ahead of us when it comes to the vision of what should be done next .
If we cannot identify new projects and develop new technologies , we will not be able to retain our leading position in the field of space-based applications , because we will simply not have the necessary foundations in science and research .
For this reason , I would like to repeat that I was very grateful that all of this has been made clear today .
If we can work together to raise awareness , we can tell all the citizens of Europe the story referred to by Mr Chichester , the story that European space projects can be the cause that brings us all together .
The debate is closed .
Need for the Convention on Cluster Munitions to come into effect before the end of 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Council ( B6-0481 / 2008 ) on the need for the Convention on Cluster Munitions to enter into force before the end of 2008 , by Mrs Beer , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Mrs Gomes , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck and Mrs Lynne , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Mr Kristovskis , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , Mr Pflüger and Mrs Zimmer , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , and Mr Zappalà on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ( O-0110 / 2008 / rev. 1 ) .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 3 December 2008 in Oslo , we will at last reach the point of being able to sign the convention banning cluster munitions .
In Dublin , 107 states adopted the convention and promised to sign it .
Two weeks before the conference , we would like to call on countries throughout the world to keep their promises , to sign the convention and , above all , to ratify it quickly .
The war in the Caucasus and the use of cluster munitions both by Georgia and by Russia , represent a challenge to us .
We must not waste any more time .
We have high expectations of the European Commission and the Council .
We expect all the Member States of the European Union to sign the convention on 3 December , in particular those European states which are still in doubt , that is Greece , Latvia , Poland , Romania and the Republic of Cyprus .
We expect that the European Union will continue to campaign for a legally binding ban on cluster munitions as part of the UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons ( CCW ) .
We unanimously condemn the unbelievable attempt by the USA , Russia and China at the last Geneva conference to legalise cluster munitions within the CCW .
We would like , in future , to evaluate the synergies and links between the future Oslo convention and the Ottawa Treaty , which resulted in landmines being banned .
Our resolution will act as a call to the Commission to make more funding - significantly more funding - available to protect people in the contaminated areas and to remove the cluster munitions .
This applies to Lebanon , the Balkans and all other contaminated regions .
We do not have any reliable sources of funding there and this should not be the case .
If we are to take this cause seriously , the Commission must find ways of funding it .
I would like to emphasise once again on behalf of my group that our objective is a legally binding ban on the use , stockpiling and production of these inhumane weapons which have , for decades , been a source of suffering for the civilian populations of affected areas .
I would like once more to make it quite clear that the use of these weapons , including in countries where the European Union has police and military forces in operation , such as Afghanistan , Bosnia and the Democratic Republic of Congo , represent just as much of a danger to our mission as to the people themselves .
On 3 December , the leaders of the 107 countries which adopted the Convention on Cluster Munitions in May of this year will meet in Oslo to sign it .
The choice of 3 December is not fortuitous .
On this same day in 1997 , the Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines was opened for signature in Ottawa .
These instruments do not only share their date of signature .
Shamefully , neither Convention has the support of countries representing a large part of humanity , such as the United States , China , India , Iraq , Pakistan , Russia and Israel .
The Oslo Convention was negotiated in Dublin and 22 out of the 107 signatories are members of the European Union .
We hope that Cyprus , Poland , Romania , Latvia and Greece will shortly abandon their reservations , thus allowing the European Union to present a united front in its opposition to these weapons which kill and maim indiscriminately .
These weapons are not only immoral , they are increasingly useless in military terms .
The European Defence Agency itself explains , in its ' Long-Term Vision Report for European Defence Capability and Capacity Needs ' , that :
' serious thought needs to be given to the future utility of unguided munitions , as well as cluster bombs , mines and other weapons of indiscriminate effect ' .
( PT ) European military forces , and not just them , are increasingly operating in the midst of civilian populations and the objective is less and less to destroy an easily identifiable enemy .
As a result , cluster munitions are not only incompatible with humanitarian law , they are also of limited use .
International law , moral imperatives and the most basic military logic agree on the urgent need to eradicate these weapons .
It is therefore essential to ensure the universal ratification of the Oslo Convention .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , on behalf of my group , I supported this oral question in order to express our disapproval of cluster bombs and munitions , for reasons that are entirely evident , and to show our support for the attitude of those Member States who have given their agreement to the convention banning them .
I hope , as do my colleagues , that in the coming weeks , all Member States , without exception , will sign this convention and will adhere to it because , as you well know , it is said that either under the leadership of the United States or inspired by them , some states , several of whom are Member States , plan to get around the convention by , if I may say so , playing with the definition of what constitutes cluster bombs and munitions and their reduced risk of inadvertently injuring people who touch the unexploded fragments .
I hope that this does not occur .
My group hopes that this does not occur and I therefore take my opportunity to ask the Council what steps it plans to take to ensure that this convention enters into force .
Finally , turning to another matter , Minister , I read that in the near future , you may be moving on to new challenges , as we say .
Should that be the case , my best wishes and those of my group go out to you .
Mr President , representatives of the Commission , representatives of the Presidency , first of all , I would like to say that I was defence minister in my country for nearly six years , during the period leading up to our accession to NATO .
Therefore , I can say that I understand very well what it means to look after one 's country through defence measures , through the requisite weaponry and ordnance .
However , on my own behalf and also on behalf of the UEN group , I have supported all the measures which the European Parliament has taken , including this issue regarding the prohibition on cluster munitions .
In my view , everything has already been said here .
It is clear to all that this weapon is not accurate enough and that to date , as we can see , it has mainly struck civilians and has wounded children .
I would therefore like to say that the European Parliament and I myself believe that the EU Member States ought to come together in a united position and use their joint forces to unite on banning this kind of weapon .
On the other hand , I would also like to advocate the use of this requirement in bilateral talks with countries such as Russia , the United States of America and China , who are the main holders of this type of weapon .
I believe that this is very important , when we recall that quite recently , during the war between Georgia and Russia , unfortunately Russia used this type of cluster munitions against Georgian civilians .
This confirms that the argument for retaining this munition in our arsenals , namely , the argument that it is a defence tool , does not withstand criticism .
Unfortunately , as we see , this instrument is used in other countries as an offensive tool against civilians .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , cluster munitions are , to all intents and purposes , weapons of mass destruction , inhumane devices , if it is possible for a humane device to exist in a war .
A US army publication , Field Artillery , states : ' Unexploded bomblets are a problem for innocent civilians and our light forces , our dismounted infantry , who come after the bombardment of an urban area ' , and nonetheless they continue to be produced and used and land polluted with unexploded devices continues to sow death year after year , as we have also seen in Georgia .
In Oslo , at the conference to combat the use , production and stockpiling of cluster munitions , a young Lebanese man aged 24 , Ibrahim , whose body had been devastated by wounds , and who had an amputated leg , introduced himself , saying : ' Pleased to meet you , I am a survivor ' .
I would have wanted to die , and instead I just embraced him .
I went to meet him in his village , in the south of Lebanon , and I saw in the yards of the houses , the schools , in the grass , under the trees , unexploded bombs , launched from Israeli planes .
They launched over 1 400 000 of them , and they launched them in recent days , when the truce and ceasefire had already been declared .
This was pure cruelty , and I met many children , men and women in Afghanistan in the emergency hospitals , with mutilated bodies ; there are thousands of children in the world mutilated because they played with fragments of cluster bombs , attracted by the coloured objects .
In Dublin , 109 countries undertook , after 10 days of debate , to sign the prohibition on the deadly weapons , to provide assistance to victims and to provide financial help to the areas involved , but the agreement also stipulates that all the arsenals must be destroyed within eight years .
They will certainly not do this unless there is strong pressure from all the signatory countries of the United Nations and the countries which are responsible for crimes against civilian populations countries such as Israel , the United States , Russia , China , India and Pakistan , which did not go to Dublin and which have refused to ban cluster munitions .
Robert Gates , Defence secretary , has attempted to explain US resistance : cluster munitions are an effective weapon against many different objectives .
The dead in Iraq , in Afghanistan and in the former Yugoslavia have certainly tested this .
Once again , Europe is showing its sensibilities , with the 22 countries that have signed and acceded to the Dublin Convention , but concrete action is needed .
On 2 and 3 December , the treaty will be officially signed in Oslo , but it will have to be ratified .
We must do so quickly and block any attempt to get round the treaty , and I believe that the Council will really have to lay down effective political and financial instruments to ensure that the treaty is implemented and that there are no more deaths of this kind , namely deaths caused by weapons of destruction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is just a point of information for the Presidency of the Council , if you , as current President , can pass it on to your predecessor : Earlier it was said that here , in this Chamber , there are three people who were born on the same day as Neil Armstrong .
In fact , a European astronaut of Italian origin was a Member of this Parliament between 1994 and 1999 ; and during this legislature , there is also a European astronaut in this Parliament , again an Italian .
In any case , coming back to cluster munitions , on behalf of my group , I joined the initiative on this subject because I believe it to be a matter that goes to the heart of civilisation and humanity .
My fellow Member was minister of defence in one of the Member States , and I also come from the military world .
I believe this plan to ban cluster munitions globally to be a matter , as I was saying , that goes to the heart of civilisation and humanity .
Why is this ?
It is because civilisation and humanity are two of the many constituent principles of the European Union ; they form part of the foundation of our treaties and I therefore believe that we must not merely take this matter as a starting point , but we must make it our serious business to consider what the EU 's attitude ought to be as a whole with regard to munitions of this type .
What these weapons and munitions give rise to around the world is , however , clear .
In all forms of war , the facts are what they are , but the most serious point is that it does not all finish with the end of the war , but continues afterwards because the land is contaminated , and continues to be so .
Unfortunately , another point is that war also takes place in countries that certainly do not have a very advanced level of civilisation , and therefore there remains that readiness , including at the local level , to use objects found on the land and which are then the cause of the majority of disfigurements that happen in childhood to young people .
Many films have been submitted to us and continue to be sent to us from around the world showing the results of using these weapons .
I therefore call upon the Council , on behalf of my group , and upon the European Parliament , to persist with this issue .
I hope that all this work will translate into the ratification of this convention which I believe is one of the most important aspects , in fact , of civilisation and humanity that the European Union can act upon .

Mr President , honourable Members , Mrs Beer , Mrs Gomes , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , whom I thank personally for her kind wishes , Mrs Morgantini , Mr Kristovskis and Mr Zappalà , you are all profoundly correct : as Mr Zappalà said , it is a question of civilisation and humanity .
All Member States of the European Union share the humanitarian concerns raised by cluster munitions .
The European Union supports the adoption of an international instrument prohibiting cluster munitions , which cause unacceptable harm to civilian populations .
It was for this reason that all the Member States of the European Union attended the conference in Dublin , either as stakeholders - like the large majority of Member States - or as observers .
It is , of course , the European Union that is the stakeholder ; that is what one must understand from this rather complicated phrase .
With regard to the decision to sign or ratify , this is a sovereign decision that falls upon each Member State , but like Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , I regret that they will not all have signed by this December .
The vast majority of Member States of the Union have announced their intention to sign the convention in the coming weeks , I would like to point this out and say that Mrs Morgantini is right ; we need to take practical steps before the convention enters into force .
In this spirit , France , the country that I know the best , decided , in May 2008 , to withdraw from service 90 % of its stock of cluster munitions , without delay .
As you know , however , a number of Member States have yet to take such a decision .
As far as the French Presidency is concerned , it announced in May , following the Dublin Conference , that it will sign the convention in early December .
The Presidency wishes to draw the attention of all Members to the on-going negotiations on cluster munitions within the context of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons ( CCW ) which is the only convention that the largest military powers - the United States , Russia , China and India , or countries such as Georgia - agree to participate in , which is not the case for the Oslo convention .
I would point out that these countries have not expressed an intention to sign this convention .
All Member States of the European Union are party to this convention and are calling for the adoption of a protocol on cluster munitions .
It is also through commitments made in this arena , and Mr Kristovskis is entirely right to emphasise this , that it will be possible to achieve changes on the ground .
Furthermore , the deaths caused by cluster munitions , such as we have seen in Georgia , could be avoided in the future if the negotiations taken within the framework of this universal convention are successful .
Honourable Members , as you can see , cluster munitions are an issue that presses the European Union to act , and it must continue to press at an international level for the adoption of a universal instrument .
It is , in any case , with this aim in mind that the French Presidency is going to great lengths to convince all its partners , and will continue to do so .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I am no pacifist - anybody in this Chamber who knows me well would say that - but there is much about warfare and the arms trade which we must regret .
Cluster munitions to me are one of the most horrible ways of waging war which should always , of course , only occur as a very last resort .
There is much evidence to suggest that these weapons disproportionately affect civilian populations , who must be protected above all in international law .
Cluster bombs can fall across a huge area and remain unexploded for very long periods of time , posing a lethal threat to civilians who could be killed or maimed long after a conflict has ended .
They are also costly to locate and remove and cannot be formally mapped in the same way that a minefield can .
Sometimes children have picked these things up , thinking of them as toys , and losing limbs or perhaps even their lives as a result .
As a father of very young children myself , few things could be more horrendous to think about .
If we are serious about creating a European Union of common values and sharing those values with the world , we must take a common position to promote an eventual ban on these terrifying and terrible arms , which are very blunt in their effect on the battlefield .
We must also use all diplomatic means at our disposal to persuade others to do the same .
We , as the European Parliament , can rightly be proud of what we have done to try to rid the world of the scourge of anti-personnel land mines .
We must approach this issue of cluster bombs with equal vigour and commitment , in order to build a better , more humane world and not see innocent civilians suffer in the aftermath of armed conflict .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , today we are appealing to the EU countries who are not currently planning to sign the Convention against cluster munitions to do so .
Cyprus , Estonia , Finland , Greece , Poland , Romania , Slovakia and Slovenia , alongside EU aspirants Serbia and Turkey , please join the other EU countries and more than a hundred states worldwide in signing this Convention .
For whom are we making this appeal ?
For Suraj Ghulam Habib of Herat in Afghanistan who , when six years old , lost both his legs when he found a cluster bomb he thought was a kind of food .
He now finds it almost impossible to get to school or to play with his friends from within his wheelchair .
For Mrs Chanhthava of Sepone District in Laos , who lost a leg and damaged her sight after she accidentally struck a cluster bomb while working to gather food for her family in the rice fields .
She now has to send her daughter out to the same dangerous fields to collect the rice .
For the 13-year-old Georgian boy , Beka Giorgishvili , who , this year , whilst at a friend 's house , became one of the newest victims as he was helping to pump up his friend 's new bicycle tyre .
Beka lost part of his skull and shrapnel remains inside .
It is hypocrisy for EU countries to condemn Russian aggression in Georgia , yet fail to condemn the means of that aggression , which causes excessive harm to civilians wherever cluster munitions are used .
It is also a hollow excuse for countries to seek to justify stockpiling cluster bombs as part of adhering to the landmines ban , when cluster munitions are equally deadly and have caused even greater humanitarian damage in the world .

My own Member State , the UK , has already started the destruction of some 30 million explosives , changed its export control regulations and directly contributed to the clearing of ordnance , including cluster munitions in Georgia .
Europe is where these weapons were first used by German and Soviet forces in the Second World War , Europe currently stockpiles an estimated one billion bomblets , and it is Europe which should take the lead in the world in securing their obliteration .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as many people have said , civilians , many of them children , are indiscriminately killed or injured by cluster bombs every day .
Many of those child victims are disabled by cluster munitions and have to live with that disability for the rest of their lives .
Yet the shocking fact is that cluster munitions are stockpiled in over 15 EU Member States .
Horrifyingly , there is evidence that at least seven EU Member States are still producing these weapons .
In my view , these countries , as well as those that have used them - including the UK , my country - have blood on their hands .
Banning the production , transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions will save many lives .
This Convention will also ensure the provision of much needed resources , such as medical care and rehabilitation to aid victims of cluster bombs .
I urge all EU Member States to sign and ratify this Convention and not to try to redefine what we mean by cluster munitions so as to wriggle out of their responsibilities , as certain Member States are trying to do .
Mr President , I strongly support the proposal requesting that the Convention to ban cluster bombs be implemented from the end of this year onwards .
All of the governments which implement the Oslo Declaration of 2007 are willing to draft a legal document before the end of 2008 that would stop the use of cluster bombs ; and that would put a system in place to encourage cooperation and help for those who fled from these kinds of attacks until now and that would destroy any stocks of cluster bombs still in existence .
I am very proud that it was in Ireland - in Dublin in my own country - that the settlement under this Treaty was reached during an international convention that took place there earlier this year .
All those who took part were very clear about what they wanted to achieve at this convention - that cluster bombs would be banned from now on .
And , just as my colleagues have already asked in the House today , I would ask that the other countries which have not signed it yet would sign it now .
We must put an end to these terrible weapons once and for all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is an excellent thing that the Convention on Cluster Munitions has been introduced .
It is very important that all the EU countries join the Convention , including Finland , Greece and Poland , otherwise , we will be giving other countries an all too easy excuse to continue using these inhumane weapons .
I greatly regret that my own country , Finland , intends to remain outside the Convention .
The justification for this is that cluster munitions have been acquired to take the place of another type of inhumane weapon , the anti-personnel mine .
This , however , is like using Beelzebub to cast out the Devil .
At the end of the 1990s , when the Finnish government of the time decided to phase out anti-personnel mines , the army did not say it was going to replace them with that other killer of civilians , cluster munitions .
The EU and all the EU countries must now show consistency in their opposition to cluster munitions and also refuse to engage in any military operations in which they are used .
As many as 98 % of the victims of cluster bombs are said to be civilians .
We have well over 20 years of experience with these weapons , showing that they indiscriminately kill civilians , including children .
It is now time we put a stop to this .
Mr President , honourable Members , solemnly and seriously , I have to tell you that I was truly proud to participate in the debate that we have just had on cluster munitions and , on behalf of the Presidency , I join all those who have called for the ratification of the convention .
The European Union has already recognised , in 2007 , the urgency with which these humanitarian concerns about cluster munitions must be addressed .
I know that the Member States of the Union have played an active role both in the Oslo process and within the framework of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons .
In our view , this Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and the Oslo process are mutually reinforcing , and it is to the credit of your House , and to those who have taken the floor , to have reminded us of the values that Europeans believe in .
We call on all Member States to act for those reasons that you have , better than I , movingly set out during the course of this debate .
I have received two motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I urgently call upon all EU Member States to immediately ratify and implement the Convention on Cluster Munitions .
Cluster Munitions visit unspeakable and indiscriminate horror on civilian populations worldwide , most recently in the Georgian conflict .
The Convention on Cluster Munitions prohibits the use , production , stockpiling and transfer of Cluster Munitions .
The Convention was adopted by 107 states at a conference in Dublin in May this year .
However , the Convention will not enter into force until at least 30 states have also ratified it .
It beggars belief that eight EU Member States have no immediate plans to sign the Convention .
Thus the EU , the most successful peace project ever , a community founded on the very principles of respect for human rights and the rule of law , fails to endorse the extension of international humanitarian law to ban one of the most insidious anti-civilian weapons in use today .
I call on Cyprus , Estonia , Finland , Greece , Poland , Romania , Slovakia and Slovenia to ratify the Convention on Cluster Munitions without delay and help bring an end to the use of cluster bombs .
in writing . - We should take into account that cluster munitions are one of the most damaging weapons , which do not see a difference between military and civilian targets .
Today , in the 21st century , making war can no longer be led by the idea of ravaging or by the idea of maximum damage .
Targeted attacks with a minimum effect on civilians can be the only way to act in a war situation .
Therefore using cluster munitions has to be clearly rejected and forbidden .
I call upon the European Union and its Member States first of all to urge other states in the world to sign this convention on 3 December this year .
Furthermore I call upon the EU and its Member States to commit ourselves to pursuing the implementation of this convention efficiently and as fast as possible .
I also call upon the EU and its Member States not only to tackle the technical parts of the Convention , but to seriously dedicate themselves to helping in the areas where cluster munitions have been used , to assist the societies concerned and to provide effective and tailored help to those civilians affected by the harm caused by cluster munitions .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0484 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part I
Subject : Information for citizens on EU measures to protect them from the international financial crisis
In reply to my oral question on the impact of the international credit crisis during the plenary sitting of the European Parliament held last March , the Commission stated that we should expect a fall of 0.5 % in the EU 's growth rate , an increase in inflation and an external trade deficit of EUR 185 000 million in the EU of 27 .
The Commission stressed that the best way of dealing with this international crisis was to continue with structural reforms and macroeconomic policies , pointing out that protectionism is not a solution .
Currently , we are witnessing the further spread of the financial crisis , which is now also affecting the big conglomerates .
Have the data which the Commission previously provided changed ?
How will it inform European citizens of the implications of this crisis and what practical measures will it take to protect them ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission presented its autumn forecast on 3 November , which indicates that the economic outlook is bleak : economic growth is expected to come to a standstill in 2009 , increasing by a meagre 0.2 % in the European Union .
2010 should see a gradual recovery for most EU economies , with growth projected at 1.1 % for the EU as a whole .
As a result , unemployment is expected to increase to 7.8 % in the EU in 2009 , with a further increase projected for 2010 .
However , next year we expect inflation to fall back quickly to 2.4 % in the EU and to decelerate further in 2010 .
There is no question that the challenges we face are substantial .
Hence , the Commission is now developing a comprehensive strategy to manage the financial crisis and limit the economic downturn .
The basis of this strategy is set down in the communication entitled ' From financial crisis to recovery : A European framework for action ' , which indicates how the EU should tackle the next stages of the crisis in a united , coordinated manner .

Action should be geared towards three objectives : first , building a new financial market architecture at EU level ; second , dealing with the impact on the real economy and , third , coordinating a global response to the financial crisis .
On 26 November , the Commission will propose a more detailed version of this EU recovery plan , under the umbrella of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
Our aim is to bring together a series of targeted short-term initiatives that will help counter adverse effects on the wider economy , while adapting the medium to long-term measures of the Lisbon Strategy to take account of the crisis .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your reply .
However , what we need to say to European citizens today is that we are responding to the credit crunch and shall be injecting money into the real economy .
European citizens also want this crisis to be an opportunity for Europe , for civil Europe .
My question is : will money be injected into public investment and public works over coming years ?
( DE ) Madam Vice-President , when the latest information is available , rapid decision-making is needed .
The problem is that it generally takes a very long time for the Commission , which takes the form of a collegial body , to put things into motion .
Are there special rules for situations like the one which we are currently confronted with ?
In other cases , it really is a long time before the Commission , as a collegial body , produces a result .
( LT ) Mr President , Mrs Wallström , as experience shows , the Member States themselves are seeking a way out of the consequences of the financial crisis and the economic recession .
What is your opinion of the pre-crisis measures ?
Do increased taxes , an expansion of the tax base and the VAT increase offer an effective way out of the crisis during such a difficult period ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The most important question right now is : what are the next steps for the Commission in the coming week to actually deal with the effects on the real economy ?
We are going to present a package - which is being worked on at the moment - where we identify the different policy fields where we think we can mitigate the impact on the real economy in the short run , whilst sticking to the existing medium-term reform priorities of the Lisbon Strategy .
That will be the framework within which we work .
We hope that we can find actions which will help to bolster aggregate demand ; on the demand side , we want to reduce inflationary pressures and help the purchasing power of households .
We have to do more on the labour market and , as you say , front-load investments .
We hope that this will also help the issues and the actions taken when it comes to the energy and climate change package , because we will need money for investments .
We hope that will help to push in this difficult period .
On the labour markets , for example , activation policies can be very helpful .
In reply to the last question , I would say that we want Member States to coordinate action .
We think the worst thing would be if everybody went in different directions doing whatever they thought was the right thing to do in their respective Member States .
We want them rather to discuss , coordinate and cooperate as much as possible , because the effects will be felt on the whole economy in Europe .
We prefer actions in a coordinated way .
What about the long lead time or the long time to prepare ?
You would be surprised .
As I said yesterday in the debate on the financial crisis , the Commission , for the first time , has managed within 24 hours to get proposals on the table .
We have to respond to this very serious crisis in such a way that we do not take too long to prepare the different proposals .
We have all been instructed or we have all wanted to see in our respective policy areas how we can help , how we can overcome the long period to prepare , how we can do it more quickly , yet do it in a coordinated and respectful way .
We are trying to get the proposals on the table as quickly as possible and we are stretching all our possibilities as much as possible .
This is the starting point for the Commission at this moment .
Subject : Disparities in driver blood-alcohol limits in EU Member States
In many Member States - for example , the United Kingdom , Italy , Ireland and Luxembourg - the limit on the amount of alcohol that anyone driving a vehicle may have in their blood has been set at 0.8 mg / l .
In Slovakia and Hungary , which do not allow anyone who has consumed even the smallest amount of alcohol to drive , any driver with that amount of alcohol in their blood would be committing a serious offence .
The rules governing the driving of vehicles , as laid down in the Polish Road Traffic Act of 20 June 1997 ( Official Journal No 108 , 2005 , Item 908 , as amended ) , set the permissible blood alcohol level at 0.2 mg / l .
Driving with a blood-alcohol level of more than 0.5 mg / l is a criminal offence subject to imprisonment for up to two years .
Given the current trend towards the standardisation of road traffic legislation within the EU , does the Commission intend to take steps to standardise permissible blood-alcohol levels for drivers in the EU Member States ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in fact , in 1988 the Commission proposed a directive on the maximum rate of blood-alcohol permitted for drivers , but in the absence of an agreement between the Member States and the Commission , the Commission had to content itself with adopting , on 17 January 2001 , a recommendation that a maximum rate of 0.5 mg / ml be imposed in all the Member States .
Today , in the European Union , only three Member States , Ireland , Malta and the United Kingdom , have maximum rates of blood alcohol greater than that value .
The recommendation of the Commission also envisaged lowering the blood-alcohol rate to 0.2 mg / ml for certain categories of driver , including learners , who are the subject of the first question posed by the honourable Member .
In fact , learner drivers are the main victims of danger on the roads and therefore it is vital to reduce as far as possible the risk factors in relation to them , for instance , by permitting for this category a blood-alcohol rate no greater , as I have said , than 0.2 mg / ml .
This is linked to the measure known as ' zero rate ' , laid down for this category of driver in the communication adopted by the Commission in October 2006 and which lays down a strategy to support the Member States to reduce the damage caused by alcohol .
Ladies and gentlemen , given this background , the Commission unfortunately does not consider that the political conditions are in place that would allow the adoption by the Member States of a piece of legislation designed to further harmonise the level of blood-alcohol permitted within the EU .
Having said that , the Commission does not intend to remain inactive with regard to something which remains one of the main causes of deaths on Europe 's roads .
The Commission has taken various measures on this issue .
First and foremost , with regard to road checks , in the recommendation of 6 April 2004 , the Commission pushed to intensify random checks on blood-alcohol levels through an effective device to measure alcohol in blood through an analysis of exhaled air , to be used in those places and at the times in which excessive consumption of alcohol by drivers is regularly observed .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must also stress that driving under the influence of alcohol is one of the offences covered by the proposal for a directive facilitating cross-border enforcement in the field of road safety , adopted by the Commission in March of this year , and currently being debated by the Council and Parliament .
At the last Transport Council , I was able to emphasise this to the ministers : faced with the loss of human lives , we cannot stalemate ourselves with legal quibbles or discuss whether it is an issue relating to the first or third pillar because unfortunately , legal debates serve for very little in tackling and resolving problems as serious as road accidents .
I would like to take the opportunity of this parliamentary debate to point out that the four offences envisaged in the directive under discussion which , in addition to driving while drunk , are speeding , not wearing seatbelts and driving after having taken narcotic substances , are responsible for three out of four road accidents .
This means that much can and must be done by the European Union , and I therefore call once again upon Parliament to go forward in the direction already embarked upon through the vote in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Additionally I am just about to finish , Mr President , in order to be able to draw up in the near future concrete proposals regarding driving under the influence of psychoactive substances , in October 2006 the Commission launched a research project set to last for four years designed to improve knowledge in this field and formulate solutions .
This is the DRUID project , of which you are well aware .
Finally , the financial support supplied by the Commission for awareness-raising campaigns should be stressed .
These are , in particular , those campaigns conducted by young people aimed at other young people to make them aware of the danger of consuming alcohol and drugs when driving a car .
One example of many is the campaign called ' Bob ' which was very successful throughout Europe , and we should also remember the commitment of the Commission , which called Kimi Raikkonen , outgoing world Formula One champion , to Brussels to be a witness for the European Union 's campaign for road safety , as well as the day dedicated to road safety in large cities which was held in Paris on 10 October , and which is a further indication of the European Commission 's huge commitment on road safety .
I made this one of my priorities during the debate on confidence following my appointment as European Commissioner for transport .
Ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately more cannot be done , but I hope that I have been comprehensive in answering your oral question .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I thank you for your response and encourage you to take bolder steps .
We need to adopt and update a directive introducing a total ban on drink driving .
We must not surrender to the alcohol manufacturers ' lobby and its influence , and we must not be afraid of them .
We have a right to safe roads , and we should start with the young .
We must be bold in tackling these projects .
( DE ) Mr Vice-President , I would like to take this brief opportunity to ask two questions .
Firstly , you have said that the political background for a regulation of this kind is not entirely in place .
What I would like to know is , where does the major resistance lie ?
Does it come from individual states or from large lobby groups ?
What is preventing the Commission from doing something in this case ?
My second question concerns the fact that increasing numbers of studies have shown that smoking in cars is very dangerous .
On the one hand , it is very unhealthy and , on the other , it is distracting and tiring .
My question is whether the Commission is considering doing something with regard to this at a European level .
My question concerns Ireland , where a large number of young people have been involved in tragic accidents as the sole occupants of vehicles .
I should like to know whether any research has been done across Europe on this topic and if we could revitalise the programme about educating young people in driving .
A lot more work needs to be done , and I would ask that we revitalise that education programme at the earliest possible date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the questions that have been tabled , because they make it possible to clarify further the European Union 's position .
Mr Leichtfried , when you rightly spoke about the political problems that we have encountered , the political problems concern the Member States , but we have seen that unfortunately , the Commission 's proposal was not accepted , despite a huge effort .
In spite of the lack of agreement with the Member States on the proposal for a directive , we have persisted , and will continue to do so .
I repeat now what I said at the hearing at which I gained the confidence of the Commission and Parliament : I will continue to make road safety one of my priorities .
I intend to continue to support all the DRUID projects and programmes - this is my response to the honourable Member - with regard to the issue of provision of information to young people , and educating young people .
This should be a priority .
It is not tools that cause accidents ; of course , it is important to have safe tools .
It is important to have safe roads and this Parliament has decided to take , together with the Commission , certain decisions relating to infrastructure , but the main problem is educating those who sit behind the driver 's wheel or on a motorbike saddle .
We have a duty to start to educate young people , and therefore I am fully in agreement with your position and I will do all I can to ensure that programmes are always funded by the European Union and the Commission to educate young people at school .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not by chance that I chose the former world champion as the Commission 's witness , who is a young man .
We should seek to communicate to young people , through young people who do not preach , as a head of the family may do , but who are able to explain to them what the actual risks are , because all young people , in fact , when they come out of a disco , feel themselves to be invulnerable .
Unfortunately , that is not the case , and we must work with schools , we must work with families , to ensure that all young people are shown the risks that they run every time they sit at the wheel and , above all , if they drink alcohol or take drugs .
With regard to the issue of smoking , I will ask the Commission departments to carry out an investigation to find out whether there are , in fact , additional risks for smokers or not .
I am not able to give you an answer , because , from the scientific viewpoint , I do not know , but I will commission the departments , as I say , to check this .
I believe that I have also answered Mr Sonik by confirming my commitment , and I think that I can make this commitment on behalf of the Commission - Vice-President Wallström is also responsible for communication - that we will do all we can to provide information to citizens and above all to young citizens , who are therefore learners , of the risks and dangers that they run every time they travel in a vehicle .
Subject : Interinstitutional agreement on ' Communicating Europe in Partnership '
On 22 October 2008 , representatives of the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council signed the first ever political declaration on an interinstitutional agreement on communicating EU priorities .
This is an agreement of the utmost political significance since it seeks to provide an effective solution to the major democratic problem that European citizens are not adequately informed , but it also comes at a critical time since we are in the run-up to elections in the EU .
What will be the priorities and the basic messages of the Community 's unified communications policy for the year ahead , in particular during the run-up to elections ?
How will cooperation between the three Community institutions be promoted in jointly selecting the priorities and objectives of this communications policy and also their cooperation with the relevant national authorities ?
In particular , what will be the relation between Community and national communications policies relating to the EU ?
What resources will be allocated to implement its new Community communications policy and what role will the new communications technologies play ?
What will be the role of multilingualism in this context ?
What Community funds will be used to fund individual actions under the newly established communications policy ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Parliament , the Commission and the Council have boosted their cooperation on EU communication and signed the political declaration on Communicating Europe in Partnership on 22 October this year .
Thank you very much for your strong support on this issue .
This is the first time that we have agreed on a common approach to communication .
Communicating is more efficient and effective if done in a coordinated way on priority issues .
Besides , it requires a political commitment of all actors , including Member States .
All institutions have a responsibility to communicate with citizens about the European Union .
However - and let me stress this firmly - the political declaration also respects the individual responsibility of each EU institution and Member State for its own communication strategy and priorities .
Common communication priorities are at the centre of the political declaration and they will be agreed by the interinstitutional group on information ( IGI ) co-chaired by representatives of each institution .
We have already identified and agreed to have four common priorities in 2009 : the European elections , energy and climate change , the 20th anniversary of the democratic changes in Central and Eastern Europe and , of course , sustaining jobs , growth and solidarity in Europe .
Implementation will be assured together by Parliament , the Commission and the Council , as well as by Member States .
Therefore , we will aim to develop synergies with national , regional and local authorities , as well as with representatives of civil society .
Our representations and Parliament 's information offices in the Member States will work with national authorities on joint activities adapted to national conditions .
If needed , we will enter into appropriate administrative arrangements between the services at EU and national levels and action will be financed appropriately .
It goes without saying that in their actions , our institutions and Member States will respect multilingualism and cultural diversity .
In this context , let me mention that the Commission is very active in facing the challenge of multilingualism .
Among other measures , translators have been assigned to our representations in the Member States to serve local needs and help to communicate Europe in the language of its citizens .
Finally , implementation of the common communication priorities will provide excellent platforms for European , national and regional politicians to debate with citizens on EU issues before the European elections .
I hope it will have a positive influence on the turnout .
( EL ) Thank you very much Mrs Wallström for your reply .
I should like , firstly , to state that this interinstitutional agreement aims , first and foremost , to introduce a single European communication policy which must be adopted , at a steady rate , slowly but surely , by all the Community institutions , so that citizens receive standard information .
Secondly , I should like a number of clarifications on the question of financing for the new proposed actions .
Will they be integrated into existing programmes ?
Will a new line be created , so that there is a budget for information ?
How will sectoral programmes be financed ?
Will the communication policy be an independent or cofinanced policy ?
( DE ) Madam Vice-President , paper may be versatile , but it is becoming increasingly clear that it is no longer very informative .
The electronic media - television and the internet - must be given priority in our information policy .
Therefore , my question concerns whether we can identify a trend of this kind in current policy .
Secondly , I was pleased that the local and regional television companies , in particular , are to be involved in this .
This makes more sense than covering the deficiencies of the large public television companies .
Again I am pleased to hear what the Commissioner has to say but I share the concerns of the last speaker .
I am concerned about how the message is going to be conveyed out there and I agree about the electronic media .
There is a real danger that brochures and books will remain in offices unread .
I have seen this happen so many times .
I suppose the question I want to ask is : how do you intend to get the message out there to those who are interested ?
Are you going to try to target interested groups , or is it simply a blanket approach ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Thank you for these important follow-up questions .
Let me say what I think is necessary .
For the success of any campaign or information , we will need five elements .
First , to use the internet and new technologies intensively .
We can only dream of the Obama campaign .
I think they had USD 1.2 billion for their information campaign , but the way they used the internet proved to be decisive .
Therefore , we need to do that .
Second , we need to use audiovisual tools : 60 % of citizens use mainly TV and radio for any information about what goes on at EU level .
Third , we need to engage with multipliers , such as civil society and local authorities ' different networks .
Therefore , we have other faces and other messengers about the added value of working together at European level .
Fourth , we need to cooperate with ' ambassadors ' , i.e. people who are willing to stand for the cause of democracy and who can reach out more than we , the politicians , can do .
Fifth , we need to reach young people and women , who tend to vote less and be less enthusiastic about the European Union which , not least , the referendums in Ireland , and previously in France and the Netherlands , showed us .
These things are necessary .
What about the money then ?
What kind of budget do we have ?
We have been able to identify some EUR 8.5 million in our budget for next year to cover centrally and decentrally managed actions that are linked to next year 's elections .
Our representations have been instructed to devote the bulk of their modest communication means to the EP elections and , in fact , out of the decentralised monies that they have , they have allocated 60 % to this task .
We also now have meetings at a technical level with your services in Parliament to compare notes on the different activities in the different Member States .
This year , we have activities aimed at the elections that represent around EUR 6.2 million .
We have projects targeting young people ; we have special Eurobarometers etc .
There is also money for communication on Structural Funds , on agriculture and on research in each policy area , but we do not have any extra money or special money allocated to this .
I have asked all my colleagues to integrate the elections in their communication plans .
They will be reporting to me on how this is being done .
Next year 's budget has not yet been finalised , so there is still an opportunity to add extra money - but this is what we can identify today in the budget .
So there is not an over-allocation of money , but we will have to use the already existing channels .
We will also help and assist the European Parliament as much as we can with all our resources and through our normal activities , i.e. producing audiovisual material , video clips on EUtube - all of the things that we do on a daily basis we will make sure are used to mobilise voters and to inspire good and lively discussion in the EP elections .
Subject : Information for Europeans concerning participation in European elections
The recent international financial instability , which put a severe strain on international and European banking systems , was a cause for deep concern among ordinary European citizens , who did not see any solutions proposed at EU level or any sign of European solidarity during that critical period .
What steps and what measures does the Commission propose in order to inform European citizens about European policies and solutions at EU or Member State level during times of crisis and exceptional political and economic developments ?
What plans does it have to provide European citizens with information in the run-up to the election and induce them to take part in the European elections in the context of unfavourable developments affecting issues of importance to the EU concerning international economic and trade relations ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I know very well that the financial crisis and its impact on the real economies are of huge concern to many Europeans and , as such , this will also have a particular impact on the European elections .
It is no wonder , then , that most people would like the election campaign to focus on economic issues affecting their everyday lives , such as unemployment , economic growth , inflation and purchasing power .
More recent opinion polls also show that people now see the EU as a ' shelter ' from the current crisis and want the EU to regulate at global level .
The Commission keeps pace with developments .
On 29 October , we adopted a framework focusing on dealing both with a crisis in the markets , preventing future crises through reforms of economic governance , and minimising the impact on jobs and growth .
Proposals to follow this up are in preparation and are central strategic priorities for our legislative and work programme for 2009 , which we presented to Parliament yesterday , and which was debated .
It is important that the need for action has been recognised by the Commission , Parliament and Council and that we are about to propose sustaining jobs , growth and solidarity as one of the interinstitutional communication priorities for next year .
This means that it will be one of the themes on which EU institutions and Member States will work in partnership to communicate on EU activities in this area .
Plans will be drawn up on how best to do this .
I have already mentioned the EP elections , which are another of the interinstitutional priorities .
Here , preparations are more advanced , as we have all known for some time that it would be a priority .
Our institutions are working in close cooperation on all election-related communications activities , and the Commission will contribute actively to the framework communication strategy adopted by Parliament .
The Commission 's goal is to raise people 's awareness of the elections and generate debate on substantive EU policy issues .
This will be partly achieved by the use of our central tools , including the use of audiovisual media and the internet , and complemented by many decentralised activities organised by the representations in each Member State in close cooperation with Parliament 's information offices .
Those events should make people aware of the fact that the voter has a choice between different policy visions of Europe and that these choices will make a big difference to the lives of all our citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , my thanks to the Vice-President for her reply .
I trust that the measures proposed by the Commission will be implemented , because a great deal of time passes between proposal and implementation ; there is the bureaucratic process and I do not know if there will be enough time before the elections for citizens to see the results .
Financing and the information strategy can also bring about contradictory results , which is why particular care is needed to ensure that we do not hit a nerve among our citizens , who do not want to see money being squandered unnecessarily on the events , publications and decentralised activities you mentioned .
Also , debate does not always convince .
Perhaps we should therefore recognise the means at our disposal and be more honest with the citizens .
( ES ) Mrs Wallström , do you believe that the issue of whether electors feel close to or distant from candidates has an impact on the level of participation in European elections ?
Do you agree with a State of 45 million inhabitants having only one electoral district for the European Parliament elections ?
What can the Commission do to ensure that States with a larger population have electoral districts which are closer to the people ?
I just want to say to the Vice-President of the Commission that we should look at the situation in Denmark , where they are now talking about applying for membership of the euro ; in Iceland , where the country has been torn apart ; and in Sweden , where clearly they are looking again at joining the euro .
For example , who is telling the people of Ireland that , because they were under the euro and the European Central Bank , they have been able to weather this storm much better than these other countries ?
Is it not time that we actually start talking up the European Union ?
This week , we have Members of the European Parliament from Ireland in this House making negative comments about the European Union .
Who is going to make the positive comments and claim the good things for us so that people know the benefits of being in the European Union and the euro ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I tried to do my bit by visiting Ireland last week .
I tried to explain what I think are the added values of European cooperation .
I think the debate about the euro and why it has been to the advantage of Ireland to belong to the euro area is going well now , but it raises the basic question of who will advocate the European Union .
Who will speak for the European Union ?
Where does the responsibility lie ?
We can never count on Brussels doing all of that .
It has to be shared and done in partnership .
Actually I think that the political controversy and debate are good , because there are different versions , different programmes etc .
I think that helps to raise interest , and it is also ultimately good for voter turnout .
Of course we want to encourage and stimulate a lively debate and discussion on the European agenda and European issues .
We all have to be advocates .
That is why I am proud and happy that we , for the first time , have this kind of framework of an agreed partnership on communication .
We have never had that before .
So we should decide to share the responsibility to be advocates and also to listen to the concerns of people across Europe , because really it is communication , not only information , that matters .
Listen better , explain better and go local : that is what I repeat with regard to communication .
The campaign will be carried out differently in different Member States because it will have to be adapted to national conditions .
This is what we are trying to do now .
We are trying to speed it up as much as we can , but we also have to respect the Financial Regulation and all the rules .
We have to be correct in everything we do .
We had a meeting today , which we will follow up .
We will try to respond as best we can to the Parliament 's detailed timetable for planning for the EP elections .
I think that we will already be able to allocate and spend money this year but , of course , more resources becoming available would help us to organise more activities next year .
I repeat that I think we also have to look at using audiovisual media and the Internet more extensively in order to be effective and to reach out to young people .
( ES ) Please forgive me , but I did not hear the Commission Vice-President answer my questions .
We note the reply given by the Commission , but we do not have the powers or the skills to assess the scope of the reply as regards its substance .
Subject : Commission 's communications strategy for the Irish referendum
What was the communications strategy of the Commission and its members during the run-up to the referendum in Ireland ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I would like to stress that , on the Lisbon Treaty , the European Commission has worked through its representations and in close coordination with Member States to provide factual and objective information to EU citizens .
We have supported this work with communication kits including various materials such as fact sheets , presentations and key messages .
We also provided training and briefings for Commissioners , representation staff , Europe Direct information centres and other information multipliers .
Recognising the importance of the web , we have created a dedicated website with comprehensive information on the Lisbon Treaty which was launched in the 23 official languages .
On that basis , the Commission representations in Member States have developed materials adapted for local needs and better suited for informing citizens .
Further to this , the representations , including the one in Ireland , have drawn up communication plans in close cooperation with the national government and EP information offices in Member States .
Activities that we planned include training for journalists and multipliers , publications of brochures and leaflets , organisation of discussions with civil society and local authorities , and also public events at schools and universities .
As such , the citizens get tailor-made information in their language and which address their real concerns .
( EL ) Mr President , my thanks to the Vice-President .
My supplementary question includes a proposal : Madam Vice-President of the Commission , you - not just you , the College of Commissioners - should visit Ireland at a politically convenient time for the Irish question and the entire College of Commissioners should start a debate with the citizens of Ireland and answer their questions in toto .
Organise a debate with all the interested agencies with television coverage , so that the Irish people , the Irish electoral body can watch it and reply to their anxieties and questions in situ .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , for two months the political and media agendas have been dominated by the financial and economic crisis .
The referendum in Ireland or the difficulties in the Czech Republic over the Lisbon Treaty have gone virtually unreported in the media .
Do you not feel that the Commission 's information and communication strategy should now be reinforced , given the need and urgency for the Lisbon Treaty to enter into force , and also as a political response to tackle and overcome the current crisis ?
I will be brief .
First of all , I would like to compliment the Commissioner in particular for her efforts on this issue .
As a former journalist , can I suggest that while a meeting of the Commission might be interesting for the Commission , we cannot force people to watch it .
The problem is , information without emotion will not be taken up and I am afraid Europe is pretty dull and boring - except your good self - so you need to address that .
Can I also say as a former journalist - and this is terrible that I am saying this in public - I was brought here , and to the Commission , on many occasions , and the grey walls and the dull presentations did not stimulate my European genes .
You need to tackle that issue .
Finally , if the Irish government had , as you said , listened better , explained better and gone local , there would have been a ' yes ' .
Questions Nos 38 to 41 will receive written answers .
( EL ) Could the Vice-President please reply to my supplementary questions ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I think that maybe the President forgot to give me a chance to reply to your specific questions .
Of course we are learning important lessons from what happened in the referendum , and I think you are right in pointing out that there should perhaps have been more visits on the ' yes ' side .
We followed the advice at the time and we fully respected the wish not to be seen as interfering with the debate in Ireland , but maybe now the Irish will want to send out invitations much more widely .
I have encouraged all my colleagues to go there and engage in a discussion with the Irish .
If they broadcast it on TV , I am not sure it will always be that convincing , but we appreciate the media attention .
We are working now with the Irish government to conclude a memorandum of understanding , where we look at the things that have to be done , both in the short term and the longer term , in making sure we have better civic education , that we work with journalists , that we perhaps have a more emotional approach to some of these issues yet , at the same time , respect the laws and rules that exist in Ireland .
We are learning lessons and I think we will very much follow your advice to go there and to respond to everything from agriculture to fisheries policy to trade etc . This is the way to meet the challenge .
I hope that we will stimulate a good discussion .
Thank you for giving me this time .
Subject : Intra-African migration
The build-up of internal problems in a number of African countries and the prospects of emigration to Europe have triggered the migration of tens of thousands of Africans from the sub-Saharan countries to countries further to the north , such as Libya , Morocco , Mauritania and Senegal .
Is the Commission aware of this situation ? If so , is it considering any measures to improve the miserable living conditions of those inter-African migrants and relieve the pressure on North African countries arising from that abnormal demographic migration ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Now we are into a completely different policy area .
The Commission is perfectly aware of the poverty which , combined with other factors such as instability , climate change and human rights violations , drives migrants to embark on a hard , sometimes tragic journey .
The Commission is active on all these fronts , primarily via the political dialogue conducted with these countries and via the European Development Fund and its aim of combating poverty .
In response to the tragic events in Ceuta and Melilla and as part of the global approach approved by the European Council in late 2005 , the European Union wanted a structured dialogue with Africa on the link between migration and development under the Rabat process in respect of the West African migratory route , shortly to be followed up by the Paris Conference on 25 November , and the Tripoli Process in respect of Africa as a whole .
The partnership on migration mobility and employment was launched at the December 2007 EU-Africa summit in Lisbon .
The underlying idea is that the partnership should find solutions to migration by linking it to employment issues .
The Migration Information and Management Centre , inaugurated by the Development and Humanitarian Aid Commissioner and Malian President Touré in Bamako on 6 October , exemplifies the practical application of the integrated approach that the Commission is striving to promote .
It is , moreover , ready to reproduce this example elsewhere in West Africa .
As regards migrants ' living conditions , one of the objectives of the migration and asylum programme is to protect migrants ' rights , inter alia , by strengthening the capacity of administrations and stakeholders in countries of transit or destination such as the North African countries to assist migrants , especially in certain conditions .
By way of example , the European Community has recently granted funding under the programme for the following projects : the continuing financing of the Libya office of the High Commissioner for Refugees , which plays a key role in promoting the rights of refugees and asylum seekers ; improving the protection of the living conditions of international migrants in North Africa ; strengthening the capacity of civil society organisations in the area of promoting the rights of migrants in North Africa ; and a programme enabling migrants in Libyan Morocco to return home voluntarily in decent conditions .
Lastly , the Commission is using the programme to finance many projects in sub-Saharan Africa addressing the prevention of illegal immigration , the promotion of legal migration , the link between migration and development and the promotion of refugee and asylum-seeker advocacy .
( ES ) Thank you very much , Madam Vice-President , you have given me plenty of information on the issue that I raised and I thank you for this detailed information .
I feel that the Commission 's new phase is important .
In particular , the Bamako project provides a focus for the European Union in terms of immigration .
I know that this has only just started , so my question is probably premature , but I wanted to ask the Commission the following .
If this Bamako ( Mali ) project produces good results in terms of immigration , does the Commission believe that this experience can be extended to the other countries around the southern rim of the Mediterranean ?
Mr President , on a point of order , I just wanted to mention something in relation to the last session .
I am sorry for raising it at this stage , but during the last session less than 15 minutes were given for three questions - 38 , 39 and 40 - which were very much connected .
I think it is unfortunate that they were not dealt with , because I think they could have been dealt with , and yet only 15 minutes were granted to the last session .
I had understood it was 20 minutes .
I think that you are right .
I will make a note of it , but I have no other option for action at the moment .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I am also learning all the time in this job .
I am learning that similar projects - like the Bamako project - are planned for other countries in Western Africa such as Senegal .
So apparently this is already on the agenda and the Commission is fully engaged in developing similar projects in other countries .
Subject : Opening of dialogue in Cuba
The Council Conclusions of 23 June 2008 on Cuba have been very well received in Cuban democratic circles , which appreciate the fact that the unconditional release of all political prisoners is a key priority for the EU and that it supports respect for human rights and genuine progress towards a pluralist democracy .
In line with the commitments made in those Conclusions , can the Commission indicate whether its members have already had contacts with the representatives of civil society and the democratic opposition ?
What effective measures is the Commission taking to further develop dialogue with those representatives , and how is it ensuring that measures intended to benefit civil society ( such as microprojects to promote social integration and cohesion ) do not end up being supervised by official bodies ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission maintains regular direct contact with civil society in all countries of the world , including Cuba .
The Commission 's role in Cuba is appreciated and supported by civil society and by opposition groups .
The Commission delegation in Cuba regularly receives representatives of civil society and opposition groups , and the Commission 's departments in Brussels pursue an open-door policy vis-à-vis any person or organisation that wants a constructive discussion on Cuba or any other country .
The meeting that relaunched political dialogue between the European Union and Cuba , following the Council conclusions of 23 June which terminated the diplomatic measures adopted in 2003 , was an EU ministerial troika meeting on Cuba in Paris on 16 October 2008 . The positive spirit that reigned at that meeting allowed frank and open discussions to take place on subjects of common interest , such as the international financial crisis , human rights , cooperation with Cuba and reform of the United Nations .
The Commission is firmly convinced - and the Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid has said this on several occasions - that frank and open dialogue between the EU and Cuba provides the best framework for discussion on matters of common concern to the two sides , including questions of human rights .
( ES ) On behalf of Mr Yañez-Barnuevo , I thank you for your answer .
However , Commissioner , I must say to Mr Michel that his actions , words and gestures are vital in the direct contacts made with the Cuban democratic opposition in terms of implementing the Council 's priority conclusions , reducing the effects of Castro 's terrible dictatorship and encouraging freedom .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I will , of course , convey to my colleague all Parliament 's responses and reactions .
I think he recently visited Cuba but , of course , to date , we have not had the chance to develop this context .
If I know him well enough , I think that this is definitely in his interests and that he will show openness and willingness to listen .
This is , of course , part of what we have to do from now on .
It is definitely in the Commission 's interest as well .
The Members who tabled the other questions are not present , and therefore written answers will be given for Questions Nos 51 to 58 .
Subject : Europe - a more attractive place for researchers
Statistics show that the European Union produces more graduates in the pure sciences than the USA or Japan .
Nevertheless , studies reveal that Europe is unable to retain its high percentage of graduate research scientists and that there is a ' brain drain ' to countries outside the EU .
This situation gives just cause for concern , particularly at a time when Europe is aspiring to become the most dynamic , knowledge-based economy in the world .
What are the main reasons for this phenomenon and what are its implications for the EU ?
Does the Commission have statistics on the employment of graduate researchers for each Member State ?
Member of the Commission . - Researchers are at the heart of knowledge creation , transfer and exploitation .
They are the key for Europe to turn the fifth freedom - the freedom of movement of knowledge - into reality , and with that to shape the knowledge-based economy .
The supply of human resources for research is indeed best reflected in the number of new university graduates .
The benchmark adopted by the Education Council in 2003 , to increase by 15 % the number of graduates in Member States and decrease gender imbalance by 2010 , has been reached .
In 2006 , there were in the EU-27 about 200 000 more mathematics , science and technology graduates than in 2000 .
It is clear that not all university graduates go into research .
For the European Union , an additional factor here is that , due to the lower share of private research investments in Europe compared to other continents , the market for researchers in the EU is relatively smaller than those of our competitors .
On top of that , there is strong competition for attracting and keeping the most talented researchers .
This is , first and foremost , a competition between research and other economic sectors .
But there is also a competition between countries and world regions - in particular the US , but also , increasingly , China and India .
The European Union is facing the upcoming retirement of generations of researchers in Europe , with no prospect of their complete replacement .
The situation will get worse if young people are not attracted into the research profession .
What is at stake is whether Europe in the long term can remain and further develop as a world-class location for research and development .
The fact is that researchers in Europe are still faced with serious obstacles and a lack of opportunities .
When I talk to researchers across Europe , I hear about unattractive working conditions and career prospects , an often precarious status and short-term contracts .
Furthermore , many researchers are still trained in a way which does not equip them with the skills needed in a modern knowledge economy .
There are strong disincentives for researchers wishing to move jobs within academia and industry and vice versa .
Finally , the structural fragmentation of the European researchers ' labour market hinders the transnational mobility of researchers within the European Union , due to , in particular , a lack of open , merit-based recruitment and to cultural factors , as well as problems encountered by highly mobile workers in such fields as social security , taxation and transferability of supplementary pension rights .
It is therefore high time for Europe to step up its efforts to ensure the availability of the necessary researchers in the years ahead .
That is precisely why the Commission , last May , proposed a European Partnership for Researchers : a partnership with and among Member States entailing a focused framework to make rapid progress across Europe in key areas determining better careers and more mobility .
The Council has responded favourably to this initiative and we are about to embark on its implementation , centred on national action plans and mutual learning .
Evidence-based monitoring of progress , data-collection on mobility and career patterns are also foreseen .
So , while we currently have very few data , the aim is to provide ourselves with the better statistics that the honourable Member is looking for .
We have many of the other data but not exactly these specific data .
The Commission Communication on the European Partnership for Researchers is currently under consideration in this Parliament .
The Commission looks forward to Parliament 's opinion , which will hopefully reinforce this common endeavour for the future of research in Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , my thanks to the Commissioner for his reply .
I have a supplementary question about the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , which has a package of EUR 54 million .
Do you have any details , Commissioner , 18 months in to this Seventh Framework Programme , as to how it is developing , which countries have a satisfactory take-up rate , what the main problems are and if the Commission intends to produce a progress report on this financing framework ?
( DE ) Mr President , the attraction for researchers naturally also depends on the net income that they receive .
Are we working together with Commissioner Kovács to develop a proposal which will allow researchers to pay no tax on their earnings and which will ensure that donations to research organisations are also tax-free or can be regarded as operating expenses ?
A system of this kind is already in place in the United States .
Would it not be possible to carry out a comparative study so that we can also provide incentives in this area ?
I would like to ask the Commissioner , when he is revisiting these questions and listening to Parliament , if he will again revisit the question of ethical research and ethical researchers .
It is very clear that the destruction of embryos is no longer required and there are many other avenues for exploration .
Will he now start putting resources into those other avenues so that we can return to a fully ethical research base within the European Union ?
Member of the Commission . - I wish to begin by saying that of course we are following all the data and everything that concerns the framework programme .
This is available and we can provide you with the data .
We also have regular monitoring reports , which are envisaged until the end of the year and , in addition , we will have a progress report - I think at the end of May 2009 .
But the progress report is much more : it is about providing the input of ideas on how we should proceed in the future .
Part of the logical implementation of the framework programme is to follow what you do and where you are investing or spending the funds .
Concerning tax-free income : I was always in favour of using those instruments which would stimulate science and research , including tax-free incomes .
One of the problems which we have to deal with in this crisis and difficult situation is how to stimulate research and development so we are not in the same situation as companies .
Because of the pressures , they would certainly consider reducing investment in research and development .
This avenue is one of the possibilities , but we also have to be aware that we have a flexible growth and stability pact , which has to be followed , and we have to consider that the situation is certainly not the same in all Member States .
Member States have different kinds of manoeuvres which they have established during the good times , when economies were better .
Finally , you asked me about the ethical approach , which was also mentioned in another question .
I think we have truly invested a lot in order to reach an agreement on which to base our ethical approach in science and research and also when we are using the framework programmes .
Agreement is difficult .
There are different views across the European Union Member States , and we can be quite proud that we have established something like clear ethical procedures which are , in reality and in practice , proving to be based on true ethics .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to apologise .
I am normally very punctual , but there are always two sides to punctuality and this question time has been delayed .
Therefore , I was in the Group meeting and , as soon as I saw on the screen that Commissioner Potočnik was starting , I came running over and arrived at the very second when he began .
I would ask you to be so generous as to call my question 42 , because I arrived at the plenary session at the very second that Commissioner Potočnik was called .
You may not have seen me , but I came running in .
Mr Posselt , we had already seen that you had arrived , although slightly late .
Clearly , you are not responsible for this lateness , which is fully justified , and the Bureau had , in the meantime , intended to follow the order with the next question .
We will , however , do all that we can to cover your question during this round .
Subject : Funding for green technology
In today 's climate of economic downturn and greater energy insecurity , citizens are looking to the EU for leadership .
It is now time that the EU and its Member States raise the tempo and support increased funding for innovation and technology .
We need to get the message across that the EU can be a world leader in green technology if we act now , not later .
The challenge of climate change is an opportunity for investors , research and development , business and jobs .
Can the European Commission lay out the current and future plans for investment funding for green technology under the 7th Research and Technology Framework Programme ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission fully supports the analysis made by the honourable Member in his oral question .
We are the leader in green technology and we need to maintain and reinforce this position .
This will also back the position of the EU in its leading role in the international fora for combating climate change .
With the seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , the European Union is well equipped - and Parliament played its full role in its outcome - to mobilise EU R & D funds in support of the development of new green technologies .
The Commission is putting a lot of effort into making the most of FP7 .
Two of the joint technology initiatives adopted so far are fully dedicated to green technologies : ' Clean Sky ' , with a European contribution of EUR 800 million ; and ' hydrogen and fuel cells ' , with a contribution of EUR 450 million from the European Community .


With the European Strategic Energy Technology ( SET ) Plan , we are strongly endorsed by Parliament and the Council .
The Commission has initiated a process that will enhance the effectiveness of Research & Development spending in energy research .
The SET Plan is committed to green technologies .
It calls for the implementation of six new priority European industrial initiatives ( industry-led programmes : wind , solar , CCS , grids , bioenergy and sustainable fission ) and the establishment of the European Energy Research Alliance ( research-led programmes ) .
The FP7 Energy Community Programme is the main instrument available in the short term to support the implementation of these actions .
But more than EU effort alone is certainly needed .
Therefore , the Community Programme should be used to catalyse actions of Member States and , of course , of the private sector .
This requires a shift in the approach : rather than just cofinancing projects , steering and enabling the deployment of a joint effort through joint programming is truly needed .
Analysing the whole set of work programmes from the first three years of implementation of FP7 , the Commission estimates that 37 % of the topics supported by R & D funding are for green technology .
Forty per cent of the budget committed after the 2007 calls , under the ' Cooperation ' Specific Programmes , also support green technology R & D.
In order to be able to monitor the contribution of FP7 to sustainable development , in general , and to green technology , in particular , the Commission is setting in place a monitoring system that should be operational in the first semester of next year .
In its Communication ' From financial crisis to recovery : A European framework for action ' , adopted on 29 October this year , the Commission also emphasises the role of R & D investment and education as well as enhancing European competitiveness by continuing to green our economy .
In more general terms , it should be noted that , in addition to FP7 funds and activities , there is a wide range of policy initiatives and supporting programmes related to environmental technologies in the EU like the Environmental Technologies Action Plan , the Competitiveness and Innovation Plan and more recently , the Lead Market Initiative and Action Plan on sustainable production and consumption .
The Commission hopes that , with this element of response , the honourable Member will be convinced that we are fully engaged in harnessing FP7 funds to really greening our research and our economies .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for that comprehensive answer .
As regards marine research , sea research , and marine technology and science , is there help available under the seventh Framework Programme of the European Union to increase marine research and marine technology under that programme ?
Member of the Commission . - The answer is certainly ' yes ' .
We discussed only yesterday in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy this specific activity which is devoted to marine and maritime matters .
We want to make more progress in this area , because the situation is extremely complex .
This whole area of oceans is extremely complex , but our life , the way we live , also influences the ecosystems there .
It deserves special attention , and this attention should take the form of a new way of organising the system of research in this area : bringing marine and maritime researchers together , and also combining the efforts from the Member States in a different way than is the case today .
This is a new way of thinking , which could be named ' pilot thinking ' in the context of joint programming , which is something which I mentioned before .
Certainly this will have our attention in the future also .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must try to deal with the effects of the reversal of the Question Times that we have had , by attempting to respect all and give everyone the chance to put their questions .
In order to do this , we will try to deal with all the remaining questions , but once the Commissioner has given an answer , I will be able to give the floor only to the Member who tabled the question .
We will not accept any other requests to speak , because that would make it difficult to achieve the final result .
Mr President , I know I have just joined you , but I have been watching the monitor at a very important group meeting and I just wonder why we are not going seriatim .
I really cannot stay .
I came precisely when my question was scheduled and now you are reverting out of order .
I would urge you please to stick to the order , Mr President .
Mrs Doyle , I am not changing the order .
Unfortunately , an incident occurred for which Mr Posselt bore no responsibility .
Since there was a round of questions for which the time was changed for the Commissioners , Mr Posselt was 30 seconds late .
I am therefore going back to the question by Mr Posselt and immediately afterwards we will have the question by Mrs Doyle .
Subject : Cloning
The Commission is currently conducting a general discussion on cloning .
What is the purpose of this debate , and what are the essential principles on which it is based ?
Member of the Commission . - This is certainly a difficult and complex area .
The debate on cloning at the Commission refers to the use of a technology called somatic cell nucleus transfer ( SCNT ) with particular reference to farm animal breeding and how to deal with food produced from these cloned animals and their offspring .
In the case of the use of this cloning technique in livestock reproduction and breeding in the agrofood sector , the questions are , in particular , related to animal health and welfare .
In the case of the safety of food derived from cloned animals and their offspring , the questions are , in particular , related to any possible risk to human health and to the consumer 's right to be informed .
The debate does not cover the use of SCNT in research .
The Commission has been following the development of SCNT since 1996 , when the first cloned mammal , Dolly the sheep , was born .
In 1997 , the Commission asked the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnology to issue an opinion on the ethics of cloning .
In 2004 , the Commission financed the project ' Cloning in public ' under the sixth Framework Programme .
This allowed an EU-wide debate to be launched as a first opportunity to have preliminary discussions with academics and civil society on ethical , legal and other societal aspects of farm animal cloning .
The study concluded that the public is not well informed about the use and implications of cloning .
The JRC published a study in 2007 in Nature Biotechnology on the prospects for future commercial use of cloning technology .
The study mapped the state of the art of the commercial applications of animal cloning worldwide and produced a pipeline of products and their estimated time of arrival on the market .
The conclusion was that cloned animals were not expected to arrive on the EU market before 2010 and that reproductive materials - semen - from cloned animals may be the first products to be traded .
Over recent years , the Commission has received information that the technology of somatic cell nuclear transfer for the reproduction of farm animals is about to reach its commercial stage , in particular , in third countries , notably the USA .
Based on the final risk assessment , a report written by the US Food and Drug Administration scientists and issued in January 2008 concluded that the consumption of food from cloned animals and their offspring is safe as long as the food comes from healthy animals , which is a general principle in food safety .
Only healthy animals enter the food chain .
In order to prepare for an informed political debate , in 2007 , the Commission asked the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) to assess the actual and potential risks associated with the use of this technology in food production and also asked the European Group of Ethics ( EGE ) to issue an opinion on the ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply .
The Group released their opinion in January 2008 and the Authority in July 2008 .
According to EFSA , ' based on current knowledge ... there is no indication that differences exist in terms of food safety between food products [ derived ] from healthy [ animal ] clones and their progeny , compared with those from healthy conventionally-bred animals ' .
Concerning the general health conditions of clones , the EFSA opinion states that there is no indication of adverse effects for the sexually reproduced progeny of cattle or pig clones .
However , clones and their progeny have not yet been studied throughout the whole of their natural life span .
At present , the EGE does not see convincing arguments to justify the production of food from clones and their offspring .
The Commission also asked for a Eurobarometer survey to be carried out on the attitude of Europeans towards animal cloning .
The results were made available in October 2008 .
The study showed that 58 % of the respondents were against cloning for food production purposes .
The Commission is now carefully considering these various elements to prepare an informal political debate on the use of somatic cell nucleus transfer for the reproduction of farm animals and food production .
Should it be considered necessary to further develop the regulatory framework , it is important to recall that the new provisions would , of course , have to comply with the EC Treaty and with World Trade Organisation rules .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank the President for his generosity and the Commissioner for his positive response .
I have only one question .
Can the Commission definitely state that cloning humans , in whatever form , is not and will not be part of this strategy ?
Member of the Commission . - Under the rules which we currently apply , this is ruled out .
The rules which we are using certainly do not allow research where the purpose would be the cloning of people .
Subject : European Research Council
On 27 / 28 February 2007 , the European Research Council ( ERC ) was officially launched at an inaugural conference in Berlin hosted by the German EU Presidency .
One of its aims is to ' promote wholly investigator-driven or ' bottom up ' frontier research ' .
Could the Commission clarify what is meant by investigator-driven or ' bottom-up ' frontier research ?
And what progress has been made to date in this area ?
Member of the Commission . - Here , I will be brief .
The ' investigator-driven ' approach followed by the European Research Council means that it supports projects at the frontiers of knowledge carried out by researchers on subjects of their choice , in any scientific field .
So they have the freedom to choose .
The European Research Council , by supporting ' frontier research ' , puts particular emphasis on interdisciplinary projects and on pioneering research .
So far - and now I am talking about the progress - two calls for proposals have been implemented by the European Research Council , and Europe 's research community has responded with huge enthusiasm .
A massive 9 167 proposals were submitted by young researchers in response to the Starting Independent Investigators Grants call last year and more than 2 000 proposals were received for the Advanced Investigators Grants call this year .
This high level of participation demonstrates the appeal of the European Research Council and confirms that funding for frontier research on a bottom-up basis corresponds to an urgent need in Europe .
The Commission is convinced that such investment in frontier research in the long term will substantially contribute to improving our knowledge-based society and also our innovation capacity in research .
In the light of the French presidency 's objective of establishing a governance process for the European Research Area ( ERA ) by the end of 2009 , could the Commission specify what measures it plans undertaking , in cooperation with Member States and Parliament , to put in place science policy evaluation methodologies to ensure evidence-based policy options for science and research and development in the EU ?
With the announcement of the European Research Area 's ' 2020 Vision ' agreed by the French Presidency , the Council and the Commission , what progress is being made in the whole area of governance here in the ERA ?
Member of the Commission . - To be honest , this is quite a far-reaching question .
We believe that it is important that we agree with the Member States on ' 2020 Vision ' , because if we do then this would certainly reduce the length of further debates about what we want to do in Europe .
We should not repeat again and again where we are going : that is the whole idea .
Of course , the debate is not starting now : the idea was launched with a Green Paper in 2000 .
I think it is great , especially for the new changed reality in which we live .
The structure and governance of ERA are extremely important , and that is why we have to be patient .
It is clear that we will not be successful if the Member States are not in the driving seat .
When we talk about the European Research Area and stimulating that , we do not talk predominantly about increasing funds at the European level , but rather about how we can all cooperate better - something that is inherently in the basics of the institutional framework of some of our major competitors , such as the USA , with which we want to compare ourselves .
So we want to create a voluntary commitment of the Member States through which we cooperate more and better than at present .
Concerning science policy methodologies , this is all part of the discussion which we are focusing on .
I think that this question will certainly have to be addressed , but I cannot elaborate on that .
I know that ERA 's approach is , in essence , one of the developments that Europe most needs at this time .
Subject : Ethical review of funding for research under FP7
In the rules for submission of proposals , and the related evaluation , selection and award procedures under the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development ( FP7-1982 / 2006 / EC ) , it was made clear that funding would not be given to research activities that involved the destruction of embryos .
Is the Commission satisfied that the ethical review of proposed projects has been successful in the implementation of this policy ?
Member of the Commission . - The ethical review of research funded under the Seventh Framework Programme is a system that safeguards the protection of fundamental rights and respect for ethical principles .
In the case of research involving the use of human embryonic stem cells , the procedure consists of five steps , including the scientific evaluation , the ethical screening and review , the national / local ethics committees ' approval for the proposed research and the submission of the proposals to a Regulatory Committee , so this relates to which project we decide on a single project basis .
In July 2007 , the European Group on Ethics also delivered an opinion to the Commission on ethics reviews of Seventh Framework Programme research projects using human embryonic stem cells .
In following the above steps , the Commission considers that the established ethical review mechanism has been successful in implementing the relevant EC provisions .
In particular , as all research activities that involve the destruction of human embryos are excluded from the scope of the Community funding , no research proposals in this area have been funded under the Seventh Framework Programme .
The ethical review is meant to verify that no EU funding is granted to research activities involving the destruction of human embryos .
In this sense , it is an integral part of the whole implementation of the Framework Programme .
Would the Commissioner tell the House if the framework can be used to carry out research on human embryos which have already been destroyed before the research starts , or is this semantics and are we just playing with words ?
I return to the question I asked earlier and ask for more detail .
Will the Commissioner take steps to ensure that everything possible is done to keep abreast of that form of research which does not raise the same ethical questions and which may well give the same or better results ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in any case , my concern is the opposite from that of Mr Mitchell .
Research is certainly permitted on cell lines that have already been extracted .
The problem , in my view , is that the obstacles are so great anyhow that this type of research finds itself being penalised for reasons which , on the face of it , are ethical , but which actually are no such thing .
Mr President , you said earlier you would not be allowing questions to the Commissioner from people other than from the questioner .
People can then come in and go on the record .
Why do they not put their own questions down about these issues ?
You have to follow the ruling consistently , Mr President .
You said you would not allow anybody other than the person who put down the question to ask questions and then you allow a gentleman here to get in on the back of my question .
If I knew that this sort of question was put down , I would have gone on much longer about the point that I want to make .
Unethical research is totally unnecessary ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr Mitchell , when I give the floor to an MEP for a 30-second speech , I do not know whether he will ask a question or make a comment on the questions which have already been put .
In any case , you had the opportunity , through Mr Cappato 's speech , to make a further speech in reply .
I believe that we can all be satisfied and , thanking Mr Potočnik for his patience , let us give him the floor for his final answer .
Member of the Commission . - You have seen how difficult this debate is when we talk about ethical questions .
That is exactly what Europe is and how it looks .
To be precise , human embryonic stem cells research is allowed under conditions which were agreed and voted in the European Parliament and also in the Council .
We have had a very thorough and in-depth debate and the procedure which is used is - I can say - based on a really ethical approach .
I have explained in the introduction which steps we have taken and how the decision is made .
Firstly , we need to have a scientific evaluation .
Then we have an ethical evaluation at European Union level , then an ethical evaluation at individual Member State level .
If any Member State is against something being funded in their country , we do not fund it .
Then this project goes to the committee where the decision is taken by the Member States on the individual project basis .
When we do the scientific evaluation , the first question is : is it possible to attain this with any other kind of approach ?
And only if the answer is ' no ' will we continue in the other direction .
Normally , there is an overwhelming majority of scientists who believe that the combination should be used .
But if you look at the structure in our programmes , you would definitely find that the overwhelming majority of the programmes we finance are programmes which are connected with adult stem cell research .
That is quite clear .
So we try to follow the rules which were voted and agreed here and which we believe that , in practice are working .
Mr President , I was here at 18.15 this evening for these questions .
My question was No 3 in a session .
Fifteen minutes were given to it .
Thirty-five minutes were given to this session .
I think it is an unfair system when someone who is here on time does not get their question dealt with and I am extremely disappointed .
I want my annoyance noted .
It is extremely frustrating to come in here , to be here on time , and then find that questions are skipped so as to accommodate other people .
I find it very annoying .
Mr Burke , I understand your frustration , but the period of time laid down for every period of questions this evening has been complied with .
Unfortunately , when it happens , as a result , that some questions are included in a question time period and are not dealt with , this depends , unfortunately , not on the President , but on a matter of chance which I can do nothing to remedy .
The only opportunity that I had was obviously , as you can very well verify , to lengthen the time for the last period of questions by a few minutes , thanks to the Commission 's availability and kindness .
No time was deducted , however , from the other question periods .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.50 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Demographic tendencies - Economic and social impacts ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on demographic tendencies - economic and social impacts .
Madam President , as we are unfortunately required to spend part of this evening together , I shall try , on behalf of the Council and also of Commissioner Potočnik , to summarise the Council 's aims concerning demographic trends and their economic and social impact .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the ageing population , in other words the increase in the proportion of older people , is primarily the result of economic , social and medical progress which offers Europeans the opportunity to live long lives in a level of comfort and safety which is unprecedented in history .
However , this is also one of the greatest challenges facing the Union in the coming years .
This ageing is the result of four factors .
The first is that the number of children per woman is low , with an Union average of 1.5 children , which is far below replacement rate , which needs to be slightly higher than 2 - 2.1 - in order to stabilise population size .
The second factor is the decline in fertility over recent decades , which followed the ' baby boom ' of the post-war years and which means that today these ' baby boomers ' are swelling the 45 to 65 age group .
Having increased by eight years since 1960 , life expectancy at birth - and this is the third factor - may well continue to increase , with an additional five years added between now and 2050 , or perhaps even more .
The fourth and final factor is that Europe , as you know , is experiencing growing migration from other countries .
In 2004 , there were 1.8 million immigrants , which is more than the United States experienced relative to total population , but this level of immigration only partly compensates for the effects of low fertility and increased life expectancy .
We therefore find ourselves in a situation in which the level of dependence , in other words , the number of people aged over 65 compared to the number of people between 15 and 64 years of age is set to double , and will rise to over 50 % between now and 2050 , which means that the Union , which previously had four people of working age for every person over 65 , will see this figure fall to just two .
The demographic change that I have just described , taking into account these factors , is accompanied by profound social change affecting family structures , all of which results in an increasing number of older people living alone and very old people being dependent on others .
As you know , most of these issues fall within the scope of Member States .
This is the case for family policy , social security systems and , in large part , fiscal policy , and the Council , given these facts , believes that the Lisbon strategy and the open coordination method form the framework within which Member States should work in this area , and most Member States agree that no new structures should be put in place .
For the Council , the truly important guiding principle is that , in addition to better balance between work and private life , there should be more efforts to balance the roles played by men and women within households , and to offer more good quality infrastructure to care for children and other dependent people .
In an ageing society , the contribution of young people will become all the more important .
We will have to intensify our efforts to combat youth unemployment and reduce early school-leaving .
Investing in children must be our top priority if we want to improve young people 's prospects .
We must also recognise that Europe is affected more by retirement than by ageing , although these trends are worrying and , without healthy public finances , it will be impossible to tackle all the consequences of demographic ageing .
This means that we must pay close attention to the viability of retirement schemes , and pursue the reforms underway to modernise these schemes and make them sustainable , which is in line with the current strategy within the Union .
It will also be useful to encourage older workers to carry on working and , in particular , to provide meaningful incentives .
The Council is fully aware of all of these challenges and has adopted the recommendations of the social protection committee concerning views on demographic change in Europe and the challenges this poses .
In addition , the Council adopted , on 30 May , the conclusions concerning policies that are in line with families ' needs , and established a series of initiatives to support family policies .
In this context , an informal meeting was held on 18 September , organised by the French Presidency , involving ministers responsible for the family .
At this meeting , the discussions centred on child care , as a way of ensuring balance between work and family life , and the protection of children on the Internet .
To conclude : the Council invites the Commission to view the first forum on the future demographics of Europe , which took place in Brussels on 30 and 31 October , as a starting point for a structured and lasting dialogue , within and between Member States , and to act so that the Commission may provide support to the relevant bodies to find the best strategies for responding to this demographic change .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I might take a bit longer but I promise to compensate for that in the second response .
Parliament 's request for a statement on demographic trends from the Council and the Commission comes at the right time .
This Friday , the Commission services will present their second demography report - in time for the European Demography Forum on 24 and 25 November .
The European Union is going through a major demographic transformation .
All the Member States have seen life expectancy rise and fertility rates decline among their populations as a result of scientific , economic and social progress .
Today , Europeans live longer , healthier lives than their forbears did , and we can expect life expectancy to increase in the future .
This ageing of Europe 's population is no longer an abstract scenario for a distant future .
The baby boom began 60 years ago and the first baby boomers are now reaching retirement age .
So the European Union 's demographic development has reached a turning point .
From now on , the number of those aged 60 and over will rise by two million people every year for the next 25 years .
Meanwhile , the rate of growth of the working age population is falling fast and will stop altogether in about six years .
Today there are four persons of working age - between 15 and 64 - for every person aged 65 or over in the 27 Member States .
In 2060 , the ratio will be two to one .
Some see ageing as a threat and paint a bleak picture of conflict between the generations .
But demographic change need not be a threat if we look at the opportunities it holds .
Living a longer , healthier life can mean staying active longer .
Most of the baby boomers are better educated and better trained than previous cohorts .
Today they are still fit and healthy .
I am convinced that demographic change offers the chance of stronger solidarity between the generations .
But I do not expect that to come about by itself .
Society will have to make better use of the abilities of all generations and give everyone the chance to develop his or her full potential .
That means modernising our social policies - in line with the renewed social agenda the Commission adopted in July .
The renewed social agenda identified Europe 's ageing society as a priority area for action and recommended a number of policy responses .
Our goal is to help the Member States make the most of the possibilities and manage the impact of an ageing society effectively .
The approaches and recommendations set out in the Commission 's 2006 communication ' The demographic future of Europe : From challenge to opportunity ' continue to be valid .
That communication expressed confidence in Europe 's ability to adapt to demographic change .
But it also stressed the need to act in five key areas : promoting demographic renewal in Europe , by creating the conditions for our fellow citizens to fulfil their desire to have children , in particular , by helping to reconcile work and family and private life ; promoting employment in Europe , by ensuring that more and better jobs are created and people can work longer , in order to improve the balance between active and inactive people ; promoting a more productive and more dynamic Europe , by optimising skills at all ages ; taking in and integrating migrants into Europe , by attracting skilled and unskilled workers from abroad and facilitating their integration in order to alleviate labour shortages ; ensuring the sustainability of public finances , by consolidating budgets and reforming social protection systems in order to guarantee adequate social protection and public services in the future .
The Lisbon Strategy already covers the most important of those policy responses , but it focuses less on the long term than the demography debate .
That is why the Commission has proposed additional tools in the form of biennial reports on the demographic situation in Europe and two-yearly demography forums .
In the 2008 report , the focus will be on the potential of the baby boom cohorts .
A growing number of people in their 60s and 70s will probably be willing to continue playing an active part in social and economic life .
The employment rates of older people have risen in recent years , reversing the past trend towards ever earlier retirement .
But more needs to be done : when they reach 60 , only 40 % of men and 30 % of women are still in employment .
Yet most people in that age group are still fit and capable of contributing to the economy and society .
The ageing baby boomers can also make a major contribution to society as informal care providers and volunteers .
Their contribution deserves to be recognised and supported by public policies .
It is crucial to ensure that the growing number of older people can lead an independent life for as long as possible .
A key objective of demography forums is to promote mutual learning based on good practice among the Member States .
The next European Demography Forum - to take place in Brussels on 24 and 25 November - will focus on family policies and active ageing .
It will also provide an opportunity to take stock of how prepared the Member States are for demographic change and to identify the most important opportunities for further action .
Early next year , the Commission will present an update of the implications of demographic change for future public spending , in particular , in the area of pensions , health and long-term care , based on Eurostat 's new population projections .
To wind up , I want to emphasise that it is the responsibility of the individual Member States to implement the right policies in the face of demographic change .
But demographic change is a challenge we all face together .
The Member States can learn a lot from each other 's successes and failures in responding to this demographic change .
That is why the Commission encourages a Europe-wide debate on demographic change and is offering a platform for the exchange of experiences and mutual learning .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , the two opening speeches have rightly highlighted longevity as the most significant change in demography .
That , of course , means people are living longer , mainly healthier lives , but in later years they become frail in body or mind .
That has meant an enormous growth in neurodegenerative diseases and the cost of that is vast .
Drugs for Parkinson 's disease in many countries cost more than drugs for cancer .
UK research predicts that by 2051 , there will be an increase of 154 % in the numbers of people with dementia .
Long-term care : that comes later now .
It used to come in the 70s .
Now it comes in your 80s and is increasingly coming in your 90s , but it is coming at an ever greater cost to individuals and families with implications for their savings .
The challenge is to ensure longevity as a reward and not a punishment .
We need to rethink our assumptions on ageing , moving from just ' How do we care ? ' to ' How do we promote healthy later years ? ' .
That means healthier lifestyles earlier in life of course ; keeping off tobacco and drugs , sensible drinking , healthy eating , exercise , but also management of stress .
Flexible working lives : time for leisure and families .
It means preparing for life after work with flexible retirement ages and the gradual movement into retirement that I have seen in the Netherlands .
It means greater social support in new and innovative ways , more domiciliary services so that people can stay in their own homes for longer .
Services and devices to match changing needs .
When my mother reached 80 , she needed a fax machine for communication .
At 90 , she needed a stair lift .
At 100 , she needed stimulation as her hearing and sight and mobility diminished .
But the mind inside was good and needed to be protected and stimulated if she was to have a real and full life .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , the trend for there to be fewer and fewer workers and more and more elderly people could be described as dramatic , yet , at the same time , the fact that we are actually staying healthier further into old age is a positive development .
It poses a number of challenges for us , however .
I shall describe a few of them .
Fewer children are born nowadays than in the past .
That said , this situation varies greatly between the Member States .
We can see that the outcome is better in those Member States where a system has been set up to allow parents to combine a working life with parenthood , both the women and the men in a family .
We must learn from each other in this regard .
Despite the fact that our population is ageing , the long-term trend is for working lives to shorten .
This is due both to the fact that people are starting their careers later and also - with the exception of the last few years , when the development has been more positive - to the fact that career spans have been getting shorter .
We need to do something about both sides of this problem in order to lengthen working lives and , above all , before we retire , to come up with flexible solutions .
We have been discussing the ' Blue Card ' today , but we must ensure that everyone who has come here from other parts of the world where there is currently high unemployment is integrated and enters the working world , including those with disabilities and other issues .
We must do all this within the framework of the Lisbon process , so that we can meet these challenges over the long term .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , there are many issues that arise in the context of this evening 's discussion , but I would just like to look at one of them : care and carers .
If we are lucky enough to live long enough , we will most likely need care , and , while there are differences between Member States , the likelihood is that this will largely consist of informal care .
Carers form the foundation of formal care and social care , and are an indispensable part of long-term care provision .
If carers are expected to keep providing care - which they are - then their needs must be an inherent part of health and social care policy development .
In this context , I am pleased to see that the DG SANCO website has a short section devoted to carers , and I have no doubt that this came about as a result of the submission the carers ' interest group in Parliament made to DG SANCO on its annual work programme .
However , carers need more than just a mention .
We believe it is time to design a new social contract for care that goes way beyond the traditional view of a contract between the state and the individual , and which calls for new commitments involving employers , local agencies and communities .
Indeed , the recent ECJ judgment on discrimination by association points the way .
Caring cannot be the sole responsibility of the informal carer or , indeed , of the Member State .
The informal care system will collapse without proper support , while with an exclusively state-based approach , the costs will simply be too high .
That is why we need this wider social contract .
Finally , there are approximately 100 million carers across the EU .
They are unpaid , undervalued and , in many cases , inadequately supported .
I welcome the mention on DG SANCO 's website , but this is a first step only .
By its very extent , this is a European issue and action will have to be coordinated between Member States .
Policy on carers should be part of the work of DG SANCO , and also of DG Employment and Social Affairs .
Thank you , Madam President .
Europe 's residents are getting old !
Alongside this trend , the organic increase in the number of inhabitants may become negative .
In many Member States , this is already a reality .
The number of people working in proportion to the number of pensioners is falling in all Member States .
A low birth rate in conjunction with longer life expectancy and immigration is increasing pressure on pensions , health protection and social services .
There are , however , also some Member States which have succeeded in changing Europe 's negative demographic trend .
In these countries , a balance has been achieved between life and work , which enables parents to bring up their children , without sacrificing their careers , and to obtain the economic and social benefits linked to them .
I have no doubt that Member States will have to find the main economic , social and cultural solutions to combat the ageing of their populations .
There are also tasks , however , which ought to be carried out at the European Union level .
The EU labour market still conceals enormous reserves .
We need to ensure that in the internal market , there are no barriers to the free movement of the labour force .
However complicated it may be , we need to return to the liberalisation of the market in services , and we need to review the services directive that was adopted .
The implementation of both these basic freedoms would help to offset the financial deficits created by the demographic process .
Of course , we should also adopt a non-discriminatory attitude towards gender and age . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , it is interesting how we often see the declining birth rate etc. as a problem .
This is not necessarily the case if it means that we are then starting to share some of the inordinate wealth that we have at European Union level with people coming from other countries and that we look at technical innovation and how we can increase productivity and maybe even produce fewer of the rubbishy goods that clutter up our lives and our planet at the moment .
Of course , there is also an issue about making the best use of the potential labour force .
This is why the anti-discrimination directives in the field of employment are crucially important and why it is essential that Member States implement those properly .
They should also look at the barriers to phased retirement - issues such as : if you cut your working hours , what does that do to your pension ; what does it do to your life and access to benefits ?
We also ought to consider what is happening in the current financial crisis with regard to a lot of our thinking in this area .
We are likely to see more older workers being laid off , because people are not implementing the anti-discrimination legislation properly , with all the implications for many of them of perhaps never getting back into work .
There will be others who will find it even more difficult to start their working lives or to find promotion to build up their pensions : all those aspects of what happens if you are not working for a period of time .
There is the question of disaffection amongst the young who cannot find work , for whom it becomes more difficult , and of course the problems that many people will face when their private or occupational pension schemes are not able to pay out in the way that they thought they would .
So we also need to look at the demographic situation in the context of the current crisis and how we are going to use this opportunity in terms of increasing training .
We should use that as a way of helping people to improve their skills , perhaps to find pathways to less physically demanding work - something that we have been saying for a considerable period of time needs to be done .
We should look at how we might increase the higher-education qualifications of a number of people who never had that opportunity in their youth .
We now have the opportunity to look at certain of the elements that we know are problematic and really begin to look forward to how we are going to tackle the demographic situation .
In our opinion , instead of being entitled ' demographic tendencies - economic and social impacts ' , this debate should be entitled ' economic and social policy and its impact on demographic tendencies ' .
The demographic tendency projections for a country or region should not be disassociated from the policies adopted in that country or region , given that these policies determine and condition the demographic development .
For example , the 50-year projections are made based on assumptions that should be explained , including the economic policies determining the scenarios put forward .
In other words , given the projections made , what we should be discussing today are the consequences for demographic development resulting from unemployment , increased job insecurity , deregulation of working time , a monetary policy focused on moderation and devaluation of wages .
What we should be discussing today are the consequences of the European Union 's interest rate policy on thousands and thousands of families who have taken out mortgages to buy houses , the consequences of liberalisation and privatisation on public services , and the consequences of low pensions on the independence and quality of life of millions of pensioners .
What we should be discussing are those policies which promote the centralisation and concentration of wealth and the increase in social inequalities .
In essence , what is actually at stake is the observance or non-observance of human rights , such as the right to food , employment , dignified wages , housing , health education and leisure .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , we are facing a crisis in Europe to which we will not find a solution until we face the fact that the crisis is of our own making .
In the EU , we kill over one and a half million children before birth every year .
We destroy our future and then wonder why we have a crisis .
We talk about a fertility problem , but this is not a fertility problem : it is a refusal to let millions of babies conceived be born .
Unless we are honest in identifying the problem , there can be no solution .
The solutions are that we must respect life and support the family , in order for that life to find a nurturing environment .
By taking these steps , we can begin to tackle the challenge of skewed demographics .
Improvement will not happen overnight , but at this point we can still avert disaster .
One should study the case of Japan closely .
Two decades ago , it was the second largest economy in the world , and one of the most advanced .
In 2007 , the Japanese population peaked and entered decline .
In 1995 , twelve years before the downturn , Japan entered deflation as negative demographics began to take their toll .
It has never got out of it .
Japan is 20 years ahead of Europe in this , but it was also 20 years ahead of European countries in legalising abortion .
We peak in 2025 - which is only 17 years away .
I wonder if the deflation we are now entering , in 2008 , is here to stay , with the banking crisis being replaced by a demographic crisis , which will be with us until we learn to respect life again .
( NL ) Madam President , I am delighted that the Council and Commission are issuing a statement about the economic and social impact of present demographic trends .
Many politicians have a bad habit of thinking in the short term and of neglecting long-term policy .
Our demographic challenge is a vital problem in the long term , which also requires long-term solutions .
The average birth rate in women in the European Union is 1.5 , which is too low to replace the current generations .
This is also where the problem lies .
One option is to reach out for an easy solution in the short term by pleading in favour of an even greater immigration wave from outside Europe .
Whilst this may seem like a good idea in theory , day-to-day reality in our big cities bears witness to the total failure of lax immigration policy over the past 30 years .
The European unemployment figure is 20 million , and still the Commission would like to import more immigrants .
Might I , in fact , point out that the unemployment percentage among non-European immigrants is considerably higher than among the native people in the Member States ?
A lack of time prevents me from mentioning the social problems , including the social breakdown , which large-scale immigration causes .
What we need is policy in the Member States that supports young European families in their desire to have children .
Tax measures are needed in the Member States in order to make having children more attractive .
Child care should be improved and extended .
We should also dare to contemplate the introduction of a wage for the stay-at-home-parent who chooses to commit most of his or her time to raising the children .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome this debate because it raises awareness , rather than arousing fear We must take action now , without waiting until tomorrow .

Demographic change has its causes , consequences and challenges , which include falling population levels , fewer people in gainful employment and the likelihood of us living longer .
The children born during the next few minutes may live to the age of 100 .
Indeed , this will be the case for half of these children .
The population is ageing and we are having fewer children .
This is resulting in dramatic changes to the age structure and the population structure .
We in this House are faced by new infrastructure requirements , new requirements on public services and on business , education and social systems .
This is an ageing continent .
Jean-Claude Juncker once said , ' If we do not rapidly redesign our social , pension and health systems so that they are fit for the future , we will become the losers in the globalisation process , instead of the winners . '
What is to be done ?
There is a great deal to do .
Ensuring that people have a good work-life balance .
No longer forcing people to give up working .
New forms of care , child care and mobile services , such as meals on wheels , are required .
In all Member States , responsibility for financing care must be taken away from social security systems and become a community responsibility .
We are facing a challenge in the field of education .
Our goal should be to become the most child-friendly and people-friendly continent in the world .
We must credit time spent bringing up children and providing other forms of care , because 80 % of carers are family members .
Equal pay for equal work is also important .
Much remains to be done and our problems have a wide range of different causes .

( FR ) Madam President , Minister , I have a few words to say : the stumbling block that we will encounter when tackling this demographic challenge is that the number of working people is falling .
Two figures : in 2010 , there will be 217 million people of working age , and in 2050 this figure will be 180 million ; a deficit of almost 36 million people .
Should we fear a shortage of labour ?
Should we fear an imbalance between the working population and those who are dependent ?
We are suggesting two solutions to this problem , which aim to achieve optimal management of human resources .
Firstly , full employment .
We must work towards full employment .
There are currently very significant employment opportunities , given the under-employment among young people , women , over-55s and underqualified individuals .
We are witnessing a huge waste of skills .
We may well find that if employment levels among women and those aged between 55 and 65 increase , by 2050 , to rates similar to the best in Europe , we could make up for this shortage of labour .
Finally , lifelong education and training .
We would like to work towards an optimal length of working life .
It is unacceptable that a worker , a project manager , a 50-year old manager has little more by way of career prospects than stagnation .
The social responsibility of our firms is at stake here .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the world population has doubled within a few decades with devastating consequences for the planet and so the fact that the European trend is at least partly different is a positive point .
There are problems in terms of social welfare , certainly , but the answer is not to encourage people to have more children , but rather to raise the retirement age , to eliminate discrimination against older people in countries such as Italy where the disincentives to working after retirement age are so high as to make pensions into obligations rather than rights .
On the world stage , I call upon the Presidency , in particular , to take action to bring about the convening of the new United Nations conference on population which has , for years now , been blocked because of pressure by states such as the Vatican State and by those who fear responsible policies on the provision of information on sex and family planning .
( PL ) Madam President , Europe 's demographic trends have been deeply alarming for over a dozen years now .
The replacement fertility rate is 2.16 .
In Poland this rate is 1.2 .
At the same time , the progress of medicine and healthier lifestyles mean that people live longer .
Europe is getting older , but it is also dying out .
By 2030 , the ratio of working to non-working population will be 1 : 2 .
Anti-family , socio-economic policies , the promotion of family models with few children and childless marriages by the media , as well as policies conducive to family breakdown , are significant causes of the adverse demographic changes in Europe .
Their most important outcomes will be a shortage of workers in the labour market , threatening economic development , a dramatic loss of pension system efficiency and increased cost of health care systems due to the special needs of an ageing society .
( SK ) I welcome the debate on these issues and I feel that it is particularly important now , when we must solve both a financial and an economic crisis at the same time .
Demographic trends show that we have an ageing population , due to a combination of improvements to health care and falling birth rates .
Therefore , we have to prepare for this reality and to make provision in the relevant areas .
In the social area , it will be a relatively difficult matter to provide pensions .
In the area of health , we must think how to provide treatments , especially for diseases associated with old age .
We know , for example , that up to two thirds of cancers are associated with an age of over 60 .
The sustainability of the social system will require increased , improved and better-adapted conditions of employment for older people .
This mainly concerns women over 55 and men in the age range from 55 to 64 .
It is possible to make up for the population loss through immigration of young people from third countries , but we must try , above all , to create the conditions for stabilising the population of young educated people who we are currently losing to the USA .
In view of the worsening reproductive health of young women , we should support assisted reproduction .
Many young families cannot afford this .
In my opinion , we will not be able to comply with the Lisbon strategy .
Let us try at least to renew the idea of a European family support alliance , either through tax bonuses or through improved facilities for pre-school children .
Maternity leave should be provided at full pay and not at the minimum level .
( RO ) Minister , I apologise for contradicting you , but we have several problems , not just one .
We do not only have demographic problems , but political , social and ethical ones too .
We state that we want a higher birth rate , but 30 % of children already born live below the poverty line .
The consequences for the future will be poor education , bad jobs , lower productivity and small insurance contributions .
The Council 's position on the Working Time Directive blatantly contradicts the intentions of achieving a balance between work and private life .
Infertility is a condition which is recognised by the World Health Organisation , but not by many Member States .
As a result , insurance does not cover the cost of treatment .
To pay for a single attempt at IVF in Romania , a person earning an average salary and saving all of it would need to work for nine months .
3-4 attempts are required for conception and then another nine months before the child is born .
Fellow Members , the most effective solution would be for us to promote a consistent policy among states and to ensure equivalence among the statements made and measures adopted .
( FI ) Madam President , the challenges posed by demographic trends seem especially great in the sparsely populated areas of the north .
Migration takes young and educated people out of a region , whilst the ageing population quickly grows in relation to the rest .
This results in increased costs for organising social and health care services , a problem exacerbated by the long distances involved .
New technology and innovation have , however , succeeded in establishing new services to help the ageing population and which can be exploited throughout the Union .
Another way to turn challenges into opportunities is effective regional policy .
Effective regional policy is a way to make use of the opportunities that areas provide , create new jobs and deliver added value for Europe as a whole .
At the same time , trends in population can be made a more positive phenomenon .

( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Jouyet , ladies and gentlemen , when this House discussed the effects of demographic developments before the summer , the full extent of the current economic crisis had not yet hit us .
This crisis will increase pressure on our social systems .
As a result of expected growth in unemployment , some relaxation may perhaps be expected within the labour market in the short term .
In the long term , however , this does not solve the specific problem of an ageing population .
If a worsening economic climate brings increased pressure to bear on the older workers to leave the labour market prematurely , we shall lapse into old errors .
The emphasis should now remain , as it should do in future , on flexible pension arrangements on a voluntary basis , combined with organising work in such a way as to ensure that continuing to work longer becomes a real option .
The financial crisis has demonstrated once again why we must handle pension funds wisely .
The sustainability of the pension system , aligned to both demographic and economic developments and based on risk-avoiding investment strategies in the long term , should be accorded high priority .
Additionally , the European Commission should turn its attention to regulating and monitoring pan-European pension products .
( SK ) The changing lifestyle of the younger generation is such that after completion of studies , everyone wants to spend some years travelling and then building their career .
By this time , young people , including young women , are over the age of 30 and most of them then produce only one offspring .
A family is seen today as a negative burden and , in addition to this , young men are not capable of promising marriage and security to women .
The number of abortions is at an all-time high and a large proportion of women use hormonal contraceptives , so the number of women who are actually physiologically capable of conceiving children is very small .
The fertility index in European countries varies between 1.1 and 1.3 .
Only France , which has long provided financial support for families , has an index approaching 2 .
A recent European congress on the family at the University of Ružomberok ...
Madam President , it seems we will all live longer but enjoy fewer grandchildren .
I suppose the reasons why that is the case are very complex and varied .
I think children are seen as a ' problem ' and you hear that when you talk to people who do not have children .
We also talk about a child care ' problem ' rather than a ' solution ' .
Older people , too , feel that they are a burden and worry about who will look after them into their old age .
I think that those of us in the middle somewhere fear this impending doom because there will be even fewer people around to pay for our pensions and to look after us when we , too , are unable to do so .
The role of carers in society , as Marian Harkin rightly pointed out , is totally undervalued and that needs to change .
And I wonder - listening to tonight 's debate - in the context of the financial and economic crisis , can the Commission perhaps answer this question , and see that this problem of the demographic trend could actually get worse because of the situation we are now in ?
That would be regrettable .
( RO ) Madam President , Commissioner , the European Union needs to be prepared to face up to the demographic challenges .
Social Europe needs to be able to meet the expectations of its citizens by offering good-quality education , an efficient and accessible health care system and jobs which support a decent living and the guarantee of a decent pension on retirement .
The EU has an ageing population .
At the same time , there are few Member States where the birth rate has grown , apart from Ireland and France which have performed well in this area as a result of specific policies that have been adopted .
At the same time , although the infant mortality rate has fallen at Community level to 4.7 in a thousand inhabitants , there are still some Member States where this figure is 12 in a thousand inhabitants .
Europe needs to invest in health , education and social welfare .
Guaranteeing well-paid jobs means a decent living for workers , but it also guarantees the resources required to pay for pensions .
The pension system is a system based on solidarity between the generations .
Madam President , the European Union is an ageing society .
There are many people in the EU who choose to advance professionally instead of concentrating on their family lives , until it is far too late for them to have children .
Having recently become a grandfather , I am a fierce advocate of an Estonian family planning measure that allows one of the parents to stay at home for 18 months after the birth of their child , guaranteeing social benefits more or less equal to the parent 's salary before his or her leave - the parental allowance .
It is my strong opinion that , unless we want to burden our children with unreasonably high taxes , we ought to start implementing a similar approach across the EU .
In Estonia , for example , such a policy has brought the nation out of a seemingly interminable decrease in population .
Madam President , the most important work done by any citizen is the rearing of the next generation .
And , without any hectoring or lecturing of the young women of today , married or single , what we need to do is restore the freedom of choice to all women who want to stay at home to have the second or third child and to ensure that they are not forced to remain in employment because of economic and financial circumstances .
We must ensure that full pension credits or a parental pension or a maternal pension are preserved for the women working in the home so that their old age will be financially secure and that they can be properly rewarded by the state for doing that most important work for all of us : rearing the next generation .
On another point , given the increased average number of healthy years available to most of us , the compulsory retirement age - the traditional retirement age - of 65 must be revisited , and revisited urgently .
On average , women are now well into their thirties when they give birth to their first child .
We must review this situation as quickly as possible .
( PL ) Madam President , we are all aware that European society is ageing , but are we all aware what consequences this will have for our economy and for our labour market ?
In an era of globalisation , demographic problems acquire a much broader dimension .
For this reason , the European Union needs integrated action on a large number of levels .
On the one hand , we must ensure that the goals of the Lisbon Strategy are attained , strive to raise employment levels , increase the participation of women in the labour market and arrest the early retirement trend .
We must also place greater emphasis on education , especially in engineering and information technology , essential for a knowledge-based economy .
It is also vital to promote life-long education and to prepare workers for being open to new challenges .
Madam President , I will try to adhere to your advice .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate has been very fruitful and it is clear from the various interventions that there are multiple points to address if this demographic challenge is to be met .
Various courses of action can complement each other , as I shall describe later .
To a certain extent , it is true that we must increase employment rates , and it is true that we will need immigration in order to solve this demographic deficit , and it is also important that immigration be controlled and organised .
It is also true that we need family policies and support for the existing birth rate , and there is a requirement to care for elderly people and to improve the way in which they are treated .
In this context , we must pay close attention to the development of education infrastructure , child care and the alleviation of dependency in the elderly .
As several speakers have said , we must consider our strengths , in particular , new information technologies and research and development , with all the flexibility available in medical and health care services , and all that can be done to assist with prenatal diagnosis , early years assistance and community child care .
There are therefore several challenges , but we already have the resources to tackle this demographic deficit .
We must be ready to monitor the consequences of demographic change , as was emphasised in the debate .
We need to oversee the viability of our social security and pension systems , which are one of the characteristic features of the European solidarity model .
We must take long-term measures , despite the economic and financial crisis that we are experiencing at the moment , in order to ensure that these systems are viable , and we must also consider the future effects of this demographic change on various aspects of labour organisation .
Mr Cappato used a specific example to illustrate this point , and he is right to do so .
In conclusion , I believe that the Commission , as Commissioner Potočnik will undoubtedly say , Parliament and Council must continue to engage in dialogue in the same spirit that pervaded the debate today .
Europe undoubtedly faces a long-term challenge , and we must anticipate , organise ourselves and not allow the economic and financial crisis to prevent us from taking action and initiating reform .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we have heard today a clear message that we have a very serious challenge - that of the ageing of society .
In many ways , the 21st century is an era of fragility , and we have to deal with this .
We all have to do everything possible .
As was mentioned , longevity should be a reward and not a punishment .
It was also mentioned that it would be consistent to do this in the context of the Lisbon Agenda , and I agree .
We can understand the Lisbon Agenda in a simple way , going towards a knowledge-based society and being concerned about sustainability , whether it be in relation to social security , the environment or the economy .
What we have learnt from this crisis is that even the profits have to be clearly sustainable .
So the present financial crisis should not divert our attention from any of the problems which we have been patiently discussing in recent years , including the problem which we are discussing today .
It is only one additional problem .
When we have dealt with it , we have to come out of the financial crisis with a structure that is capable of dealing with all the challenges which the 21st century brings us .
So it is important that in this context , we are aware of all the possible aspects of sustainability - sustainability of the planet on which we live , between living beings on the planet , between us humans and between generations , which is very much the essence of the demographic question which we are discussing today .
Our policies should definitely address this .
The demographic forum to be held on 24 and 25 November - which I mentioned in my opening address - is certainly one good opportunity to do so .
We should certainly continue the dialogue between the Council , Member States , Parliament and the Commission .
Your discussions today prove that the debate is very timely .
I would like to thank you on behalf of the Commission for those views .
All the things you have mentioned are extremely important - promoting demographic renewal , reconciliation of family and working life , the questions of carers , mobility and anti-discrimination and other policies .
All this is valid when we talk about this problem .
The debate is closed .
Social security systems and pensions ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Stauner , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the future of social security systems and pensions : their financing and the trend towards individualisation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , preparing an initiative report on the subject of the future of social security systems and pensions is a fascinating task because this area is so topical and so complex .
However , it involves the significant risk of the report becoming a long wish list and catalogue of requirements for all right-thinking people .
We did not succumb to this temptation , as the relatively brief and highly technical text , which carefully avoids flowery wording , indicates at first glance .
I would therefore like to thank all my fellow Members , in particular the shadow rapporteurs and Mrs Lulling , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , for their self-discipline .
My aim was to produce a report which provides a description of the developments over the next 30 to 40 years for all decision makers and interested parties and which offers food for thought and recommendations for action for the individual areas of social policy .
Social security and pension systems in the Member States have traditionally been designed , developed and financed in very different ways , which is why it will not be possible to harmonise them at an EU level .
Nevertheless , all of the systems are in difficulty because of demographic developments and the changes to the labour market resulting from globalisation .
This means that reforms are necessary in every case .
Scientific findings have shown that continuing as before is not an option for any of the existing systems .
That is the first important result .
The type of reforms needed in each Member State obviously varies depending on the structure of each system .
In our opinion , all the systems need , among other things , more and improved measures to bring about a better work-life balance , which will help to prevent the employment rate from falling , and which will ensure that social problems are not aggravated by the large-scale immigration of workers .
Secondly , despite the introduction of so-called atypical employment relationships , we must retain the traditional model of full-time employment for an unlimited period , because this is the only way of guaranteeing stability for living conditions and social security systems .
Thirdly , as well as ensuring that social spending is financially secure through the use of joint contributions and hybrid fund-based solutions , we must put the focus on social investment .
Fourthly , we must improve productivity and increase the ability to innovate , because in Europe we are reliant on our human capital .
Fifthly , we must ensure that high-quality health care is available to everyone , with medical progress and falling contributions guaranteeing basic care for all citizens .
Sixthly , special measures must be introduced to protect women against the specific risks which they are exposed to , in particular poverty in old age , by crediting child care and family care time in pension insurance .
A sense of solidarity across generations and social groups must lie at the heart of all our efforts in future .
This is particularly true in a world characterised by change resulting from globalisation , which is becoming increasingly depersonalised and anonymous .
Solidarity and subsidiarity are the basic principles of the European social model .
In this context , we must ensure that globalisation has a social side , so that well-qualified and adaptable workers can support themselves and their families with dignity , receive high-quality health care if they are ill and have financial security in old age .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , despite being drafted before the current turmoil erupted on our financial markets and the economic downturn became apparent , this report is remarkably timely and also relevant .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her sound work .
The report underscores the long-term social demographic and economic changes that are driving the modernisation and reform of our social protection schemes .
It highlights the importance of our shared values in the field of social protection .
It also shows how they can help to make our pension and health care systems sustainable .
More people working more and longer is the key of the long-term adequacy and sustainability of social protection .
It is also a win-win strategy .
The report links sustainable , adequate social protection with the Lisbon Strategy and our commitment to guarantee sustainable public finances .
The renewed social agenda proposed by the Commission gives substance to that link by advocating a broad holistic approach to future social policies and priorities .
I welcome the emphasis on promoting women 's full integration into our labour markets and on fighting all forms of discrimination to ensure that everybody can acquire adequate social security and pension rights in particular .
The report emphasises the need to combine the move to funded pensions in many Member States with sound national and EU regulatory frameworks for effective supervision and careful monitoring of outcomes for citizens .
That is a very timely message .
Access to quality medical treatment and preventive care is a cornerstone of EU social models .
It is both a goal to be attained for itself and a necessary condition for a productive labour force to exist in a phase of rapid population ageing .
The Commission shares your concern about health inequalities and the need to guarantee high-quality health care for all and solidarity financing covering the whole population .
These points will be taken up in a Commission communication on health inequalities to come out next year .
The report is a strong plea for us all , not only to keep working to achieve our basic objectives of access for all , solidarity , adequacy and sustainability , but also to work to strengthen them through modernisation .
The Commission will provide its full response to the financial crisis and the downturn in the real economy in a communication to be published on 26 November .
It will also elaborate on the constructive social and economic role of social protection in the joint report on social protection and inclusion for 2009 .
May I assure you of the Commission 's willingness to look again at the various points in this report in close cooperation with Parliament .
This item is now closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Sadly , population ageing and population shrinkage are the inescapable future of Europe .
Demographers say that the birth rate will not ensure generational replacement , while average life expectancy will increase .
The low birth rate is associated with the difficulty of combining professional work with family life - we lack the necessary number of crèches and kindergartens , as well as economic support for families .
By the end of 2030 , the ratio of working to non-working population will probably reach 2 : 1 .
Mitigating the consequences of the shrinkage of working population through immigration is only one possible solution .
It will also lead to increased ethnic , cultural and religious diversity .
We must therefore raise employment levels among the disabled and older people ( by arranging for training and retraining ) .
Retirement must also be made more flexible , through the introduction of voluntary retirement , change of employment and the use of new technologies .
Member States must also conduct a balanced financial policy , dividing the tax burden fairly between workers , consumers and businesses .
Demographic changes will have a major impact on public expenditure on retirement and old age pensions , which can be mitigated by being partly privately funded .
Expenditure on health care will also rise .
In the circumstances , providing the populations of Member States with health care and appropriate benefits delivered at an appropriate level is a task requiring immediate action on many social and governmental levels .
HIV / AIDS : Early Diagnosis and Early Care ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on HIV / AIDS : Early diagnosis and early care .
Madam President , Commissioner Potočnik , ladies and gentlemen , it is twenty five years since HIV was discovered .
Today , it is of the utmost importance , now that the epidemic has claimed more than 25 million lives , that the European Union reaffirm its commitment to combat the global HIV / AIDS pandemic .
Universal access to prevention , testing , early treatment and support in this field is essential , and the European Parliament , your House , emphasised this in its resolution of 24 April 2007 .
There is an urgent need to increase the rate of development , and also to increase implementation of prevention , information , education and awareness campaigns , and to invest in research and development of new prevention and testing strategies , which must be kept up-to-date with changes in the nature of the pandemic .
In particular , it is of prime importance that testing and treatment are done as early as possible , and that anti-retroviral drugs are made available at an affordable price . When diagnosis is made too late , or if the immune system is too badly damaged by the disease , patients have an increased risk of death in the four years following diagnosis .
In order to screen earlier , it is necessary to use new strategies and tools , such as rapid screening tests .
It would be useful to offer testing more widely , providing that patients consent , of course .
It is useful to remember that these rapid screening tests can be carried out where there is no medical laboratory , and that the results may be given to patients within a relatively short time .
In order to encourage people living with HIV / AIDS to be tested early , it is also essential to overcome discrimination barriers .
The fear of the stigma attached to a positive test result can prevent patients from accessing early screening .
For this reason , the European Union must speak out clearly and consistently against all forms of discrimination against people living with HIV anywhere in the world .
This strongly held conviction is shared by the French President Nicolas Sarkozy and by Bernard Kouchner , who have brought this matter to the attention of the United Nations .
HIV is to be treated as a transmissible but non-contagious disease , and any restrictions on freedom of access , travel and residence for HIV positive people , because of their HIV status , are counterproductive .
Any such practices will dissuade patients from obtaining screening and treatment , which is harmful to the individual and to society .
In conclusion , I should like to make two observations .
The first is that our common goal is as follows : people who test positive for HIV must receive high-quality treatment , regardless of their origin , nationality , opinions , age , sex , sexual orientation , religion or any other factor .
The second observation is that , in this context , international coordination is essential if this pandemic is to be defeated .
I would like to pay tribute to the EuroHIV programme , which has , since 1984 , been disseminating essential information about HIV / AIDS to the WHO , UNAIDS and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
In order to make prevention , screening and early treatment available to all , in order that people with the disease are no longer stigmatised or discriminated against , in order that the countries of the South have proper access to drugs , cooperation between UN agencies and regional agencies must be increased .
More than ever , the European Union must be involved in this fight .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would say to the honourable Members and to Minister Jouyet that , as we approach World AIDS Day on 1 December 2008 , this plenary session provides a good opportunity to reflect on some significant achievements in combating HIV / AIDS and to focus on the serious challenges that lie ahead .
This year 's Nobel Prize for Medicine was awarded to two European researchers at the Pasteur Institute - Professor Françoise Barré-Sinoussi and Professor Luc Montagnier , who were the first to isolate the Human Immunodeficiency Virus back in 1983 .
That landmark discovery paved the way for many important developments and diagnostics , and the treatment of HIV infections , and allowed us to understand more about the pathogenesis of HIV infections and its devastating consequences .
However , 25 years later , we still do not have a cure for HIV / AIDS and still witness millions of new infections per year worldwide , including tens of thousands of new infections in Europe .
How can this happen ?
It is well known how HIV transmission can be effectively prevented .
Successful campaigns in the 1980s and the early 1990s have shown that awareness and knowledge are essential elements of prevention strategies against HIV infections .
Determined political leadership and civil responsibility are two further elementary prerequisites for successfully combating HIV / AIDS - as is an open and constructive partnership with the stakeholders .
Today 's plenary session is also an excellent time to reaffirm our political commitment - a time to be ambitious .
I should add that I appreciate very much the European Parliament 's commitment in keeping HIV / AIDS high on the political agenda .
Indeed , we recently had a very useful exchange of views on HIV / AIDS in a round-table meeting organised by Vice-President Miguel-Angel Martínez Martínez and Zita Gurmai on the need for HIV testing and subsequent early ' state of the art ' care and support .
Experts estimate that an average of 30 % of people in Europe infected with HIV are not aware of their status .
That incredible figure carries two risks : first for the person concerned , since he or she may not receive treatment and care on time ; and second for his or her partner ( s ) , who may be exposed to the infection .
So what can we as politicians do to address and overcome this situation ?
Our common humanistic core values and a strong commitment to human values , solidarity and our position against discrimination must be the basis of all policies to fight HIV / AIDS , and should be the foundation for all activities in combating the disease .
The European position and response is clear : we concentrate on prevention and raising awareness ; we promote HIV testing and access to treatment and care for all in need ; we fight for affordable medication ; we oppose and fight any form of discrimination or stigmatisation ; we seek to identify best practice and support civil society .
In areas within our political responsibility , we have to create the conditions for effective actions on the ground , serving both society and people living with HIV and AIDS .
Clearly we cannot be complacent .
We have to keep up the momentum .
The EU also looks beyond its borders to the devastating impact of HIV / AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa and other developing countries , which represent an exceptional challenge to social growth and development .
Eastern Europe and Central Asia continue to experience the fastest growth of the epidemic in the world .
In this context , we reaffirm our commitment to supporting partner countries in scaling-up towards universal access to HIV prevention , treatment , care and support .
On behalf of the Commission , I welcome the resolution on early diagnosis and early care of HIV / AIDS and fully endorse and support the principle of breaking down barriers to HIV testing , treatment and care .
The Commission further encourages people to use the possibility of HIV testing and reiterates to Member States the need to establish testing centres that meet international standards and operate according to agreed principles .
The Commission is currently developing its second strategy on combating HIV / AIDS in the EU and also our near neighbourhood , which will further concentrate on prevention and will focus on the regions and groups most affected by the epidemics .
However , what a successful prevention approach needs most of all is openness and tolerance on a political and societal level : openness to the realities of our lives today , of sexuality and behaviours ; openness to means of harm reduction ; openness to fight inequalities , discrimination and suppression ; and openness to other cultures and habits .
In facing up to the challenge of HIV / AIDS , the Commission will continue to play its role to the full .
I know that we have Parliament 's support in this endeavour , and we treasure it highly .
Let us continue together the strong political momentum , together with the Council , to ensure that we all live up to our responsibilities .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , in the United Kingdom , we have 80 000 people living with HIV and , as the Commissioner has said , 1 in 3 of those is undiagnosed .
We also have 1 in every 360 pregnant women HIV positive .
Ten per cent of new cases in Europe are multi-drug resistant strains , and that is heading in the direction of the 20 % that we see in America .
We see increasing numbers living with multi-drug resistant TB as well as with AIDS .
The ECDC shows new cases of HIV infection doubled between 1999 and 2006 .
It showed 11 % of cases are in young people aged between 15 and 24 .
We saw 53 % heterosexual transmission , largely from people who originate from epidemic countries , but a third are men who have sex with men and , perhaps surprisingly , less than 10 % are injecting drug users .
But on top of all this - and I very much welcome what the minister said - we impose stigma .
Stigma is a cruel added burden to the pain of the disease and , what is worse , it encourages people to hide and not to come forward for testing and treatment .
The solutions stem from these figures , from these facts .
We need early diagnosis , as everyone has so far said .
We need confidential testing , we need education , we need the understanding that flows from that and can counter that stigma .
We need the on-going research and development , and we need care because fewer people are actually dying of AIDS ; more people are living with it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I was very happy to hear the Commissioner mention the Round Table which I co-hosted and co-chaired .
Miguel Angel Martínez and Commissioner Vassiliou also participated and were actively engaged in it .
AIDS is one of the most serious diseases of our century .
Within the European Union alone , 215 000 people were newly infected with HIV in the last 10 years .
According to estimates this year , almost one third of the AIDS infection - as my good colleague mentioned - still remained undiagnosed , posing a real threat to the health of European citizens .
It is high time to take concrete steps so we have put forward practical suggestions on how to combat HIV / AIDS effectively by focusing on evidence-based HIV / AIDS early diagnosis and early care .
It is not only a health-related question .
It is a strategic matter for the future enlargement of the EU and crucial in the field of neighbourhood and migration policy .
We should combine the different EU policies to emphasise the right of each single European citizen to better health and living conditions , not forgetting the role of women .
They are the most endangered groups when it comes to HIV / AIDS .
Ensuring accurate monitoring surveillance of the disease is of the highest urgency .
Early diagnosis and the reduction of barriers to testing are regarded as an urgent necessity .
Steps must be taken to ensure access to free and anonymous testing in order to facilitate more people seeking testing .
HIV / AIDS reduction strategies must be worked out in each Member State and these must focus on vulnerable groups and groups known to be at high risk .
The strategy shall also include information and education campaigns on the preventing , testing and treatment of HIV / AIDS .
We must recognise that increased investment in research and development for more effective therapeutic and preventive tools , such as vaccines and microbicides , will be essential to securing the long-term success of HIV and AIDS responses .
Discrimination against people living with HIV / AIDS must be effectively outmoded across the European Union .
The struggle against HIV / AIDS must not result in any discriminatory effect on HIV-positive citizens , including restrictions that impact on their freedom of movement .
The cross-party EP resolution tackles all the situations together .
The aim is common and the enlarged Europe can become the initiator of enhanced international cooperation on evidence-based HIV / AIDS early diagnosis and early care in the near future .
I am convinced that , if early diagnosis and an early care system work as a pilot programme , it may be possible to use it as a common European tool for other health-related policies .
I am really thankful to all my colleagues who supported this initiative and worked on it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , ever since I had the honour of drafting the report on combating HIV / AIDS within the EU and neighbouring countries , I have been very committed to this issue , with all its implications and ramifications , of people living with HIV .
One year ago , in the framework of the conference ' HIV in Europe 2007 ' , participants developed a comprehensive call to action on measures regarding how to effectively tackle HIV / AIDS in Europe .
Some elements of this call are now also reflected in this joint motion for a resolution .
The aim of this resolution is to contribute to the fight against HIV / AIDS on a political level .
Therefore , it calls on the Council and the Commission to formulate a comprehensive strategy on HIV to promote early diagnosis , ensure early care and communicate the benefits of earlier care to all European citizens .
It calls on the Commission to commit substantial resources to deliver the above-mentioned strategy and asks Member States to step up information and education campaigns on prevention , testing and treatment .
I am aware that the Commission is planning to bring forward a new communication on combating HIV in the EU and the neighbourhood and also that Commissioner Vassiliou confirmed her personal commitment to take further action in this field .
To conclude , this situation needs to be urgently tackled .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been working as a doctor fighting AIDS for 21 years and every year I still hear the same debates .
From a clinical viewpoint , the situation is very clear : we have about 30 anti-retroviral drugs that are able to prolong the lives of those with the HIV virus .
We do not have any drug that is able to destroy the virus and , as a result , in the West and in Europe , we have seen a decrease in mortality and an increase in the number of people living with the HIV virus , who can technically be described as ' potential vectors of infection ' .
This means that today , we have a greater risk of coming into contact with people with the HIV virus than in the past , because the number of HIV-positive survivors is increasing .
In the midst of all this , what is being done ?
Nothing .
The majority of European countries have not had any stable prevention campaigns for years .
Prophylactics cost a lot and let us give the words a precise , recognisable name : prophylactics cost a lot and are one of the main ways of preventing the HIV virus .
That is without mentioning damage-reduction projects aimed particularly at drug addicts to prevent the sharing of needles .
How many countries carry out projects of this kind nationally ?
In Italy , 50 % of confirmed AIDS diagnoses come at the same time as diagnoses of the HIV virus , which means that many people do not know they have HIV until they are ill .
Where are the campaigns for increasing access to tests , which should be free and anonymous ?
We know that if there is discrimination , people will try to hide , they will not go to have the test , and this will entail risks for their own health and the health of others .
One last point : today , again , the Council has spoken of aid to the global South , but I would like to know what happened to the proposals made by Parliament when we voted for the most recent version of TRIPS , which committed the Commission and the Council to increase funds for combating AIDS in the global South and , in particular , to transfer technologies and to transfer pharmacological aid .
Madam President , in 2006 over 86 000 newly-diagnosed HIV cases were reported , and over 13 000 AIDS cases were diagnosed in the WHO European region .
In Western Europe , 10 % of the new infections occurred amongst the 15-to-24 age group , and 25 % of those newly infected were female .
The main route of transmission was heterosexual contact , as the Commissioner has said .
In Eastern Europe , the main route of transmission was via drug injection .
Very worryingly , 27 % of new infections there occurred in the 15-to-25 age group , and 41 % of the newly-infected patients were female .
Currently , 30 % of HIV-infected patients do not know that they are infected and are responsible for over a half of all new HIV infections .
In addition , late diagnosis implies late use of anti-retroviral therapy , with increasingly limited opportunities for the drugs to have effect .
There is an urgent need for European-level guidance on HIV testing and counselling .
We must have comprehensive and flexible guidance on best practice in reporting , in testing , in treatment and in care .
In my own country , Ireland - while data on HIV and AIDS should be interpreted with caution owing to considerable under-reporting and late reporting - the total number of AIDS cases reported up to the end of December 2007 is almost 1 000 .
That figure is , however , expected to rise owing to that under-reporting .
The cumulative number of HIV infections reported in the same period was 4 780 .
Prevention strategies need yet again to be top of the news , on the front pages of our e-newspapers .
Complacency has set in .
Fear of infection has evaporated .
We need to spell out the facts , in an open and tolerant way .
John Bowis is so right when he says that while fewer people are dying of AIDS , more and more are living with it .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate the French Presidency for its commitment to the fight against AIDS and HIV , and also congratulate those who have spoken in the debate this evening .
It is a late-night debate on an issue that actually affects every single one of us every single minute of every single day .
As a gay man living in the 1970s and 1980s , I could so easily have contracted the HIV virus .
I was lucky .
I did not .
However , I watched as swathes of generations were cut down by a virus and cut down by discrimination and stigmatisation .
That is why the message we need to send tonight is that we are committed to making available treatment and to having early testing but , above and beyond all that , and the brilliant and excellent work Mr Bowis did as a Health Minister in a Conservative government , we have to say that what happens to you is as if it happens to me , or my daughter or my son .
People do not go for early testing for one simple reason : fear of the discrimination that they will have to live with - that stigmatisation .
I remember once in the early 1980s visiting a hospital to try and cheer up the patients - which I always failed to do ! - and walking into an HIV unit to find that in one of the beds was one of my close friends .
He could not even tell me that he was living and dying with an AIDS-related illness .
That situation still exists , not only in our countries , but also on other continents .
What happens on other continents affects us directly because , unless we engage with the communities most at risk , they will never hear the message .
A sex worker who gets trafficked into the EU is as vulnerable as a visitor from the EU to Africa or one of the other continents .
That is why I welcome this resolution .
1 December 2008 is the 20th anniversary of International AIDS Day , but little changes except the lives that accumulate , that go past and are destroyed .
That is why I congratulate the House , the Presidency and the Commission , and all of the speakers , for being here to send a signal that what happens to them happens to us .
Madam President , I have come to realise that HIV-positive people are sometimes treated like lepers , not knowing that with early diagnosis and care they may be active members of society for a number of years before AIDS develops and the disease starts seriously to affect their lives .
Such prejudice is a sign of ignorance .
It is extremely important to promote support and understanding towards the HIV-infected .
As a result , people would have more courage to have their viral infection diagnosed at an early stage instead of opting for a nuisance that might pose a threat to others .
It is vital that HIV-positive people can be open about their condition with no fear of being discriminated against , so we can increase awareness and tolerance in society of HIV and AIDS .
Madam President , HIV prevention and treatment capacity varies across different socio-economic and geopolitical settings .
Promoting the early diagnosis of HIV infection should be a component of all comprehensive approaches to addressing AIDS .
Even in countries where anti-retroviral treatment options are severely limited , important contributions to health can be achieved through the diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases , tuberculosis and other opportunistic infections among HIV-infected persons .
In a recent US research publication , it was found that the time between self-reported dates of HIV diagnosis and presentation for care had , in fact , increased .
The interval between diagnosis and presentation was substantially greater among injection drug users than among other risk groups .
Combined with this is a problem of the growing perception that AIDS is now a treatable condition , which undermines the public health message calling for frequent testing and prompt treatment of HIV .
Madam President , I thank Michael Cashman for the passion he has brought to this debate .
I am very glad that I stayed to listen to his words , and I hope that others will hear them and act upon them .
My concern in relation to this issue is that the fear we had in the 1980s has been forgotten and , as a result , we are taking our eye off the situation , when there is a whole generation of people who did not grow up in the 1980s who need to hear the message again .
The challenge for us all is to try and bring a message of prevention into the public domain while not bringing back the stigma that sometimes comes with it .
We have to be able to do this , because while testing is vital and treatment is absolutely vital for those who have the disease , we also want to stop people getting AIDS , living with it and tragically dying from it .
Madam President , Commissioner Potočnik , ladies and gentlemen , this is a truly fascinating and , at times , moving debate .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Cashman for his striking account , and I know that he has often been in contact with Mrs Bachelot , who apologises that she cannot be here this evening and who has said that we must act as though we were all affected and that we must work with those communities that are most at risk .
Mr Savi has also said that people should be able to talk freely about their condition .
Mr Burke emphasised the value of tolerance and the importance of equality of access .
Mrs McGuinness said , very pertinently , that we must not forget what happened during the 1980s .
I should like to come back to what Mr Bowis said - and I believe this can be a common approach with full support - which is that an increasing number of people are living with AIDS now , and that there are increased levels of resistance to anti-retrovirals .
We must therefore accept these two phenomena and because of this , we must , for the reasons you have given , oppose all forms of discrimination even more strongly .
Secondly , we must do all we can , as all have agreed , to ensure that early diagnosis is available .
Mrs Gurmai was entirely right to emphasise the fragility of women 's situations and the need to promote prevention in particular .
Mrs Doyle stressed the fact that the virus is developing in young people and that efforts at prevention must be strengthened while ensuring that freedom of movement is not hampered , and Mrs Gurmai agreed with this .
These aspects all seem to me to be extremely important ; transparency , Mr Cashman 's remarks about anonymity , free medical care , improved distribution of condoms , equal access to testing for all population groups .
The remarks of Mr Agnoletto , whose expertise in this field is widely known , told me that retroviral drugs will prolong life but that no drug could cure the disease , which means that we must improve preventative measures , whatever the cost .
Mr Bowis also added that it is necessary to strengthen research and development .
I believe that these are the aspects on which we should continue to work together , that we have the necessary resources , and I completely agree with Mr Andrejevs about the proposed resolution which aims to develop all aspects of early treatment .
I believe this debate will encourage us to remain alert and vigilant , to combat all forms of discrimination and to act on what has happened in the past , and not to act as though the situation has returned to normal .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I took part in a conference either at the beginning of this week or last week - sometimes I am probably like you these days , a bit lost in time .
It was a conference on poverty-related diseases .
Of course , HIV and AIDS are among the three big killers nowadays , malaria and tuberculosis being the second and the third .
Every year , five million people still die from these three diseases globally , which is the equivalent of the population of Denmark disappearing every year .
The problem is so clearly still present that it would simply be immoral not to give enough attention to it .
We have to do everything possible on the preventive campaigns .
We have to do more because we have slept a bit there .
We have to do everything possible to ensure early identification if somebody is infected .
We have to do more to find a cure ; we have to do more about taking care .
Since , as you know , I am responsible for financing research in the Commission , I can clearly give a commitment that we will also , in future , use our funds to actively search for an HIV-AIDS vaccine .
We have one excellent project which has now been running for many years .
It is called the EDCTP .
It is the clinical trials partnership with the sub-Saharan countries .
It had a lot of problems at the beginning but now it is really running smoothly and only last year , in 2007 , we gave a commitment here ; the Member States are working here together with the Commission .
All the Member States are cooperating with African member states in building their capacity .
In one year alone , they committed between EUR 80 million and EUR 90 million and this is , of course , doubled because we commit the other half .
So research should continue in this area too .
Just as Commissioner Vassiliou , my colleague , is committed in her area , I am also committed in my area to continue in the search .
One thing which was not mentioned here today , and I think it should be mentioned , is the importance of the neighbourhood policy and structural cohesion policy , because these are precisely the countries in Europe or in our neighbourhood where this is a critical issue .
This could and should also be used for these purposes .
To conclude : in simple terms we have a moral obligation as human beings to take action .
I am really happy that our voice today was so clear .
It was so united and even passionate .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November 2008 .
Amendment of the single CMO Regulation ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Parish , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the amendment of the single CMO regulation - C6-0314 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , we are tonight talking about the single CMO on wine .
We actually very much support the idea of bringing all the common market organisations together into one organisation .
However , we are concerned that we can identify exactly where the chapters on wine are , that we can access them properly and that , in the future , when we are dealing with wine and Member States are dealing with wine , that you do not open up the whole 20 odd chapters - which are included in the whole single CMO - at the same time .
We have now had many meetings with the Commission to get reassurance on this .
At the moment , you are probably at the stage of bringing all these CMOs together .
We are seeking reassurance that we will be able to get the information we need .
The industry itself , of course , is also concerned that it will be able to identify the rules within the single CMO .
There is no doubt that the Commission is telling us that this will mean a reduction in bureaucracy .
We very much welcome that , but we want reassurance that this is exactly the case .
We have been told that the technical organisations that give information on wine to the Commission will be the same as they were previously and this will now work within the single CMO , so - provided this is the case and that we can actually go on to a computerised system in the future and identify all the regulations - we welcome this proposal .
But we must be assured , at the end of the day , that this will actually be beneficial for the whole industry .
I think there will be Members tonight who will be seeking that reassurance from the Commission .
We look forward to the Commission giving us these answers .
I actually think that the way forward is to reduce bureaucracy in the Commission and in Europe .
What we seek now is those reassurances .
I welcome the single CMO .
I am sure there will be other Members here who have comments to make .
What is absolutely apparent is that we must get this voted on now so that Parliament gives its opinion and the Commission can come forward and conclude this .
I therefore recommend this to the House .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur and Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Parish , and the members of the Committee on Agriculture , for the report .
I could be very short and just reassure you but I have to read the speaking points .
We have been working very hard at simplifying the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
A single common market organisation ( CMO ) covering all agricultural sectors is a keystone of this effort .
It allows for streamlining legislation across sectors whilst taking into account the specifications of particular products .
It has also substantially reduced the volume of CAP legislation .
This Commission proposal aims at completing the single CMO project by integrating the wine sector also .
Without wine , the single CMO would simply remain incomplete .
We would stop part way through the process and lose many of the benefits of the projects .
We have always intended to include wine .
Indeed , both the initial single CMO proposal and the recent wine reform were drafted and adopted on that basis .
I am glad to say that the European Parliament has always fully endorsed the single CMO project , including the integration of fruit and vegetables and wine after the completion of the reforms in those sectors .
The single CMO , and its management committee , has been working very well for other sectors and there has been no particular criticism of it .
The proposal for integration might seem complex at first sight .
But this is inherent in the nature of amending legislation .
After incorporation , consolidated versions of the single CMO will become available , which will show very clearly the wine provisions .
The integration of the single CMO will not make any substantive changes to the policy decided in the wine reform .
The services of my colleague , Mrs Fischer Boel , will work hard with the European Parliament and the Council to ensure that this is the case .
We did this very successfully during the integration of the equally complex fruit and vegetables sector .
I would therefore ask you to help the Commission , to help my colleague , to continue her and our simplification work and give a positive opinion on this proposal .
Madam President , Commissioner , I must say that I am disappointed by your remarks because we have entered into discussions with the Commission on the basis of what Neil Parish has said .
I had hoped for something more concrete than simply the constant repetition of the fact that it will become simpler .
It will not become simpler .
A common market organisation for wine will be the 21st market organisation in an extensive series .
The objective of making things simpler by reducing bureaucracy is not something that I or the wine growers of Europe are able to recognise .
In future , everyone who wants to find out something about the wine sector must search through a long regulation , the common market organisation for all the agricultural products , which previously consisted of 204 articles and an appendix that is twice as long , to find all the points which refer to wine , across 98 articles with 21 headings and the 10 accompanying appendices .
This is not a reduction in bureaucracy , Commissioner .
This is bureaucracy in its purest form .
I call on the Commission to at least simplify the technical applications , because it is possible to do so .
Younger colleagues of mine , such as Anja Weisgerber , tell me that it must be possible .
Please could the Commission consider this ?
A technical simplification would include , for example , a search tool on the Commission 's website which would allow people to download and print only those parts of the common market organisation which are relevant for their particular agricultural products .
Neither wine growers nor milk producers are interested in the special regulations on fruit and vegetables or hemp , and vice versa .
We must make use of these technical possibilities in order to make things simpler .
In future , whenever a change is made in one agricultural area , there is the possibility that changes will be made in another area .
This means that when an amendment is made in the milk sector and the single CMO is modified , all farmers and wine growers must make sure that a change has not been quickly pushed through in their area .
I would like to ask two specific questions , Madam President .
Commissioner , in future who will be the monitor ? ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , the single CMO Regulation has been in force since December 2006 .
The Commission describes this as an essential component in the plans to streamline and simplify the common agricultural policy .
Some people , myself included , regard this statement as highly debatable .
However , I do not believe that this is the time or the place .
We had a debate at the time and yet , despite this Regulation having only been in force for a few months , we are now voting on its amendment .
Today we are adding even more pages by incorporating Regulation ( EC ) No 479 / 2008 on the common organisation of the market in wine .
This Regulation will be repealed by the present proposal and its substance will be fully incorporated into the single CMO Regulation .
This sector has conveyed to us , myself included , its concern about the wine CMO articles being scattered among the various chapters of the single CMO Regulation and about the risk of this diluting the specific nature of this product .
We believe that this incorporation is actually inevitable and we have all had the opportunity to read the letter sent by the Commissioner to the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Parish , assuring him that this legislative measure will not fundamentally alter the rules in this sector .
This should be solely a technical incorporation which will in no way affect the content .
As a result , while understanding and sharing some of the misgivings , I can only support Mr Parish 's report .
Madam President , we are actually voting here for a provision which will incorporate winegrowing legislation into the provisions for the common organisation of agriculture on a principle of ' scattered tea ' .
Wine legislation , despite its fundamentally specialist nature , must , in other words , be randomly sprayed between lamb , cereals , goats , fruit and vegetables .
The Federation of Winegrowers from the Czech Republic has pointed out that a small producer from South Moravia with an output of perhaps 2 000 litres of wine will find it hard to deal with the enormous , impenetrable and widely-scattered body of legislation applying to his wine .
I have received requests for help , not only from our 20 000 strong federation of winegrowers but also from the federations of winegrowers in Spain , France , Italy and Germany which belong to the Assembly of European Wine Regions ( AREV ) .
The Commission , however , has had the temerity to turn a blind eye to this .
The DG AGRI insisted that it knew nothing and that winegrowers were happy .
And now that Commissioner Boel has conceded that winegrowers are not happy , she tells us that nothing can be done .
Something can actually be done , however , because we are the Parliament .
Let us either create a transparent chapter for wine within agricultural legislation or reject the report .
We must not allow arrogant officials to burden the lives of winegrowers , who themselves , through their taxes , help to pay the wages of the same officials .
( ES ) Madam President , the European Commission has presented this amendment to the single CMO Regulation , saying that this will now include wine in a new presentation that supposedly tries to avoid paperwork and red tape .
However , producers tell us that it will create more confusion , that it makes them concerned about a lack of legal certainty , and that it will not change the basis of the wine CMO ( as laid down by law , this could not actually happen without passing through this House , even if only for the purpose of consultation ) .
In any event , it must be said that the wine CMO is more than a market CMO .
It involves other requirements , such as the labelling issue .
Therefore , if milk is not the same as vegetables , and vegetables are not the same as cereals , and clearly cereals are not the same as wine , why are we putting them together as if they had some connection ?
I believe that this proposal has some technical shortcomings which , as I have said , have been denounced by producers .
I wonder what will happen now if , for example , a proposal is made to amend part of this single CMO Regulation .
Will this open the door to all the other sectors ?
Will it be possible to amend a sector without us realising ?
Will the door be open to the amendment of each and every one of the sectors included ?
I believe that we cannot move a motion of confidence in the European Commission if the Commission does not guarantee that , firstly , there will be a search engine - as requested by Mrs Klaß - guaranteeing producers security , speed and confidence when searching the Regulation and , secondly , if the Commission does not guarantee that there will be legal certainty so that a door cannot be opened or left open constantly to the amendment of any CMO which is included .
With this proposal , the European Commission is presenting a fait accompli , but they cannot say that we did not warm them that this would be a mistake and that it would not , in any way , avoid paperwork or red tape , but that it will actually create more paperwork and red tape and also more legal uncertainty , which is what is worrying producers most .
( FR ) Madam President , under a pretext of simplification , the European Commission is relentlessly pursuing integration of all CMOs for all products , from wheat to chicken , from fruit and vegetables to tobacco , into a single CMO .
The result was a large tome amounting to several hundred pages , in which one could seek the pertinent information in vain .
As has already been said , the wine sector , because of its extremely specific requirements , has been subject to very detailed regulation , which differs from that pertaining to other products and which ensured clarity and transparency .
Because of this , it was understood that the wine CMO would remain separate .
However , today it appears that the wine CMO has been swallowed up in this large volume .
The Commission does not wish to let go of this issue , as wine and wine products are the last to remain outside this tangle that is the single CMO .
If it is legally impossible to take a step backwards , and if we must submit to this for reasons that are not entirely reasonable , Madam President , I would at least like to see Mrs Klaß 's suggestions followed .
Madam President , I really will not take a minute because , being from Ireland , I have not been lobbied by wine producers .
I think there is a general concern about the pulling together of so many different sectors in a single CMO .
We really will not know if it works until it is done .
I will therefore listen to the concerns of those who know more about the wine sector , while realising that we do have to move this process on .
I hope that we will get better reassurances from the Commission because we do need to listen to the concerns of the producers .
( PL ) Madam President , we are including wine market regulations in a general regulation covering all markets , which had been adopted at an earlier date .
Will this be better for wine producers ?
Let us hope that it will represent a true simplification and reduction of the existing administrative burden imposed on farmers .
The common agricultural policy health check adopted today is also intended to limit controls and reduce the administrative burden on farmers .
The consolidation of regulations relating to very specific markets into a single regulation was also a debatable point , but has been agreed .
It would be worth considering whether we really need to include in it the wine market , which is a highly specific market functioning according to an individual formula in terms of production , processing and traditions .
( DE ) Madam President , you have just switched off my microphone and therefore I am taking the opportunity of using the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure to reformulate my questions .
I wanted to ask the Commission specifically , who in future will be monitoring existing legislation when the common market organisation is amended and who will be making sure that nothing is pushed through in other areas , for example in the area of wine when we are talking about milk ?
My second specific question is as follows : Can the Commission put in place the technical requirements to simplify management of the system , on the internet or in a portal , to allow users to access each market area separately , such as wine , milk , fruit and vegetables ?
Those were my questions . Thank you , Madam President .
Madam President , we are all well aware that the creation of the single Common Market Organisation is an attempt to improve transparency and to streamline and simplify legislation on the Common Agricultural Policy .
Most sectors have already been successfully incorporated into the CMO .
Like Mrs McGuinness , I do not come from a wine-growing area , so I will be very careful what I say - thank you Mrs Lulling .
I support Mr Parish 's view that the wine sector should now be included in the amendment , and while I understand the concerns expressed by some colleagues , I feel we should be aiming to complete this technical process , which will ultimately mean a reduction in red tape for farmers .
That has got to be good .
For wine-growing farmers , it will be a bonus at the end of the day .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to thank all the contributors to this debate .
I would like to reiterate the importance of this proposal in the simplification of the CAP .
The concerns you raised seem to be quite similar to those expressed at the very start of the single CMO project .
But I think that experience has been quite reassuring .
The single CMO is currently working really well .
The CMO for wine was never simple , to be quite straightforward .
On the contrary .
What we are proposing is , in fact , bringing more clarity and credibility - to the extent , of course , it is possible - on the basis of a very complex existing text of the wine reform itself .
No substance changes to the CMO wine reform will be done .
We are talking about technical - and only technical - adjustments .
There will be separate chapters .
There will be issues unique to the wine sector which will be kept intact in the appropriate place of the single CMO , like those on production potential , support programmes , designations of origin , GI and traditional terms , labelling and presentation , oenological practices .
But there will also be issues which are common to wine and other sectors , such as the provisions on trade with third countries or state aids , which will be combined into a single simple provision .
I would also like to add that the possibility of using our search engines was mentioned .
EUR-Lex has a search engine that allows extraction of all provisions from the single CMO that mention the word ' wine ' .
But , of course , from a technical point of view , it is not yet possible at this stage to provide for a consolidated electronic version of the whole wine CMO extracted from the consolidated single CMO .
Of course , however , this should be possible when completed .
I should also mention in the context of the questions of the honourable Members of Parliament that there is no possibility that wine issues would get mixed up in reforms with the other sectors .
This is not a realistic prospect , simply , in practice .
It is hard to see why a proposal on , for example , the dairy sector should somehow attract the attention of wine policymakers .
In any event - from a purely legal point of view - integration into a single regulation does not change the situation .
What would matter would be the substance of any changes proposed , not the precise legal framework in which they were proposed .
To finish , I think we need to take the final step to complete the single CMO .
I would therefore like to underline that the determination of the Commission to do so is very strong .
But it is truly about simplification ; it is truly about transparency ; it is nothing more than that .
rapporteur . - Madam President , the proof of the pudding is in the eating , as they say , so we look forward to the Commission actually delivering on what it is saying , because we will need this in an electronic form in the future so that we can access it .
The Commission is promising that it will bring everything together in the one CMO , meaning that when we want to look into wine , we will be able to do so and will not be accessing the milk CMO at the same time , thereby reducing bureaucracy .
We have had all these assurances tonight , and most of us will vote in favour tomorrow because we have had those assurances .
As I said , we then look forward to checking what happens .
We take the assurances of the Commission in the good faith in which they have been presented tonight , and look forward to working together on these CMOs - or rather on the one CMO - in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November 2008 .
Situation in the bee keeping sector ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission ( B6-0480 / 2008 ) by Mr Parish , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the situation in the bee keeping sector .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would first of all like to thank Astrid Lulling very much because it is very much on her initiative that we are presenting this .
As Chair , I will be presenting the report here tonight because we are extremely concerned about the situation regarding bees .
What is happening to bees is very important to Europe - to the world , in fact .
For the last two years running a third of honey bees in the USA have mysteriously died .
In 2007 , some 800 000 colonies were wiped out .
In Croatia , five million bees disappeared in less than 48 hours .
In the UK , one in five honey bee hives is falling and , around the world , commercial beekeepers are reporting losses of up to 90 % since 2006 .
What is happening and just how serious is it for us and the future of mankind ?
Albert Einstein predicted that man would only have four years of life left if the bees disappeared from the Earth , so we need to take this very seriously .
If you look at honey bees , they are responsible for pollinating plants and flowers which provide about a third of all the food we eat .
They are nature 's top dog when it comes to pollination and without them we can say goodbye to soya beans , onions , carrots , broccoli , apples , oranges , avocados , peaches and many other foods .
There would be no more strawberries .
You can imagine how Wimbledon would not be able to survive without strawberries !
We would not have lucerne , which is used in cattle feed .
We are therefore absolutely dependent on the honey bee .
Of course , they also pollinate cotton so we would not have any clothes either .
We really do have to take this matter very seriously .
In China , for instance , there are virtually no honey bees in some regions and they are having to pollinate a lot of crops by hand .
The 90 commercial crops grown worldwide which rely on pollination generate around GBP 30 billion a year .

Bees contribute over GBP 100 million a year to the UK economy and around EUR 400 million to the European economy , so you can see quite clearly that there is a huge problem .
Therefore I would ask the Commission - and if possible I want to be able to hand over some of my time to add to Astrid Lulling 's because she was very much the driving force behind this - whether it can draw together more money for research .
Having talked to the professional beekeepers and others , we know there is some mystery as to why bees are dying , partly because their condition has been very poor in the last few years and they seem to be dying literally like flies .
Also there is a problem with having the right chemicals in place to cure the diseases of bees .
I think as a Commission you need not only to make money available for research but also to draw together what all the Member States are doing .
It is essential that we act now .
We cannot wait until all the bees have died out because the problem will be incredibly serious .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you to Mr Parish and , of course , also to Mrs Lulling for this oral question and resolution on the EU beekeeping sector .
The Commission clearly recognises the importance that bees play in the EU 's ecology and its ecosystem .
The Commission is also aware of the reports made in several Member States concerning significant losses in bee colonies .
Let me go straight to your specific questions - there were quite some of them - and try to point out straightforwardly what the Commission is already doing in this sector .
As regards bee mortality and research , in February this year the Commission requested that the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) study the mortality in bees and its causes in the European Union .
EFSA collected information from Member States and now intends to analyse it in order to provide the Commission with a clearer picture of the epidemiological situation of bee colony collapse , and this would provide the basis for further action in this area .
Besides this EFSA action , the Commission is , and will be , supporting a number of research projects relating to honeybees in its Research Framework Programme .
If you are interested I can mention some of them later on .
Concerning ecological pollen zones , despite the fact that it seems difficult to set up zones as such , I would like to remind you that financial support is already granted for the efficiency of moving of beehives .
This measure , which is provided for by Council Regulation No 1234 / 2007 , is intended to assist the management of the movement of hives in the Community and provide locations where high concentrations of beekeepers can gather during the flowering season .
This measure may also include enrichment of apicultural flora in certain areas .
Concerning your third question , I would like to remind you that the placing on the market and authorisation of plant protection products is regulated by Council Directive 91 / 414 / EEC .
This Directive provides that pesticides may only be used if it has been demonstrated that they pose no significant risk of unacceptable effects to human and animal health , and the environment .
Therefore , this assessment also covers the acute and long-term risks to honey bees and their larvae and the tests applied are based on standards developed by intergovernmental organisations such as , for example , the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organisation , in which 47 governments collaborate .
It is important to note that the Community legislation is risk based .
It is evident that insecticides are , by their nature , toxic to bees .
However , their use may still be possible if exposure does not occur or is minimised to levels which do not generate harmful effects .
Classic examples of such risk mitigation measures are : well adapted agronomic practices , appropriate rates and timing of the applications ( for example in the evening after honeybee flight , or outside the flowering period of the crop and possibly other adjacent weeds ) , direct incorporation of the product in soil , uses in glasshouses inaccessible to bees or treatment of seeds in specialised facilities .
As regards the quality of the surface waters , the Water Framework Directive has established protection of all waters ; an obligation to achieve / maintain good water quality for all surface waters and groundwaters , by 2015 ; plus a prohibition of deterioration of water status ; an obligation to establish a monitoring system ; an obligation to develop the necessary plans and programmes by December 2009 , in broad public consultation with local municipalities , stakeholders and non-governmental organisations .
Concerning support to apiaries in difficulty , I would like to tell you that the Commission is glad to see that the number of hives increased between 2004 and 2007 - and this not counting enlargement .
Regarding losses of bees , you should know that , since 2004 , a new measure on restocking of hives has been added to the list of eligible measures in the national beekeeping programmes .
Therefore , it is now possible to compensate for losses of bees ( and production ) by funding activities to promote queen production , purchasing of bee colonies , or even purchases of hives .
I think that the question which you are raising is of course extremely serious and we have to take it with similar seriousness .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , when it is dangerous to delay , I can rely on the entire Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and its Chairman , my colleague Mr Parish .
I thank them for their quick , effective response to my initiative of an oral question with debate and resolution to the European Commission to deal with the apiculture health crisis .
In a situation in which bee colonies are becoming weaker and suffering excessive mortality , it is necessary to analyse all of the factors causing this increased bee mortality and to propose a plan of action to remedy this disastrous trend .
The Commission has just read to us a long paper about what it has already done , but I have to say that , in recent years , whilst I have been rapporteur on the apiculture situation - since 1994 - it has needed a lot of persuading to act , whilst with my colleagues I have strived to draw its attention to this alarming situation , which is widely known and which has been perfectly described , especially by my colleague , Mr Parish .
I do not have the time to repeat all that or to add anything but , as no one now dares deny that bee mortality is a deadly danger for our fruit and vegetable production , which is dependent on pollination , we demand that the Commission acts with greater persistence and more resources .
It must contribute to an analysis of the causes of this bee mortality and finally include research into and the fight against apiculture disease in the European veterinary policy .
It should promote the measures required to limit and remove the risk of an insufficient pollination and assure sufficient and diversified food production to meet human and livestock needs .
It must be understood that apiculture 's health crisis is as dangerous to human survival as the financial crisis is to the real economy .
I will not quote the figures , except for one world figure : the value of pollination to the cultivation which feeds mankind is estimated at EUR 153 billion .
The solutions we recommend are much less onerous than those mobilised for the financial crisis , and , even if we were finally to introduce the pollination bonus and financial assistance to beekeepers in difficulty to ensure the survival of bees in Europe , it would be peanuts in comparison with other budget lines .
If you have a billion to send to Africa without any checks - as you wish to do - to fight hunger , with all the disastrous consequences that would entail , you should be able to find some EUR 60 million to do something worthwhile here .
Madam President , as I have the office of rapporteur , may I still say something about the amendments ?
I have not used up Mr Parish 's speaking time ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I want to congratulate Mrs Lulling on the determination that she has shown in getting this issue , which some may feel is relatively minor , onto the agenda of this Parliament , albeit at such a late hour .
Beekeeping is a farming activity with important economic repercussions and beneficial effects on rural development and the ecological balance .
In my country , beekeeping involves around 27 000 producers who manage more than 2 300 000 hives .
This makes my country the leading honey producer in the European Union .
Spanish beekeepers , together with all other beekeepers , are facing problems deriving not only from the reduction in pollen and nectar , but also from the appearance of new diseases which are decimating hives .
The Commission should be working on a line of research into the origin of these diseases and , in this respect , a budgetary effort seems vital to us .
However , I want to add that imports - and I am referring to honey imports - must meet the same requirements as our products and offer full guarantees to consumers .
In this respect , good labelling of our products is fundamental and the Commission has an important role to play in this .
A high level must be maintained , in terms of both frequency and number of controls at border inspection points , to guarantee that no beekeeping products containing residues enter the European Union from third countries .
For many of our farmers , beekeeping supplements their almost always limited income .
It is also work which employs many women .
Honey occupies an important place at small fairs and markets and beekeepers have made a major effort to diversify their products , provide labelling , ensure better hygiene and health guarantees , and open new channels of distribution .
Commissioner , we cannot simply allow all these efforts to go to waste .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the beekeeping sector is not only a productive operation with age-old origins in the history of our agricultural activities , but currently it is one of the systems that is vital in maintaining the level of productivity of tree and herbaceous crops , thanks to cross-pollination .
I would like to point out that 80 % of plants grown produce fruit because of the pollen carried by bees , also ensuring genetic variation of species in reproduction .
It is clear that , at the moment , the beekeeping sector and its operations cannot be replaced and are the only way of maintaining biodiversity on target .
The products of the hives must increasingly frequently compete on the global market under competition conditions that lack transparency and through the mass importation of products , including those from outside the EU , which are not guaranteed .
It is not always possible to guarantee their quality , partly because of pesticides which are banned in Europe but are used outside .
For this reason , it is necessary to carry out labelling and to place the origin of the product on it .
I also believe it is important to point to the serious consequences for beekeeping operations of the virus , as a result of which over 50 % of the European beekeeping sector has been destroyed .
I ask the European Commission to make further efforts in terms of scientific research to find a way of dealing with this serious disease , by banning any type of phytosanitary treatment during flowering periods .
Madam President , Commissioner , natural wealth is decreasing before our very eyes .
Whole species are dying out , decimated by parasites , disease , chemicals and the irresponsible behaviour of humanity .
In many regions , ecological equilibrium has been disturbed and major , irreversible losses have occurred .
We witness with concern the mass extinction of bees , with hives falling silent one after another , and many species of plants dependent on pollination perishing with them .
The status of beekeeping determines the yields of as many as 84 % of plant species cultivated in Europe .
In this way , bees largely determine the abundance of food on our tables .
Bees are being decimated by disease and pests with which beekeepers cannot cope alone .
Additional funds are needed to control and study them .
Nor can beekeepers cope alone with protecting their markets and ensuring the viability of their products .
We therefore need to protect our internal market from the influx of poorer-quality third-country honey , frequently breaching public health requirements .
Beekeepers must also receive aid in the form of subsidies or cheaper sugar as well as large-scale promotional campaigns .
In summary , it is high time for us to start working like bees .
As a beekeeper , I can only wish that the European Commission would pattern itself on the bee , so that we do not have to wait for fifteen years for a sensible programme which Mrs Lulling has been striving so hard to promote .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would also pay tribute to Mme Lulling , who has been tenacious to say the least in promoting and bringing this issue to the floor of the Parliament .
Commissioner , I would also thank you for an impressive list of activities that the Commission is undertaking into this grave issue and , if anything , I think we are looking for a greater degree of funding and coordination as well .
There is a risk that different bits of the institutions are doing a lot of good work but we do not necessarily tie it together .
I think that is where this debate can shed some light .
It is a serious issue .
The miners of old took canaries down into the mines with them to warn of poisonous gases .
They warned of poisonous gases by dying .
That was bad news for the canaries but good news for the miners .
Our concern is that the bees of Europe are doing essentially the same sort of service for us .
A third of the EU 's food - one in three mouthfuls of food - can be linked to bee pollination .
There is a catastrophic decline in bees , and we must take action at European level .
Scientists are agreed that there has been a decline .
We have heard already how severe it has been , but we are less clear as to what has caused it .
Is it the use of pesticides ?
Is it climatic conditions ?
Is it parasites and mites and other diseases , perhaps beyond our control ?
Commissioner , I would also mention to you specifically the Bumblebee Conservation Trust at Stirling University in Scotland which has done groundbreaking work into this .
Europe is not short of expertise .
What we need to do is to tie it together .
I think the text before us has a number of concrete actions which would take us in that direction - particularly apicultural set-aside , biodiversity zones , even alongside roads and unproductive land , research on pesticides , surface water and consideration of aid .
As we have heard already , if we can find a billion euros to inflict on African development , I think we can find money to fund our own research .
It is right that we see EU action on this and - dare I say - this does constitute a pretty coherent plan B , where plan A , the common European agricultural policy , has failed Europe 's bees .
I do think we need to see a greater complementarity of actions already on-going to alleviate that situation .
( PL ) Madam President , beekeepers and bees are experiencing tremendous problems and need help .
We are witnessing a dramatic fall in the number of bee colonies , not only in Europe but throughout the world .
Unfortunately , the profitability of the profession is falling and , with it , young people 's interest in it .
There are several issues which we need to address as soon as possible .
First , we need to develop research into the parasites , diseases and viruses decimating these hard-working insects .
Second , we need to introduce testing of honeys imported from third countries .
All products must meet the appropriate quality requirements .
In addition , labels should carry information about countries of origin .
Third , we need to launch an information campaign explaining the beneficial influence of bees on the natural environment and of honey and other bee products on human health .
Due to the scope of the problem , we need to consider providing financial support to apiaries threatened with extinction .
The beekeeping community has been calling for cheaper sugar with which to feed the bees .
It would be worth considering the introduction of a special support system for the beekeeping sector , in view of its highly beneficial impact on the natural environment .
( PL ) Madam President , may I congratulate Mrs Lulling and thank her for her indefatigable and passionate concern for the interests of the European beekeeping industry .
It is a good thing that we are debating this problem , because beekeepers in Europe and throughout the world are alarmed and worried by the deaths of their bees .
Investigations of the causes of this phenomenon are under way .
Among the causes suggested by researchers is the possible impact of biotechnology and more specifically of the cultivation of genetically modified crops , which could have an adverse impact on the functioning of bees .
I would therefore like to ask the European Commission , which approves the cultivation of genetically modified crops in the European Union , the following question .
What are the relevant test results and what , in general , is the understanding of the impact of GMO on the condition of bees in Europe ?
Madam President , let me first of all begin by congratulating Astrid for her work on this issue .
As far as I am aware , she has been talking about bees now for quite a long time so I am glad to see that this resolution put forward by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has given Parliament a chance to debate the problem currently facing the beekeeping sector .
While this issue has attracted a lot of attention and publicity , possibly because it is somewhat of a novelty item , we are well aware that in reality , the problems which we are facing are very serious and could potentially have devastating consequences .
I am sure that I do not need to remind anyone of the importance of bees - and it has already been pointed out here tonight - not only for the production of important by-products such as wax and honey , but also for the role they play in pollination and the maintenance of healthy ecosystems .
Coming as I do from the county of Armagh in Northern Ireland , which was well known within the island as the Orchard County , where bees are very necessary to pollinate the apples , and I can say that it is already telling a tale in that particular area .
In this regard , the Commission urgently needs to step up its research on what exactly is causing such a sharp decline in the bee population and hopefully come forward with some solutions .
The situation will only deteriorate if we cannot find a way to improve bee health and reduce bee mortality and stop the colonies of bees dying and disappearing .
This is a source of great concern to all involved , not only within the whole of Europe , but even in the United States and beyond .
I recently addressed a beekeepers ' conference in my region of Northern Ireland and it reaffirmed to me , as I listened to the many contributions during that morning , the concern that the beekeepers have at the loss of their hives , especially during the winter period .
We need extra funds to develop through further R & D in an attempt to assess what is the reason for this calamity hitting the beekeepers .
If we are doing something wrong , we need to find it out urgently .
Is it pesticides , or some other reason ?
There may be lots of theories and such speculation , but the truth is we do not have the answer , and we need that and to be given the extra support .
Madam President , we know the importance of bees .
Everyone has spoken about it .
However , one of the issues that has not been addressed in the debate is the reality of a substantial trade in commercial bumblebees .
There is literally free movement of bees globally and , as far as I know , there is very little regulation of the movement of bees when there needs to be .
We do it in other live categories and in livestock , and we know that it works in terms of disease control .
The movement of bees has the potential to import the varroa mite , as has happened in Ireland .
There is now the problem of the small hive beetle , which is causing havoc for bee-keepers .
So we have a huge problem , to which we do not know the answer .
There are at least half a dozen reasons why these things may be happening , and research is absolutely necessary .
We need to coordinate that research across the European Union so that we find answers .
We also need to address the issue of beekeepers themselves , because it seems they are an ageing population , and we need more of them , not less .
Madam President , if Mrs Lulling will stay quite long enough for me to congratulate her , I will be delighted to do so on her consistent interest and support for apiculture in the European Parliament for some time now .
The decline in bee populations and the frightening implications for plant pollination and biodiversity generally deserve our full attention and we must support research and join with scientists worldwide to try and find the causes .
Parasitic infections , climate change , pesticides : we can only speculate at this stage .
Twenty five per cent of our food depends directly on bees , apart altogether from their contribution to maintaining our grasslands .
Regrettably , in Ireland , our only research centre in this area , in Clonroche in County Wexford , was closed down by the Irish government some years ago .
Therefore , I am not sure that Ireland can contribute ; we have the scientists and the knowledge , but we certainly do not have the support from the government .
I look forward to hearing from the Commission on how Europe and the European Union can support the research and what we are doing to date in this area .

- ( FR ) Madam President , as Mr Parish has had to leave , he has asked me to state our position on the amendments which reached us at the last minute .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has unanimously adopted the resolution , with all its amendments , which I considered in their entirety .
However , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which did not offer any sparkling contributions when the resolution was being discussed , is now making a last-minute attempt to restore its reputation by proposing four amendments .
The latter not only provide no new material , but would also confuse the text , which is currently coherent and legible .
Amendment 1 stems from an error in the German translation , since what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is proposing is exactly what I proposed but , as I said , the German translation of my recital is inadequate .
Amendment 2 is stating the obvious , Amendment 3 is unintelligible , and Amendment 4 duplicates paragraph 8 , which clearly calls for intensified research into the effects of pesticides on bee mortality , and furthermore states that authorisation for such products should be made dependent on this research , as is already the case .
I therefore suggest that these amendments be rejected , because they add nothing , and they would spoil a text that is clear and properly worded .
I insist on a good draft , because this resolution is very important , and we want it to be worded properly .
This is why we wish to reject these amendments .
( PL ) Madam President , the beekeeping debate in the European Parliament has attracted considerable interest from beekeepers .
As a beekeeper , I have personally met in Puławy with beekeepers who had travelled from all over Poland .
The asked me to put just one question to the European Commission , and to obtain a definitive answer - what can beekeepers actually count on in the coming years ? ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I truly believe that this was a very fruitful discussion with many ideas not only for my colleague but for the DG AGRI services , as well as for my services and others .
Many of the Directorates General other than DG AGRI are working on the issue we are discussing today : DG SANCO , DG Research and DG Environment .
It is really a multidisciplinary issue .
When we talk about how much funding is actually committed to this , I think that we will have to look at various other areas as well .
Let me come first to many of your questions concerning what we are doing , what is in the pipeline and what we actually mean when we talk about research in the bee sector .
In the Sixth Framework Programme , a specific target research project on food quality and safety priority was named ' Bees in Europe and Sustainable Honey Production ' ( BEE SHOP ) .
This gathers together nine European honey bee research groups specialising in honey quality , pathology , genetics and behaviour .
Do not be misled : FP6 projects are the ones that are already running ; FP7 projects are just starting .
In addition , the specific support action ' Bee Research and Virology in Europe ' ( BRAVE ) has enabled the organisation of two large multidisciplinary conferences , involving experts working in fundamental and applied research on bees - experts on virology , diagnosis , immunology and epidemiology - as well as international trade , policy formulation and disease risk assessment .
A call for proposals was published on 3 September this year , on the theme of food agriculture and fisheries biotechnology , on the identification of emerging honey bee pests and diseases , and the re-emergence of pathogens , aimed at elucidating the intimate mechanisms and reasons for the increased honey bee mortality .
So it is exactly linked to this topic and many of your questions .
The environmental aspects , including chronic exposure to pesticides , will also be taken into account .
The integrated project ALARM , on assessing large-scale environmental risks for biodiversity , is also funded under the Sixth Framework Programme and includes a module on pollinator loss .
ALARM will develop and test methods and protocols for the assessment of large-scale environmental risks in order to minimise negative direct and indirect human impacts .
Research will focus on assessment and focus of changes in biodiversity structure , function , dynamism of ecosystems - in particular risk arising from climate change , environmental chemicals , biological invasions and pollinator loss in the context of current and future European land-use betterance will also be assessed .
These are all current initiatives .
One thing which I would like to underline - since this was also stressed by your colleague - is that Europe is not short of expertise .
I think we have to be aware of this and also be fair .
At European Union level , we deal with 5 % - I repeat , 5 % - of European Union public money which is devoted to research .
So it is of the utmost important that we join forces and do as much as possible practically .
The creation of the European research area , which I fully support , is actually exactly this idea - that we all know what we are doing and that we join the scientific expertise which we already have across Europe .
This is certainly a missing element in Europe today .
I will ensure that the Commissioner responsible for research hears your calls for further research - that is me , but today I am in a different role .
One thing which I would also like to mention - because it was perhaps not fully understood in my introduction - is the EFSA full assessment on bee mortality and bee surveillance in Europe .
This was published on 11 August 2008 , so it is a new thing .
It is exactly the analysis of the programme which you are searching for and I think it is important that we all look at what we have before us .
I must also answer the colleague who asked about GMO crops .
The only GMO crop currently cultivated in the European Union is Bt-maize MON 810 .
Bt-maize , and Bt-toxin in general , have been extensively analysed with regard to the possible impact on bee health .
Forced feeding trials , where healthy bees are exposed to high doses of bt-toxin , have not shown any negative effect .
Overall , the overwhelming majority of studies show that this bt-maize pollen diet has no impact on bees .
I can add to this that the recently observed massive losses of bees , termed ' colony collapse disorder ' ( CCV ) , in North America and also in Europe do not appear to be related to the use of GMO crops as they are also reported from other areas where no GMO crops are grown .
For example , bee losses observed in southern Germany have been clearly attributed to poisoning by the pesticide Poncho Pro .
It also has a Latin name , which is so difficult that I would rather not read it out .
In conclusion , Commission actions will certainly continue and be strengthened .
They will help beekeepers to face the current difficulties and encourage them to continue their activity .
I also hope that will encourage new entrants to the profession since this activity plays an extremely important role , not only for our EU biodiversity , but also economically .
As regards my colleague Commissioner Fischer Boel 's direct responsibilities , she will continue to make sure that the national beekeeping programmes are used in the most efficient way .
However , in the first instance , it is up to the Member States to spend their budgets in an appropriate way .
Today we have EUR 26.3 million in European money each year .
This is doubled by adding the money from the Member States - but we are not spending it .
We are spending 80 % of that money .
Member States are not spending what is currently at their disposal .
Finally , the best solution to guarantee a future for the sector is to encourage consumption of EU honey .
Since 2004 , honey has been added to the list of eligible products for promotion on the internal market and several programmes have been accepted .
My answer was longer because I just wanted to make it clear to you that we are taking these actions seriously and that you should count on us - definitely also in my area - to continue to do so . Thank you for your attention and for staying so long .
I have received one motion for a resolution from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 November 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Bees are important to many different cultures in many different parts of the world .
Their universality has not come about by accident .
Beekeeping has been an important component of the economy since prehistoric times , that is to say since before the inception of written history .
In Spain , honey was gathered 6 000 years ago .
Today , the efforts of the bees and the beekeepers could go to waste due to the phenomena affecting the natural environment and also , indirectly , humanity .
In Europe , we still have people whose livelihood depends on their work and that of their bees .
They sell the honey they have themselves produced .
We should be happy that this is so .
Return to traditional forest beekeeping has also been attempted .
In Poland , these attempts were supported by beekeepers who had come from Bashkiria , because no one in our country remembered the ancient methods any more .
Beekeeping is of cultural , social and economic importance .
This is why we should protect European beekeeping .
Sadly , there is a lot to protect it against .
Economic threats , such as unfair competition by third countries , and threats to bee health , as well as biological threats such as diseases , parasites , environmental pollution and the unconsidered use of pesticides .
The European Commission and Member States should support the beekeeping sector , which is facing major challenges .
Beekeepers by themselves may find it hard to save biodiversity , to whose riches bees contribute so much .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will excuse the fact that I am a few minutes late .
Our former fellow Member Otto von Habsburg is celebrating his 96th birthday today .
He was a Member of the European Parliament from 1979 to 1999 .
His attendance record and the quality of his work was an example to us all .
I have just spoken to him on the telephone , which is why I am a couple of minutes late , and have congratulated him warmly on behalf of all you - I hope I am allowed to do this - and , of course , on behalf of his political friends from Bavaria on reaching his 96th birthday .
Financial support to Member States ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report - 2007
The next item is the presentation of the Court of Auditors ' Annual Report for 2007 .
President of the European Court of Auditors . - Mr President , it is an honour for me to be able to take part in your debate on the Court of Auditors ' annual report on the 2007 financial year , which I have already presented to the Committee on Budgetary Control on 10 November .
Overall , the Court 's audit opinion on the accounts is now unqualified - positive , if you wish - but the opinion on underlying transactions is broadly similar to that of last year .
On the accounts , the Court concludes that they give a fair presentation , in all material respects , of the financial position of the European Communities and cash flows at the year end .
Owing to the improvements that have taken place , the qualifications expressed last year are no longer necessary .
As regards the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions , the Court gives unqualified opinions for revenue , commitments and payments for ' economic and financial affairs ' and ' administrative and other expenditure ' .
As regards ' administrative and other expenditure ' , which accounts for EUR 8 billion in 2007 , the Court acknowledges the decisions and actions taken by the institutions to further improve financial management based on the recommendations made by the Court , including those taken by the European Parliament .
The Court will assess their impact in future years .
However , for ' agriculture and natural resources ' , ' cohesion ' , ' research , energy and transport ' , ' external aid , development and enlargement ' , and ' education and citizenship ' the Court concludes that payments are still materially affected by errors , although to different degrees .
Supervisory and control systems covering these areas are judged to be at best only partially effective , although in ' research ' and , at the level of the Commission , for ' external aid , development and enlargement ' , the Court notes certain improvements in the supervisory and control systems .
For ' cohesion ' which accounted for EUR 42 billion of budgetary expenditure , the Court estimates , based on the audit of a representative sample of transactions , that at least 11 % of the costs claimed should not have been reimbursed .
The most common reasons for errors were ineligible costs , over-declarations of money spent and serious failures to respect procurement rules .
For ' agriculture and natural resources ' , where EUR 51 billion was spent in 2007 , the Court found that ' rural development ' continues to account for a disproportionately large part of the overall error , while the error rate for EAGF expenditure is estimated to be slightly below the materiality threshold .
But why is this situation persisting , and why are the underlying transactions in a situation broadly similar to that of last year ?
Well , material levels of errors persist because there is a high level of inherent risk associated with many areas of European Union spending and weaknesses related to supervision and control .
Much of the budget , including in the areas under shared management , is disbursed to millions of beneficiaries across the Union , often under complex rules and regulations , based on the self-declarations of those who receive the funds .
These inherently risky circumstances lead to errors by them and also by those paying the funds .
To control these risks , there are several levels of supervision and control : first , at the level of beneficiaries ; second , to ensure that the arrangements to check claims are designed and operating effectively , and , finally , supervision by the Commission to ensure that all the systems are working as a whole .
As most errors occur at the level of the final beneficiaries , they can often only be detected reliably by detailed controls carried out on the spot .
Such checking is costly , and so , usually , only a small proportion of individual claims are covered .
Again , the Court 's audit work on the 2007 financial year found that Member States are not always effective in identifying the shortcomings in the arrangements for checking individual claims .
The Court also found some weaknesses in the Commission 's conformity clearance in agriculture .
In many areas of the budget , mechanisms exist for recovering incorrectly made payments from beneficiaries or , where Member States have incorrectly administered expenditure schemes , ' disallowing ' some expenditure , i.e. refusing to finance it from the budget .
However , there is not yet reliable information on the impact of corrective actions , and the Court concluded that corrective actions cannot yet be considered effective in mitigating errors .
All of this said , it is fair to acknowledge that the Commission has made significant efforts since 2000 to address the weaknesses in supervision and control , mainly through developing and implementing an internal reform programme and , in 2006 , launching an action plan to improve the supervisory and control systems across the Union .
Annual activity reports and declarations , a key part of the reform programme , including those relating to cohesion and agriculture , now present a picture that is more in line with the Court 's own assessments , but some reservations still appear to underestimate the problems .
Concerning its 2006 action plan , in spite of progress noted by the Commission , the Court finds that it is still too early for their impact on the legality and regularity of underlying transactions to be felt .
For example , 2007 was only the first year for which Member States were required to produce an annual summary of available audits and declarations .
These can , in time , as outlined in the Court 's Opinion 6 / 2007 , stimulate improved management and control of European Union funds .
But they do not yet provide a reliable assessment of the functioning and effectiveness of the systems .
This is the current situation .
But , looking forward , we need to ask what more should be done , and which measures for the future should be considered .
The Court suggests that any such measures need to take the following considerations into account .
First , the benefits from efforts to reduce errors need to be weighed against the costs .
Second , all participants in the budget process need to recognise that some risk of error is unavoidable .
Third , the appropriate level of risk for the different individual areas of the budget needs to be agreed on at the political level by the budget / discharge authorities in the name of the citizens .
Fourth , schemes that cannot be satisfactorily implemented at an acceptable level of cost and with tolerable risk should be reconsidered .
Finally , due consideration needs to be given to simplification , not least in areas such as rural development and research , because well-designed rules and regulations that are clear to interpret and simple to apply decrease the risk of error and enable streamlined , cost-effect management and control arrangements .
The Court , therefore , encourages the Commission to conclude its analysis on the cost of controls , and on the levels of risk inherent in the different spending areas .
The Court also recommends the Commission continue in its efforts to improve its monitoring and reporting , including working with Member States so that effective use of the annual summaries can be made in the annual activity reports , and allowing its follow-up of actions to improve recovery systems .
In addition to simplification and making use of the concept of tolerable risk , in its response to the Commission communication ' Reforming the Budget , Changing Europe ' , the Court suggests applying the principles of clarity of objectives , realism , transparency and accountability when designing arrangements for European Union spending .
The Court also encourages the political authorities to explore the scope for recasting expenditure programmes in term of outputs and to critically consider the appropriate level of national , regional and local discretion in managing them .
To conclude , while acknowledging that progress is being made , the Court underlines that further improvements in the financial management of the European Union will depend on the success of ongoing and future measures to reduce risks to an acceptable level and develop cost-effective systems to manage them .
In times of financial turbulence and economic instability , the role of the Court is even more important and relevant .
As the external auditor of the European Union , it is our obligation to act as the independent guardian of the financial interests of the citizens of the Union .
In presenting this report , it is our objective to contribute towards transparency and promote accountability , both of which are considered essential to securing the trust of European Union citizens in its institutions that keep the Union functioning and give it the direction for the future .
President Silva Caldeira , I would like to thank you for your report and for the always very constructive cooperation between you , and the Court , and the European Parliament .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the Court 's annual report .
I would like to underline the very constructive cooperation we have enjoyed with the Court .
There is one piece of really good news in the report : the Court has given the accounts a completely clean bill of health , what the auditors call an ' unqualified opinion ' .
This is a remarkable achievement in only the third year of the new accounting system .
There is a second piece of very good news : the Court acknowledges that we are strengthening our supervisory systems .
In 2007 , for the first time , there is not a single chapter with a red card on control systems from the external auditor .
Many efforts are ongoing in this field .
I would like to highlight the annual summaries of existing audits in Structural Funds submitted by Member States for the first time last spring .
The Court recognises these efforts , even if results are not yet translated into significantly reduced error rates on the ground .
The Commission is encouraged by this .
It is a fact that on individual transactions the picture remains mixed .
For the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund , the largest volume of agricultural expenditure , the Court recognises that this year again the error rate is below materiality level .
The same is not true for the rest of the chapter on natural resources , where rural development is prone to a high level of errors .
For cohesion funds too , the Court still finds far too many errors .
The Commission is giving the highest priority to reducing these error rates , and it is not shying away from taking a tough stance if needed .
In 2008 we have already imposed financial corrections on the ERDF and ESF - the cohesion funds - for EUR 843 million and an estimated EUR 1.5 billion more is in the pipeline .


Allow me to recall that , as far as errors in the underlying payments are concerned , the bar is set very high .
At least 98 % must be error-free .
Nevertheless , we are getting closer : the auditors now say that for all budget areas but one as much as 95 % or more of the payments are free from serious financial error .
For external aid and internal policies , such as transport and energy , as well as education and citizenship , the Court does note improvements .
Administration and economic and financial affairs fare even better .
These areas are in direct management by the Commission , which may partly explain why efforts undertaken have a more immediate impact .
So , to summarise : in the Commission 's view the Court of Auditors ' annual report for 2007 shows that there is steady , gradual progress .
We have come a long way over the last five years .
Looking at the progress made , I can assert that the Commission has absolutely no regrets about having set itself the objective of achieving a positive declaration of assurance concerning the underlying transactions .
We hope that the European Parliament will recognise the positive developments and continue to support efforts for simplification , better management , and more accountability from the Member States .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the European Commission , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , ladies and gentlemen , my first words are to thank you , Mr President of the Court , for the immense task you have accomplished with the Court 's auditors ; I think this is an important document for our information .

As we know , this discharge is the first discharge for the financial perspective 2007-2013 .
It is the first with the new management , certification and audit control system introduced by the Commission .
Finally , it is the last for the period of office coming to a close , because we are starting six months of work and we shall be voting in April before the European elections , at a time when the Commission has promised us a positive statement of assurance .
It is now 14 years since we have had a positive statement of assurance , which gives the European Parliament cause for concern .
First , as regards the accounts , I am told that this is an unqualified opinion .
Why was Galileo not consolidated ?
And I cannot hide the fact that I shall never get used to accounts with negative equity of 58 billion .
That is one of my concerns .
So this is good news .
We must be glad that , for administrative expenditure , we have a positive opinion , with low error rates and , from what we have been told , no fraud .
However , the Member States have poor shared management in agriculture , cohesion and the Structural Funds , where there are too many errors - over 60 % sometimes in some Member States .
The Council is not here and it would be interesting to know what the Member States and the Council think about this situation , when they do not sign the national declarations and given that , with the present difficulties in public finances , the citizens will be demanding .
I think the President is right and we should consider this procedure of discharge with the committees , the Commission , the Council , Parliament , the national parliaments and the national courts of auditors , which are very conspicuous by their absence from this debate .
I should like , with your permission Mr President , to take thirty seconds ' speaking time as rapporteur to express my astonishment , as my fellow Members have done , at the fact that the Council is absent .
However , I have understood , Mr President of the European Court of Auditors , that you are to present your report to the Ecofin Council in a few days ' time and that , as a result , the Council cannot express an opinion before there has been an exchange of views between the various Member States .
This being so and as the finger is being pointed at the Member States on shared management , I trust we shall receive the Council 's opinion quickly and I shall take the liberty , Mr President of the European Parliament , of requesting a written question at question time asking for a prompt opinion from the Council , once it has been able to have an exchange of views on this excellent report by the European Court of Auditors .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would very much like to congratulate the Court of Auditors for the work which it is submitting to Parliament in the form of the Annual Report for 2007 .
In a series of constantly improving annual reports , in my opinion this is the best report that the Court of Auditors has so far presented .
It is more informative , more colourful , so to speak , and clearer .
Members of the Court of Auditors , I have noted with satisfaction that you have resisted the temptation to add a touch of populism to this year 's report .
On the basis of a number of different special reports and , in particular , this report , we will now have to evaluate whether the work done by the Commission in 2007 using European taxpayer 's money was satisfactory or not .
So far there have been a number of encouraging presentations , in particular from the Commissioner for the Cohesion Fund .
The Commissioner for Research has also indicated that the criticism from this House and from the Court of Auditors in last year 's report has fallen on fertile ground .
One area where things are still not working well is the cooperative effort to control the European budget which Member States are withdrawing from .
Four Member States - Denmark , the Netherlands , the UK and Sweden - are giving an encouraging example of active cooperation .
It is satisfying to see that a national court of auditors , such as that in Germany , is beginning to concern itself at a national level with the European money being spent in Germany and we hope that there will be a political debate on this subject .
Since the Wynn and Mulder reports we have been attempting to bridge the gap in the treaty between Article 274 and Article 5 by means of this requirement for national statements of assurance .
While we are discussing this subject , Commissioner Kallas , I would be happy for the Commission to take a more helpful and active role in standardising these reports .
This is something which your positive approach should help to bring about one of these days .
When we pass judgment on the quality of the Commission 's work in our discharge , we will inform the taxpayers whether or not it is acceptable in overall terms .
If we expect professionalism from other institutions , we must also take a more professional approach ourselves .
I believe that it is both intolerable and ludicrous to hold debates in this House about whether this committee can continue to be a so-called neutral committee or not .
It is not acceptable for a control committee to be regarded simply as a sort of add-on committee , because that is not professional .
The times have long gone when the budget came under consideration in one place for six months or so and then for the rest of the year another committee was responsible for budget control .
We have not even looked at all the agencies yet and we are supposed to assure our taxpayers that everything is functioning correctly .
We need professionalism from the other institutions , but we as a Parliament must also make an effort , otherwise we will not be able to stand up in front of the taxpayers .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Court of Auditors for the report , and I too have noticed an improvement every year , in that the report is more legible and set out in a more readily understood format , amongst other things .
Indeed , there is an improvement every year , albeit only a slight one .
We can now to some extent take the wind out of the sails of the euro sceptics by saying that the accounts have been approved for the first time .
If we look more closely at the improvements in the accounts , though , they are only minor .
We have managed to get through by the narrowest of margins .
If we read what was written in 2006 and 2007 , then there is not that much difference , really , although there is an improvement .
The Commission underlines that , over the years , budget implementation has improved considerably .
It claims that , in 2002 and 2003 , only 4 % of expenditure was approved , compared to over 45 % at the moment .
This is , indeed , a considerable improvement , mainly due , I fear , to the drastic changes in agricultural policy .
Had agricultural policy continued as before , I doubt very much that we would have achieved an approval margin of over 40 % .
This is a matter of great concern , because the Commission 's core techniques do not yet meet international standards and still require major improvements .
Progress over the past four years has been too slow to my mind .
It is regrettable that we cannot yet measure the results of the action plan .
Initially , the Commission put a great deal of effort into it .
It was an excellent method , as we have all acknowledged , but sadly we have not seen enough results .
I share Mr Bösch 's disappointment at what the Commission has done with the national declarations .
This is all the more surprising because , last year , the Commission stated quite clearly that it was not going to implement the agreement .
Luckily , the Commission retraced its footsteps .
We cannot forget , though , that this is an agreement that has been signed by the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
After all , it is unacceptable for one of the parties to state its disinclination to implement the agreement .
I cannot wait to hear the guidelines the Commission has issued to implement the agreement .
What are the results so far of the discussions with the Member States to carry out Article 44 ?
We will need to put much of our time and energy into this in the coming months .
That is also when we will need to decide whether we want to grant discharge to the Commission in April , or whether we will postpone it by six months .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to thank the Court of Auditors , and not least their staff .
They have once again done a sterling job .
I should like to remind the Commissioner that it is true that , at the start of your mandate as Anti-Fraud Commissioner , you promised and pledged to produce , by the end of your mandate , a statement that confirms reliability of the accounts , as well as the regularity and lawfulness of all accounts .
Have we achieved this yet ?
Clearly not .
For the 14th time in a row , this statement has not materialised .
Are we heading in the right direction ?
Without a doubt , or so says the Court of Auditors , and you are there to defend this stance with tooth and nail .
Should we be worried ?
I think so .
You have exactly one year left , though , to make good on your promise , your pledge , and there is a great deal to be done yet , as my fellow Members said themselves .
What has the Court of Auditors noticed ?
There are flaws in the bookkeeping system , partly attributable to the complex legal and financial framework .
According to the Court of Auditors , there is a risk when it comes to quality and financial information .
What does the Court of Auditors say about the regularity and lawfulness of payments ?
Does it sanction the administrative expenses ?
There are major problems in large sections of the budget , including agriculture , the Cohesion Fund , the structural funds , the Regional Fund , social policy , rural development , research and development , energy , transport , external support , development and expansion , education and citizenship .
A representative sample has been made of everything related to cohesion , namely the Cohesion Fund itself and the structural funds .
We note that , in its report , the Court of Auditors states that in 11 % of the cases payments should never have been made .
This is a very serious finding , and something to which much attention will need to be devoted in the discharge .
2007 was the first year - as various fellow Members pointed out - in which the Member States were asked to draft an annual summary of the available inspections and statements , but , according to the Court of Auditors , it does not work .
The summaries cannot be compared and they do not contain all the information we need .
Despite this , as Mr Mulder pointed out with good reason , there was a pledge , a political agreement .
This is something we worked hard for in Parliament .
What do we see now ?
A whole host of Member States are reluctant to lend their cooperation .
It is notably the eurosceptic countries that are pulling their weight : the United Kingdom , Denmark and the Netherlands to a great extent .
Surely this cannot be ?
We should indeed remind the Council of its responsibility in this .
Finally , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I should like to underline the political requirement with regard to the Member States , namely that they should indeed face up to their political responsibility for the spending they help manage .
This is their darned duty !
In addition , we would also like to see more transparency about the end beneficiaries .
There may be an attractive website , but I have noticed that a number of Member States , including my own country Belgium , place information on it which is woefully inadequate and wholly intransparent .
There is work to be done in that area too , therefore , and we will need to fight for this during the discharge .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , President of the European Court of Auditors , Vice-President of the Commission Siim Kallas has , generally speaking , done good work to improve budgetary control , and especially to increase administrative transparency .
Public awareness of agricultural subsidies is a good example of that .
The European Court of Auditors partly agrees .
There are of course areas for comment , particularly on the use of agricultural and regional development aid .
Responsibility for these lies mainly with the Member States .
Something of a split might be discerned in the Court of Auditors ' report : the slightly more correct northern net contributors as opposed to the southern beneficiaries that are rather more prone to abuse .
The split is also obviously affected by the volumes of cash involved .
In the south there is more to distribute and control than in the north .
To ensure that the wrong generalisations are not made , it is important that the Court of Auditors shows precisely in its reports where any abuse has occurred so that confusion and the wrong generalisations are avoided as a result .
I would like to focus attention on something to which the competence of the European Court of Auditors does not extend and which is also a grey area from a national standpoint .
This is the Athena Fund set up in 2004 , which falls within the competence of the Member States , though not the EU .
The Member States pay into the Fund out of their own defence budgets for combined military operations that fall outside the scope of EC competence .
These operations work , on the one hand , on the NATO principle of ' costs lie where they fall ' .
On the other hand , there is this Athena scheme , whose financing is secret .
This sort of military operation on the part of EU countries should be brought under democratic control .
When the report by the European Court of Auditors is being considered , our group will be paying special attention to the legality of the Council 's budget , which for Parliament has up till now been a grey area .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , well , Commissioner Kallas seems to have read a completely different document .
I can assure him that as a UK PLC this simply would not do at all .
If any UK PLC had filed accounts of this nature for 14 years which have been completely unacceptable , and again this year - and I do not regard the Court of Auditors as having given this a clean bill of health at all , and I have read the document - if the Commission were a board of UK PLC directors I have to say they would now be in prison !
We have a situation here where this Parliament , if Parliament it is , which spends most of the year talking about bendy bananas , knobbly parsnips , standardisation of bottle sizes , and on Tuesday we were even voting on the standardisation of tractor seats , so this absurd organisation spends most of its year doing nothing very much of value .
We only have one serious responsibility , and that is to hold the Commission to account on the budget .
That is the most serious thing we can do ; and it is going to go through again for the 15th year on the nod .
It is an utter disgrace , and let the British MEPs know I am watching very carefully how they vote .
I will make sure that it is known back in the UK what they do out here as opposed to what they actually say when they go home .
Mr President , we all know that the European Commission 's accounts can never be signed off until - and unless - two major underlying problems are finally resolved .
Neither of these problems is new .
Firstly , there is no certainty about the opening balances for the accounting system , which was changed in 2005 , because a year later there were huge readjustments which made it obvious that no reconciliation was , or is , possible .
Secondly , there is the problem of shared management , which has already been referred to , or in other words the distribution of public funds to recipients who are then held responsible for both using and accounting for them .
Even the internal auditors in Member States admit that that system is impossible to operate .
For years , all we have ever heard - and we heard it again today from the Court and from the Commissioner - is well-intentioned talk about improvement soon , managing risk , error rates - trivia !
The reality is that nothing substantial changes , and the public is losing patience , and rightly so .
Tinkering with the deckchairs on this particular Titanic does nothing to plug the holes in the bottom .
If the Greek figures are to be believed , we still have olive groves in the Aegean Sea .
The misuse of funds in Bulgaria is reported to be out of control .
In Turkish-held Northern Cyprus , EUR 259 million of public money has been handed over for economic development , but the EU office in Nicosia openly admits it cannot monitor or control it , simply because we do not recognise the Turkish regime .
Some of that money has just paid for new pavements in the booming holiday resort of Kyrenia , where the casinos do a roaring trade day and night .
The local regime chooses not to raise sufficient taxes and takes the view that if the EU is stupid enough to pay for them , then that is fine by them .
Yet that money could have been put to good use .
Not only are the accounts unacceptable , but some of the judgements on how public money is used are unacceptable too .
( SV ) I would like to start by thanking the Court of Auditors for a constructive report that is unusually easy to follow .
It will , I am sure , form a sound basis for our ongoing work in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I thought I would restrict myself mainly to the EU 's independent authorities , as I am actually rapporteur for them .
Some institutions are , of course , growing in terms of numbers , responsibility and how much money they have at their disposal .
I would therefore like to suggest that examination of these institutions is also becoming increasingly important .
Every year that I have been here in the European Parliament we have commented on the problems the independent authorities have with regard to planning , implementing the budget , public procurement , reporting and so on , and , unfortunately , it looks like we will have to do the same thing again this year .
The same is true with regard to the problem of their requesting more and more money , despite them having trouble spending it during previous years .
I think that this raises a number of important questions , as it seems to be a recurring problem .
At least for me , it raises questions about responsibility and control .
I therefore think that it is particularly unfortunate that the Council is not here to participate in the debate , as I think that we have a joint responsibility to ensure that these decentralised authorities are controlled and monitored .
In addition to these general comments , which are for the most part applicable to a considerable number , although not all , of the decentralised authorities , there are four authorities that I think we have grounds for examining more closely this year .
The first is the European Police College , CEPOL , which has again this year received remarks for its public procurement , and this is a recurring problem that has not been addressed .
Furthermore , it is even more remarkable that the Court of Auditors has pointed out that money has been used to pay private expenses .
Another one is Galileo , in connection with which the Court of Auditors has not yet been able to issue a statement about whether or not they want to give a simple statement of assurance , simply because there is so much uncertainty surrounding the relationship between Galileo and the European Space Agency and the other players involved .
Where does Galileo begin and end ?
Last but not least are Frontex and the European Railway Agency , both of which are clear examples of authorities which overestimate their costs and demand too much money , but nevertheless request more money every year .
These are matters that I intend to look more closely at during the discharge process .
I hope to continue the constructive cooperation with both the Court of Auditors and the Commission and I am disappointed that the Council is not here to contribute to this discussion .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Caldeira spoke of risk as of an important error factor in the preparation of this report .
May I take a moment to focus on European Development Fund issues .
The fund provides aid to countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific .
Their risk differs from that of Member States , and is also greater than in the Member States .
It is important that the Court has concluded that the transactions underlying the income and commitments for the budget year are lawful and correct .
This general conclusion gives us grounds to view the report as a whole with approval .
On the other hand , the number of errors in the transactions underlying the payments is high .
The Court has questioned the Commission 's dynamic interpretation of eligibility criteria , and the Court 's view that the interpretation is flawed must be accepted .
The point is that it does not enable Member States to meet standards of reliable public fund management .
The Commission should review its position at the earliest possible opportunity .
Parliament has in fact already approached it on this matter .
Another issue raised by the report is cooperation with the UN . It highlights the UN 's unwillingness or negligence in forwarding the relevant payment documents .
The Court indicated three main areas of significant error .
They include eligibility of expenses , pre-financing settlement and the payment of incorrect amounts .
These errors should and could have been identified and corrected much earlier by the personnel who approved the payments .
For this reason , the Commission 's explanation that auditing costs are very high , as indicated by the ratio of the costs to the effectiveness of the audits is unconvincing .
It is hard to agree with this point of view .
Instead , the Commission should aim for greater efficiency and increase the number of its employees .
Indeed , we , as Parliament , approached it on this matter a year ago .
In summary , this section of the information provided by the Court of Auditors is mixed .
While recognising its overall correctness , I wish to point to areas of significant error .
The report includes the Court 's recommendations , which must largely be accepted .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to take my turn in thanking the Court of Auditors for its excellent work .
There have been a number of Members who , at this very moment , have rebelled against the general use of European funds .
I would like to say that I hope that , when they report our debates and the results of the work of the Court of Auditors , the media will not do what they usually do and talk about the trains which arrived late and say nothing about the trains which arrived on time , because most of the budget of the European Union has been spent advisedly .
We must not confuse the wood with the trees .
Having said which , we have noted that the trend in this report by the Court of Auditors has been one of improvement .
That is very good news .
You also said that there are millions of beneficiaries , which alone illustrates the difficulty and scope of the task .
For my part , I wish to underline two responsibilities .
I do not wish to point the finger of accusation at any specific organisation .
I simply wish to say that if , in future , we want to do better , those with material responsibility in the matter need to act .
As I see it , there are two categories of people responsible .
There is the Commission - and the Court of Auditors has just told us , having said that there are several million beneficiaries , that the first thing to be done upstream is to simplify the rules .
We therefore expect , before talking about controls , before talking about a declaration , that things will indeed be simplified upstream for these beneficiaries - especially associations , individuals and so forth .
The second category of people responsible is , of course , the Member States .
I and my colleagues in the Committee on Regional Development shall not stop pointing to the responsibility of the Member States under the Structural Funds .
It is they who often add to the administrative complexity and , instead of acting as councils , they complicate matters and sit in judgment .
Therefore , over and above this Court of Auditors report , we really expect each of the Member States to facilitate access to European funds and , of course , to introduce more adequate controls over coming years .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after making statements of assurance for 14 years , next year represents an anniversary .
We need to consider what we should do on this occasion .
I believe that we are gradually making ourselves look ridiculous .
One of the major risks is that this will degenerate into a routine , that no one will take us seriously any more and that the results which we present will not be taken seriously either .
The Court of Auditors ' Report is an interesting report - the name and shame principle has proved its worth - and I would like to ask the Court of Auditors to continue to provide this kind of clarity .
However , we are now faced with the question of what to do about the Member States which have been part of the EU since 1981 and still do not apply EU legislation consistently .
I would like to ask the Commission - and this is one of the lessons which I have learnt from this - to acknowledge that the more consistent the Commission 's actions are , the faster we will have improved results .
I would also like to see this consistent approach being taken in the area for which the Commission itself is responsible .
I am disappointed that there has been so little progress on direct management .
I expected the Commission to set a good example and to demonstrate that this is feasible and how it should be done .
One aspect of this report in particular which interested me is the position of the new Member States , but not very much information is provided in this area .
I do not understand some of the numbers , for example , your findings on the two new Member States Romania and Bulgaria and what the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) identified there in 2007 .
OLAF has carried out random samples of all the funds which revealed the percentage of fraud and irregularities in these two countries to be 76 % .
This is a significant percentage and it is now time for us to take consistent action and help these two countries to achieve better results , otherwise we will never make progress .
This annual report is the last from the Barroso Commission and the first in the new financing period .
I would like to congratulate Commissioner Kallas and the Barroso Commission for their work in the field of financial control .
The Commission has achieved much more than any of its predecessors .
It is thought-provoking that despite all of these activities we have not produced better or faster results .
I am expecting a great deal from the new reporting scheme on recoveries and I hope that we will no longer be in the same situation next year of shrugging our shoulders and saying that things should improve by the following year .
Commissioner Kallas , so much praise from Mrs Gräßle is really something to be proud of !
( DA ) Mr President , our discussions can be a little abstract at times , so I therefore think that we should start by reminding ourselves what it is we are actually talking about .
It is about taxpayers ' money .
It is about European citizens ' money .
Money that is used for quite sensible - and sometimes not so sensible - purposes .
A common requirement for all the money that is used in the EU 's name is that it must be used in a proper and decent manner .
Another thing that is common to all the money used is that there are rules that must be followed , and if those rules are not followed , a penalty must be paid .
Unfortunately , we must again this year note that it has not been possible for the Court of Auditors to approve the implementation of the EU budget , that is to say approve the accounts .
This is , of course , deeply , deeply unacceptable .
The question is , who should the criticism be directed at , where should we point the finger ?
There is no doubt that the biggest problem lies within the Member States .
Unfortunately , there is no doubt that when Member States get a bag of money from the EU they are not so inclined to subject this money to as much control and as many rules as would be the case if it was national money .
It is clearly stated in the Treaty that it is the European Commission that bears the responsibility , that is to say it is the European Commission that is responsible for there being little pressure on Member States to introduce the necessary controls .
In this connection , it is a pity that the Commission has not met its own objective for us to approve the accounts before the end of this period .
We will not achieve this .
However , I would also like to point out that great progress has been made , for example , following pressure from the European Parliament .
Last year , an action plan was introduced containing a large number of very specific initiatives , which we will see the effects of - not in this year 's report , of course , but in next year 's .
We can be pleased about this .
In this year 's procedure , we will , of course , work in a very targeted manner in relation to the areas in which there are still problems .
It is , of course , of particular concern that within the agricultural sphere , where there have otherwise been positive trends , we have unfortunately this year seen a somewhat downward evaluation because we do not have a proper hold on things in the rural development funds .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Court of Auditors for its report and the Commissioner and his team for the work they are doing .
This is such an important subject , because there are so many failing and failed states in different parts of the world - I will not list them as they are obvious - and that is where criminality flourishes and spreads to the rest of us .
So we have to tackle these problems and I am satisfied that we are moving gradually in the right direction .
I deeply regret that there is nobody present from the Council , because it is the Member States who are failing to do their job in this area .
There is not a single person present , and we should try to correct that for next year .
I want to say one word to the absent Mr Bloom from my country , who made a silly speech about ' knobbly carrots ' or something and then walked out and did not have the courtesy to listen to the rest of the debate .
If he were here , he would hear me remind him that one major British Government department dealing with pensions has failed to have its accounts approved for the last 14 years .
So , we in Britain have nothing to be proud of either .
One of the things that baffle me about the UK is that the British Government refuses to cooperate with OLAF , which seems to be completely nonsensical and needs correcting .
I would love to have an answer from the British Government to that .
My final point is addressed directly to you , Mr President : when we make recommendations about the committees for the new Parliament next year , I think we should consider seriously how to strengthen the Committee on Budgetary Control - give it extra powers and responsibilities , so that we continue to work very hard on this problem .
Thank you , Bill Newton Dunn .
The President will , as always , try to do his best .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the European Court of Auditors , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it has now become a tradition that once again no statement of assurance can be issued about the relationship between spending at a European level and administration at a national level .
I can remember discussions with the previous President of the Court of Auditors , Professor Friedmann , who once said to me that , because of the structures , it was not possible to give a statement of assurance .
For this reason , we should consider how this instrument can be brought to life with the aim of issuing a statement of assurance , if this is justified .
It is important to make distinctions between a few different issues in this respect .
Firstly , a budget that consists of around 95 % subsidies is much more susceptible to fraud than a national , regional or local authority budget .
This subsidy budget is largely managed by the Member States , which have demanded a great deal more independence from us in the new financing period , because they complained during the last funding period that there was too much central control .
Of course , this also means that the responsibility for the budget funds must be transferred to a regional and national level .
The third area is one that I just want to touch on .
We must learn to distinguish between fraud and wastefulness .
These are things which are often lumped together .
It also annoys me when projects are funded with EU money which are not absolutely necessary .
However , this is not fraud , but wastefulness .
For this reason , those with responsibility for the projects , in particular in the area of structural operations , namely the Member States , should also take responsibility for ensuring that money is not wasted and that only those projects are subsidised which provide genuine added value for the region .
Therefore , we should also consider moving parts of structural operations onto interest-free loans .
If Member States have to pay back the money , they will only fund the projects that they really need .
( PT ) Mr President , I want to start by congratulating the Court of Auditors on its excellent work and also for having made this work much more accessible to all of us here , and even to European citizens in general .
However , I should have liked to see more specific details in the Court 's report , with names and cases that were analysed .
This is not a question of doing what some Members call ' naming and shaming ' , but perhaps rather ' naming and understanding ' .
This is because it is only through a description of specific cases that we can understand the problem .
As far as I can see , particularly with the Structural Funds , we have regulatory frameworks that often demand absurd things .
This is down to both the Member States and ourselves , and we have to look at these regulatory frameworks in the greatest of detail .
We are also going to be discussing the implementation of the European Parliament 's budget in 2007 .
The buildings here in Strasbourg were purchased in 2007 and , when we bought them , we were absolutely assured that there was no asbestos in these buildings .
Only once this purchase had been completed did we find out that there was asbestos in around 50 rooms in this building .
This is a serious situation to which we must give our full attention .
That does not mean , ladies and gentlemen , waging war on those who do or do not want to come to Strasbourg .
We cannot use a health issue for purposes that strictly speaking have no relevance .
However , the health issue does exist and I should have liked the Secretary-General to give clear guarantees that the proposed asbestos removal plan is compatible with the continued use of these buildings .
After several months , I am still waiting for these guarantees .
I have read hundreds of pages of reports and looked at innumerable photographs , some of which have been very interesting , but I do not have these guarantees ; we really need them because , without them , we cannot be sure that we can work here in total safety .
I should therefore like to point out that , when we give discharge of the European Parliament 's budget , this issue must be fully clarified because , otherwise , we will not be able to vote positively .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the Court of Auditors .
Having read their report and listened to the debate here this morning , I ask myself : is the glass half empty , or is the glass half full ?
The first sentence in the conclusions from the Court states that for 2007 the Court has identified further progress in the Commission 's supervisory and control systems , so at least we are going in the right direction .
There are improvements in certain areas , but the error rate is still way too high in some sectors , and those have been outlined here this morning .
An extremely important aspect is that , according to OLAF , suspected fraud in the Structural Funds affected 0.16 % of payments made by the Commission between 2000 and 2007 , and that is a hugely significant figure .
However , as a politician on the ground , I see the other side of it .
I am constantly being told by community groups , by voluntary groups , by NGOs , of the huge difficulty they have in applying for funding and adhering to strict compliance rules at every single step .
I am constantly being bombarded about Brussels red tape and Brussels bureaucracy and , in the middle of citizens and this debate , we have Member States - many of whom need to seriously improve their act - the Commission , which still has some work to do , Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
I believe , however , that the recommendations from the Court will make a difference , particularly in simplifying the basis of calculation of eligible costs and making greater use of lump-sum or flat-rate payments .
We are making progress but it is too slow .
So , is the glass half empty or half full ?
When I consider the full impact of European funding , the improvements that are being made , and hopefully the implementation of the recommendations , my opinion is that the glass is half full .
( ES ) Mr President , pursuant to Article 274 of the EC Treaty , the Council has the same responsibility as the Commission for expenditure .
We are the budgetary authority .
Mr President , did we invite the Council to this debate ?
I do not see any representatives .
Have they apologised for not attending ?
Have they given any reason for not being here ?
I do not understand .
Is it because they do not want to hear for the fourteenth time that the Court of Auditors says that things must improve , given that they are the ones spending more than 80 % of Europeans ' money ?
Or is it because they , as the Member States , are happy with what they are spending , whereas here in Parliament we have the cheek to question the errors of an absent guest , because I am assuming that they were invited ?
( FR ) I shall say it in French .
We are in France .
Where is the French Presidency ?
Where is Mr Sarkozy ?
Where is your representation in this debate ?
( ES ) We will have to see whether , in the words of Molière , they arrive ere long .
This is unacceptable .
All my colleagues on the Committee on Budgetary Control agree with me that this should not happen again .
I thought that the excellent French Presidency would also improve this aspect of facing up to the consequences .
For it is here where they must face up to the consequences .
They cannot spend and then not come here .
For it is also the Council , and not just the Member States , that are subject to our scrutiny .
However , they are never here because they do not want to keep hearing the same thing .
The solution would be to have national statements .
I have two points to make .
Congratulations , Mr Silva Caldeira .
In this latest debate of this parliamentary term , you have produced a very good report .
The Court of Auditors , of which you are the President , is partly responsible for things having improved .
Please convey our congratulations to all your members , as several of my fellow Members have said .
Mr Kallas , this Commission has improved things considerably .
Unfortunately , we have not achieved the ultimate goal of a positive Statement of Assurance , but things are going well .
I have a small suggestion to make : we must simplify .
We must simplify and give responsibility to the Member States and then they must come here to face up to the consequences .
Simplification and removal of red tape will be the way to improve how Europeans ' money is spent .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
In my view , for a deputy from one of the new Member States whose absence Mrs Gräßle regretted , the current discharge is important for two reasons .
On the one hand , this is the first year of the 2007-13 period , thus whatever observations we make now , will have an effect on future uses .
Secondly , this is the year for which the European Parliament and the Commission will give the last discharge , and therefore it is worth preparing an evaluation .
Perhaps my fellow Members will not agree with me , but I nonetheless hold the view that although our main goal , a positive DAS , has not been achieved , we can look back with pride at our joint achievements .
The Commission , under its Vice-President Mr Siim Kallas , and Parliament , under the leadership of the COCOBU , not only saw to it that its own invoices and expenditures were all in order , but with a major , sustained effort succeeded in ensuring that Member States that account for 80 % of the expenditures are increasingly prepared to cooperate with regard to inspection .
I know that in the area of agrarian and cohesion funds we still have serious tasks ahead in this regard , nevertheless when carrying these out we cannot ignore the changing circumstances in the global economy .
In the current crisis , it is crucially important particularly for the new Member States to use EU resources as rapidly as possible , with the less democracy the better .
This goal must be attained without thereby increasing the risk to payments .
For this reason , I welcome the fact that the European Court of Auditors is also proposing simplification in this area .
Now it is up to the Commission and the Member States to implement these . Thank you very much .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the European Court of Auditors and Commissioner Siim Kallas for the important work you have done for the sake of European taxpayers .
A 2 % margin of error is permitted in the EU 's accounts .
I would say that it should be possible for the costs set aside for salaries , rent and other administrative items to be finalised with a far greater degree of accuracy .
There should not be any kind of confusion with these .
There are other cost groups , however , where achieving an accuracy of within 2 % can be difficult .
For example , there is a lot of talk at the moment about higher figures in the costs of regional policy .
Perhaps we have to be bold enough to recognise that it is not realistic to achieve zero tolerance in these cost groups .
In future we need to be a lot more cost-effective , the application procedure must be simplified , and it should also be possible to transfer accountability and authority to national level .
This would be in the interests of European taxpayers , and I hope that the Court of Auditors will act effectively regarding this .
( FR ) Mr President , I have no wish to take the floor on behalf of the Presidency , but I would like to respond to my fellow Member Mr Pomés Ruiz .
I believe he may not have been in the House when the rapporteur spoke .
The Council did not wish to be present in the House before the Ecofin meeting .
It was quite intentional .
I do not think that there should be an exchange of views prior to that meeting .
On the subject of the report , the key word is , I think , simplification .
However , I believe that shared management is indeed a source of complication at the level of European funds and the degree of complication which we have is not , in all cases , due to fraud , especially in the agricultural sector .
What we have noted today , especially on the subject of rural development , is due unfortunately to the extremely complex management of European funds .
We voted on the CAP yesterday and we need to realise that environmental cross-compliance , for example , is highly complicated .
MEPs are calling for environmental cross-compliance to be simplified , because farmers are working really hard to manage this environmental cross-compliance .
The European funds - especially the management of the Structural Funds - need to be simplified and this is a political message which we need to get across .
Simplification of the European funds is the key word today and it must be heard .
( BG ) My congratulations on the report , which can serve as an operating manual in the complex procedures by which expenses are paid in the European Union .
I have drawn a number of conclusions about the report : clarity and ease of understanding - it reflects the new working methods introduced by the Court of Auditors ; analysis , which gives grounds for important recommendations , albeit ones that have been around for years ; and focus on the results .
Let us look beyond the qualities of the report , and evaluate the results regarding the regularity and effect of European Union expenditure .
This leads to the following conclusions : weaknesses in Member States ' control systems and , to some extent , effective supervision by the European Commission ; the distribution of errors in payments made by area is quite high , as are the amounts involved .
We need to face the substantial level of errors in particular areas .
Important progress has been made , but it is still not enough .
The main findings of the report are contained in the recommendations which should improve the system for managing expenditure of European funds : improving control systems at various levels - first , second and third - and the links between them , which is a particular obligation of the Member States ; and simplification of procedures to make them easier to control , and also easier to implement risk-free .
And as it is often the new Member States that are involved , I believe that better cooperation with and assistance is required in respect to the new members to enable them to set up clear and precise national control mechanisms .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Court of Auditors for its presentation this morning , which was extremely detailed and very useful .
Yes , the error rates are too high - and we all strive for perfection - but progress has been made , and the EU generally has made progress , so that is to be welcomed .
The general point I would make is that Member States are perhaps more careful with their own money than with European money , and we need to change that mindset .
However , as others have said , we do not need to overcomplicate the rules and regulations concerning compliance , because that puts people off , and particularly those who might need to have access to funding .
I have in my hand here - hot off the presses - the health check on the common agricultural policy agreed in the early hours of this morning .
One thing that strikes me very clearly from the presentation this morning is that it was clearly said that , when it comes to rural development , there are big problems in terms of compliance when , under the health check , we are now taking more money from the single farm payment to pour into rural development .
There is an issue to be addressed here .
At the end of the day , putting money into rural development programmes to address climate change , biodiversity and water management is , in theory , a very good idea , but how does one measure these things and assess value for money ?
That is something we need to look at very carefully .
I have a concern that this report , as in the past , will be used to beat up on the EU - to say bad things about it - rather than in the way it should be used , which is to say : look , we have made progress and we are pointing to areas where we need to make further improvements , so that we spend European money in a way which is good for the European citizen , and avoid making that overcomplicated .
The most widely-used word in the House this morning was ' simplification ' .
If it was that simple , then we would already be doing it .
While I do not think things are quite that easy , perhaps if those who control and inspect were more in tune with the issues on the ground , then it might help the process someway along .
So , I commend the presentation , and let us hope that we continue to spend well .
( PL ) Mr President , may I first of all express my approval of the Court 's report , which confirms the consistency of its work .
I should also like to point out that these reports are always analysed within a specific context .
This context is very relevant just now , since first , we are working on a new shape for our policies after 2013 .
Second , we are debating methods of monitoring and judging the effectiveness of our policies .
And third , we are all working on the European Union 's response to the financial crisis and on adapting our tools , methods and instruments to the new challenges .
In this context , if we look at the effects of the report , which focuses on the cohesion policy , our attention is drawn to the fact that where the Commission itself was responsible for specific actions , the report has identified clear improvement .
On the other hand , in areas involving multilevel audits and responsibility on the part of Member States , the effects to date , as noted in the report , are slight , because we cannot yet see the direct results of reforms currently being introduced .
May I also comment that when working on new policies we must clearly distinguish - as was noted by Mr Ferber - between errors , abuses and poor management , and how to relate these to the effectiveness of policies .
In my view , it is wrong simply to identify an error or the level of error with the ineffectiveness of a specific policy .
A simplistic drawing of conclusions may cause us to abandon policies which are absolutely essential in the new situation .
( NL ) Mr President , I too should like to add my thanks to the Court of Auditors for the presentation of the annual report and the Commission for its reaction to it .
Despite the positive noises on the bookkeeping side , we are actually facing the very situation we did in previous years .
It is true that action has been taken in the area of cohesion , including via the European Commission action plan , and the error rate has decreased slightly from 12 % to 11 % , but this is less than satisfactory , obviously .
A twofold picture is emerging where agriculture and other major debit entries on the budget are concerned .
Agricultural policy 's own error rate is under the critical limit of 2 % , not least thanks to the integrated control system .
I do believe , though , that we should mete out stricter penalties for those countries that have failed to carry out this integrated control system effectively for more than ten years , and that we should do this by means of progressive financial corrections .
In rural development , on the other hand , the picture is less rosy .
This was to me , as Mr McGuinness has already pointed out , a clear appeal to the Council of Ministers for Agriculture , who met recently , not to move too fast when it comes to transferring monies from agricultural policy to rural policy .
I have since learnt that whilst the Council did not move as fast as the Commission had liked to see , the proposed modulation is nevertheless considerable .
These are the problems .
Now onto the solutions .
I have heard the Court of Auditors talk in woolly terms about weighing up control costs , simplification and clear objectives .
This is all well and good , but both the European Commission and the Court of Auditors know all too well that the problem lies with the fact that 80 % of the outgoings are co-managed by the Member States .
It goes without saying , therefore , that the solution should be sought partly via these Member States .
Imagine my surprise , therefore , on seeing that neither the Court of Auditors nor the European Commission has mentioned national management declarations .
I should like to remind the Commissioner that , in the context of the previous discharge , he promised that he would commit to these statements , and I should like to know whether he has delivered on his commitment and how this is evident , for I have not seen any evidence .
Since these declarations are a learning process for us , I think it is important for us to take a closer look at how the present annual summaries and national declarations are put together qualitatively speaking , and to draw the necessary lessons from this .
I in any event take it as read that the European Commission will help us in this in the coming months .
( BG ) The release of the European Court of Auditors ' annual report is a good occasion to analyse what the European Union budget is used for and how it is used .
The aim of the EU budget is primarily to improve the lives of its almost five hundred million citizens .
It is used to fund projects that have a direct effect on our citizens ' everyday lives , such as roads and motorways .
As you know , we are currently at a juncture where the ' Eurosceptics ' have succeeded in misleading some citizens with empty promises and false assertions .
Blaming Europe for everything that doesn 't work properly is one of the methods they use .
We , however , must do all we can to allow the citizens of the European Union to reap the benefits of membership .
We have to send them a strong message that we , as the lawmakers of Europe , want the European Union to function more efficiently and effectively .
Only in this way will we stop the Eurosceptics from succeeding .
In this connection I would like to talk of my country , Bulgaria .
For many years its citizens eagerly awaited the moment they would be able to call themselves equal citizens of the European Union , and would reap the benefits of membership .
Now , as noted in European reports on various issues , despite joining the European Union , many of my compatriots have been deprived of the benefits of community solidarity , due to mismanagement and weaknesses of the government .
This was also mentioned in the European Commission 's latest report from July 2008 , which unfortunately led to a partial freezing of European funds for Bulgaria .
This situation upsets me deeply , for there is nothing more I want to see than my compatriots living in a prosperous Bulgaria which has taken its rightful place in a united Europe , without accusations of corruption in high places and without organised crime .
In conclusion , I call upon all European and national institutions to continue in their efforts to correct the failings highlighted in the ECA 's annual report , and to fight to continually improve the quality of life of the citizens of the European Union .
( NL ) Mr President , ' catch the eye ' .
I think that this is a topic that catches many people 's eye .
Surely the lack of approval can be attributed to some extent to the level of errors .
Even after so many years , you have to wonder whether it might be the system that is flawed and needs to be fixed .
Mr Ferber pointed out that countries that fail to meet the obligations of clarity and own responsibility time and time again must be approached with a different way of financing .
This can be done , according to him , by providing funds on the condition that these are not spent definitively until later .
This appeals to me .
Countries have to choose , certainly when it comes to structural funds , agriculture and rural innovation .

Mr President , as my friend Mr Bloom quite rightly said earlier , it is simply not true to say that the accounts have been fully signed off by the auditors .
It seems that about EUR 6 billion cannot be properly accounted for .
At current exchange rates that is about GBP 4.7 billion .
Britain 's net contribution to the EU budget in 2007 was GBP 4.3 billion .
The net amount is after the UK rebate and our own money spent in our own country .
There is of course no such thing as ' EU money ' .
An amount of money exceeding the UK taxpayer 's net contribution to the EU budget is quite possibly finding its way into the pockets of fraudsters .
This neatly sums up British membership of the European Union : a complete and utter total waste of money .
More and more British people are realising that the European Union ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( BG ) I would like to add my congratulations for the report .
It is very important for me that it underlines the importance of improving the systems for monitoring and controlling European funds and recommends simplification of these procedures .
I fully agree with the findings and recommendations made to the European Commission , because they are exceptionally fitting .
I would like to mention here the regrettable example of the ineffective control system mentioned in respect of Bulgaria .
My country continues to be criticised for irregularities in the management of funding from the pre-accession programmes by several executive agencies .
This is clear evidence that mismanagement on the part of the Bulgarian government has resulted in misuse , and the results that the pre-accession mechanisms aimed for were not achieved .
However , I believe that if the Commission had taken and adopted the effective control mechanisms required , this would not have happened .
Although this is acknowledged in the Commission 's answer on page 51 of the report , it is unclear to me exactly what specific measures need to be taken .
Mr President , Mr Kallas 's stated aim at the beginning of his mandate was to achieve a positive statement of assurance , and throughout the different reports we have had from the Court of Auditors in that time , not much , to be honest , has changed .
I fear , Mr Kallas , that in your reporting and your take on this current report , there is an experience of Peter Mandelson coming through the fibre of your being .
You have had a touch of the Mandelsons - saying that everything is absolutely fine and spinning that the accounts are clean is disingenuous and simply not true .
Blaming Member States is not a decent defence , because Article 274 of the Treaty tells you that the buck stops with the Commission .
Who gives the Member States the monies in the first place ?
Who , knowing where the problems lie - and you are told every year by the gentleman sat beside you - could tighten the purse-strings or cut off money to fund some programmes ?
Mr Kallas , the buck does stop with you .
I am afraid that you have failed .
Court of Auditors . - Mr President , I wish first of all to thank everyone for their kind words about those working at the Court of Auditors , and all those contributing to the result we have debated here this morning .
On behalf of all those working at the European Court of Auditors I thank the Members for appreciating what we do to assist the European Parliament as foreseen in the Treaty .
That is our mandate .
It is our role .
We take good note of the comments and suggestions you have addressed to the Court with a view to it further improving the way it presents its results and its findings and communicates these to you and to the citizens of the European Union .
We will strive to strictly apply international auditing standards in all areas , including when taking into consideration the work of other auditors , namely those engaged in the Member States in auditing European Union funds .
I shall finish by saying briefly that we will continue to assist the European Parliament and its Committee on Budgetary Control during the discharge procedure , and that we will again strive for full cooperation with all the institutions .
At the end of the day , the important thing is that the result of our work , as I said in my speech , is a sign that the European institutions are accountable and transparent , and that one can have confidence in the European Union .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , many remarks have been made .
We have a long process of discharge and discussions ahead of us , during which all these remarks should receive answers and / or comments .
I would just like to make a comment about simplification , which has been raised many times .
Everybody says they are in favour of simplification , but in fact , there are two different underlying opinions .
The first is that the recipients of money want to have more of a free hand , while those contributing that money want a very clear understanding of where the money is going .
So there is a constant contradiction .
Secondly , we have until now - although the past two years or so have been different - always assumed that there is zero tolerance for any error .
The rules are therefore elaborated to prevent any error in the millions of transactions that take place .
That has also produced some kind of mythological view of the famous declaration of assurance , saying that the underlying transactions of all accounts have errors .
In fact , as the Court of Auditors says in this report , 95 % of all expenditure is free of errors , except in the Structural Funds , where the level of error is higher .
So the vast majority of spending has been done in accordance with the rules .
However , zero tolerance of errors is something we will soon be addressing .
The question of tolerable risks has been raised here many times also , and we will also soon present to Parliament a communication on the intensive discussions which are taking place at the moment in the Commission .
We have models which clearly show , for instance , that if you want to have zero tolerance - 100 % free of errors - then you have the enormous cost of controls .
Somewhere there is a point where the errors , costs and risks meet .
In this we highly appreciate the Court of Auditors ' approach , first of all towards introducing this kind of quantitative travel light which gives a much better picture .
Then we will go ahead and see - as one honourable Member said - that maybe in some areas there should be less materiality threshold , and more in others .
Then we can have a more reasonable interpretation of the requirement of the legality and regularity of transactions .
The debate is closed .
Investigations conducted by the European Anti Fraud Office ( OLAF ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Ingeborg Gräßle , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) - C6-0228 / 2006 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , good things come to those who wait .
As rapporteur I am presenting 92 amendments to you today for the revision of the OLAF regulation , with the request that you approve them .
This is the first reform of the Anti-Fraud Office since it was established and affects what lies at the very heart of the office , in other words the regulation that controls the essential activities of OLAF .
The European Parliament has given itself two years to revise this regulation , because OLAF issues always represent dangerous territory for us .
I am proud of the fact that we in the European Parliament and in the Committee on Budgetary Control were genuinely able to agree and that we remain in agreement .
We have not fallen out about the details or generally got into a muddle , as the Council often does .
We agree on the objective of the reform which is to create a more efficient office that can carry out its important tasks more effectively .
We stand by the office .
We want it to remain in place and we also want it to be able to carry out its tasks .
I would like to thank all the employees of OLAF , including the Director General , for their work and to assure them that we need their work .
I would also like to thank all my fellow Members , the shadow rapporteurs , the consultants and the committee secretariat and , of course , my own employees who have shown such commitment to this issue .
I would like to thank all of you for your wide-ranging support for this work , because this support will represent a success for this Parliament and it is also necessary for its success .
We have worked together to produce a logical development of the already obsolete draft text produced by the Commission and to enhance it with some genuinely innovative elements , such as the Review Adviser for complaints .
This will allow us to prevent OLAF from being brought to a standstill and disabled by internal disputes .
We have made it our priority to improve the way in which the Member States fight against fraud .
Members of the Council , who are noticeable by your absence once again today , we want to force you to take notice and we will force you to take notice .
We want the fight against fraud to be a subject that we share .
We do not want to hold a monologue .
We want to have a dialogue .
Once a year we want to have a joint meeting to discuss the major issues relating to the fight against fraud and the problems in the Member States .
We want to improve the legal protection for those involved in proceedings and to guarantee this protection throughout the entire OLAF investigation .
For this reason , we have handed over the entire responsibility to OLAF , its judges and its prosecutors .
We want to ensure that the results of OLAF investigations will stand up in court .
We want to ensure that national law is taken into account right from the beginning of investigations and that the evidence is obtained under the terms of national law .
We believe it is highly regrettable that some Member States , such as Luxembourg , have never brought an OLAF investigation to court .
Any citizens of Luxembourg who are making dishonest use of EU funds have a good chance of getting away scot-free .
This has a disastrous impact on respect for the law and this is why we are placing such a great emphasis on equal treatment for everyone affected by an OLAF investigation .
EU officials must not be treated differently from other citizens and ordinary citizens must not be treated differently from EU officials .
The Commission would be well advised not even to appear to be attempting to do this .
Commissioner , I am on the warpath about this subject .
I know that you will reject this point later as unacceptable and that you will insist on this .
I think that is a pity !
The Parliament will definitely not expose you to the temptation of sweeping the findings of investigations involving EU employees under the Commission 's carpet .
We must now convince the Council . The Council is not prepared to negotiate with us over this regulation , but instead aims to consolidate the three legal foundations of OLAF .
This means that we are wasting a lot of time over an uncertain outcome and we are missing the opportunity to do what is feasible now , to improve the working conditions of the office and to protect the office from criticism concerning those involved in the proceedings .
We would like the Council to allow us to take those steps which we can take together now .
Instead of taking the third step before the first step , we should begin at the beginning .
As rapporteur , I am prepared to come to an agreement with the Czech presidency over an early second reading .
Where there is a will , there is also a way and I am sure that we can find a joint solution .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Ms Gräßle for her energetic drive in this matter and the Committee on Budgetary Control for forcefully carrying through the debate .
The Commission appreciates the considerable work of the rapporteur , who was instrumental in taking up this proposal , pending since 2006 .
A first proposal had already been made in 2004 .
Times have changed since 2004 and 2006 .
The largest part of OLAF 's work now is not with the institutions but with external parties , conducting anti-fraud investigations throughout Europe and indeed throughout the world , wherever EU funds are spent .
It has great success in this work , as is widely recognised .
What remains is a schizophrenic situation , if you allow that analytical term : on the one hand OLAF is a ' normal ' Commission directorate general , for which the Commission has full responsibility ; on the other hand , it is an investigative function , fully independent in its operations , but for which the Commission is also held responsible .
Where are the limitations , and where are the limits of independence and accountability in such a set-up ?
It is our view that with the necessary independence from outside interference of a credible anti-fraud service comes the need for a clear and strong governance set-up .
Clear rules for investigations and strong accountability arrangements are the mirror of operational independence .
There are basically only two options : OLAF as part of the Commission , but with clear allocation and separation of responsibility , or make OLAF entirely independent from any EU institution and ensure separate strong oversight and accountability .
The guiding principles behind the Commission 's 2006 proposal were to strengthen the existing OLAF legal framework : a clearer governance set-up for OLAF ; reinforced accountability and oversight ; reinforced protection of persons under investigation and a reinforced framework for investigations and their follow-up .
On that basis , the Commission can fully support the amendments proposed in the draft report you are voting on today that are in line with the broad objectives of reform , and can thank you for those developed further .
On the other hand , the Commission made it very clear throughout the drafting process that some amendments cannot be taken into account in the current situation , simply because OLAF 's present status as a Commission directorate-general does not legally permit such changes .
This includes , for example : OLAF concluding independent cooperation agreements ; OLAF 's independent appearance before the European Court of Justice ; or the European Parliament and the Council deciding on OLAF directorate-general appointments .
The Commission also made clear that it cannot accept a limited number of proposals which , in their current wording , would depart from the governance improvements envisaged or would remove safeguards contained in the current Regulation .
This covers , for example , the scope of the governance framework , the procedural rights of persons concerned or a more effective follow-up of minor cases .
However , the Commission took careful note that , in parallel to the discussion of the current reform proposal , both the European Parliament and the Council repeatedly , and in a particularly insistent manner , stressed their preference for further simplification and consolidation of the entire complex of anti-fraud legislation .
The upcoming Czech presidency asked the Commission to present a concept paper on that in time for a working-level discussion scheduled during the latter part of its mandate .
The Commission is therefore striving to present the requested broad reflection paper in early 2009 , based on past experience with the existing anti-fraud set-up and the input from the current reform discussion , as well as any other useful elements , as sketched out above .
The European Parliament will be fully involved in that .
Let me conclude by stressing again that the Commission is thankful for the support from the European Parliament .
The Commission is not shying away from openly saying where , in our view , the limits are , but the Commission has been , and will remain , ready to discuss in a spirit of full transparency and cooperation all issues necessary to designing a strong and credible framework for the future of OLAF and a successful fight against fraud .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mr Bösch .
He was one of the people who made it possible for OLAF to be established and he was very far-sighted in his view that a body of this kind obviously provides a guarantee for the reputation of European institutions .
This is what we need on the international stage .
We need a clear , transparent institution which is accessible to European citizens , which clarifies the situation with regard to the disinformation that generally comes from outside Europe and runs contrary to European interests and , from the other perspective , intervenes in cases of abuse and ensures that abuses are eliminated .
For this reason , it is also important that the supervisory committee ensures OLAF 's independence and , in particular , that the office of the Director General can in future be guaranteed by the Court of Justice .
This will allow OLAF to carry out its work independently and objectively .
It is also important that the rights of people who are summonsed or charged by OLAF are clearly demonstrated and this applies also to this House .
It is also necessary for the rights of these people to be guaranteed in the European Parliament .
Of course , it is also important to collaborate with third countries and with other institutions in the Member States , in particular with courts of auditors at national and regional level , in such a way that the funds provided by Europe are used for their intended purpose and in the best possible way .
I would also like to congratulate Mrs Gräßle on the competence and strength of will with which she is ensuring the success of this highly complex dossier .
I wish her every success and hope that it will soon be implemented .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , thank you , Mr Rübig , for your praise .
We really should be rather proud .
It was this committee - and I would like to remind you about someone else as well - it was the Committee for Budgetary Control of this Parliament under the chairmanship of our esteemed fellow Member Diemut Theato who made use of the window of opportunity in the spring of 1999 to create the Anti-Fraud Office .
We should also remember what the basic principles were . These included , of course , independent investigations and also the fact that OLAF was always regarded as a provisional solution .
We are waiting until we have a European prosecutor and then OLAF will no longer be what it is today .
For this reason , we have always emphasised the importance of a powerful supervisory committee and of a high level of independence .
Some time ago we held a seminar on this subject which confirmed that the independence of OLAF was not , in fact , at risk .
This is also a compliment to the Commission .
I have a great deal of understanding for what Mr Kallas has said .
With this hybrid function that is partially independent and partially dependent , it is not easy to implement something like this and , therefore , I am very curious to see what will be included in a consultation paper .
Of course it is unacceptable that some of the guarantors of OLAF 's independence , in other words the Council , are not taking part in this debate .
The system cannot work in this way .
If you are unable to create an independent body , then you can only guarantee independence by ensuring that as many people as possible are tensioning the net , with everyone pulling a bit from different sides .
Otherwise , OLAF will suddenly find itself hanging from only one thread and will no longer be independent .
The three bodies which must pull on the net and retain a critical distance from OLAF , because not everything that OLAF does is wonderful , are the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
If we ignore these principles , then OLAF 's success will be jeopardised .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work and hope that we make progress in good time , as the previous speaker has said .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Kallas , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur warmly .
She has put in a huge amount of hard work , which is a rare occurrence these days .
OLAF is a very special body within the EU : an independent anti-corruption agency which is the envy of other international organisations .
It was this Parliament - as explained by Mr Bösch and Mr Rübig - which , following bad experiences with OLAF 's predecessor , insisted on the independence of the new Anti-Fraud Office .
We should remember that , at the time , OLAF was only allocated or linked to the Commission for practical reasons .
Unfortunately , for many people the memories of the scandals of 1999 have already faded , along with any respect for the necessary independence of an anti-corruption authority .
From today 's perspective , the existing safeguards are no longer sufficient to protect OLAF from the exertion of influence and , above all , from increasing blockades .
Let us be clear about one thing right from the start : OLAF is there to combat fraud .
It is a body which ensures that taxpayers ' money is used appropriately .
Therefore there are five points which we are supporting by means of this report to promote OLAF 's independence :
Firstly , the right of the General Director to intervene in cases heard by the European Court of Justice .
This right ensures that OLAF can consistently defend the results of its investigations .
The second important guarantee is the right of the supervisory committee , the Commission or another body to bring a case before the European Court of Justice if OLAF 's independence is jeopardised .
This sharp sword is necessary because warnings from the supervisory committee have simply been ignored in the past .
Thirdly , OLAF 's independence is also guaranteed by its obligation to bring before the courts the facts of a case which could constitute the elements of a crime .
The fourth point is the importance of the skills and strength of character of the people responsible .
Fifthly , I am pleased that the Director General of OLAF is being reappointed .
Experience and performance are both important here .
We should try to avoid denigrating OLAF .
The experiences of other anti-corruption authorities show that this does not help anyone .
However , I do agree fully with Mr Bösch that the Council must be involved .
No French or Czech explanation for this is forthcoming .
They are not even present and in the end the system simply cannot work like this .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , our debate occurs on the eve of the tenth anniversary of the establishment of OLAF .
The European Anti-Fraud Office rose from the ruins of Jacques Santerre 's compromised European Commission , accused of corruption and nepotism .
Life has shown that OLAF is essential for the efficient functioning of EU administration ; at the same time , its existence and operation send a signal to EU Member States , reminding them that European Union bodies are under constant supervision , control and examination .
OLAF 's work raises the prestige of European institutions in its own right .
The current , well advanced , project is intended to strengthen OLAF 's role by first , streamlining its working conditions , second , improving the quality of its operations and third , as noted by previous speakers , strengthening its independence - may I at this point thank the rapporteur .
The work has been going on for almost four years .
It was initiated by the European Commission , mindful of the unfortunate experiences of nine years ago , when it was forced to resign .
The document specifying the new OLAF framework was the subject of consultations with the Council of the European Union , the Court of Auditors and the Data Protection Ombudsman ; in addition , importantly , a public hearing was held - in other words , public opinion was consulted .
The proposals of the public hearing and of the Court 's special report resulted in significant amendments to the original proposals of four years ago .
For instance , it proved necessary to spell out the particulars of cooperation between OLAF and EU Member States and with the European Union 's institutions , bodies and organisations .
A key issue is to achieve real strengthening of OLAF 's independence .
Its personnel must be able to operate in conditions of total independence .
Where OLAF needs to investigate the allocation of EU funds , whether intended for Member States or for external assistance , the involvement of interested third countries and international organisations must be ensured .
To streamline its operations , OLAF must be guaranteed immediate and automatic access to European Union fund management data bases , as well as all data bases and important information , by the relevant EU institutions , bodies , offices and agencies .
This would go against the formerly entrenched practice whereby the same institutions sealed themselves off tightly against all controls .
Member States cannot regard OLAF as an enemy or a redundant institution .
Every EU state should nominate a body to cooperate with OLAF on a day-to-day basis .
As is well known , not all our 27 Member States have created specialist national-level services to coordinate combating financial abuses involving EU funds .
We need close cooperation between OLAF and Europol , as well as OLAF and Eurojust .
OLAF must also act transparently in the matter of its investigative procedures and guarantees , verification of the lawfulness of its investigations and appeal procedures for those already suspect or soon to become suspect .
Where procedures involving Member States are concerned , the audits could be carried out by representatives of the relevant Member States .
Representatives of judicial authorities , and in fact those involved in OLAF structures , could participate .
This is the main thrust of the amendments .
At the same time , I oppose the imposition of excessive sanctions on European institution officials guilty of unauthorised disclosure of information about specific offices and potentially corrupt practices .
The case of a colleague , Mr van Buitenen , today an MEP but formerly a European Commission official , suggests that in the past those who were victimised were not those guilty of abuses but those who drew attention to those abuses , pursued and disclosed them .
Let this experience serve as a warning also when we come to specific provisions relating to penalties and sanctions to be imposed on whistleblowers .
Finally , the citizens of Member States frequently overzealously identify corruption and abuse with European institutions .
To counteract this tendency , we need greater transparency in the operation of EU bodies , and certainly better information about investigations and the methods used by the European Union to combat corruption .
It is a big mistake to conceal such information under the pretext that its disclosure will damage the prestige of the EU .
Quite the contrary , we must publicise such matters , to make the citizens and taxpayers of European Union Member States aware that we do not sweep theft shamefully under the carpet .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an exercise in making legislation in the framework of the codecision procedure .
This means cooperation between Parliament and the Council , the latter of which , indeed , appears to be absent .
Let us be honest .
The French Presidency is not in the slightest bit interested .
This also explains their absence .
I do hope Mrs Gräßle will reach agreement at first reading with the Czech Presidency , but somehow I do not think this will happen .
The Chechens will not display much in the way of decisiveness either .
In addition to the five points which Mr Chatzimarkakis listed and which I fully endorse , I should like to list another ten points which we in the Committee on Budgetary Control deem important in the cooperation with Mrs Gräßle and which we , in fact , consider absolutely essential .
First of all , we are in favour of improved cooperation between OLAF and Eurojust when it comes to exchanging information on cross-border crimes between more than two Member States .
The cooperation agreement between OLAF , Eurojust and Europol is of huge importance .
Secondly , we would like to see the role and the duties of the Director-General of OLAF , the anti-fraud office , better described .
That way , we can also call him to account .
Thirdly , we would like to see the tasks of the OLAF staff better described .
A requirement should be introduced to make investigations last less than 12 months and extend them by a maximum of 6 months .
If an investigation lasts over 18 months , then feedback should be given to the supervisory committee .
Fourthly , the rights of the defence must be clearly reinforced .
Fifthly , journalists ' sources must enjoy specific guaranteed protection .
Sixthly , we need clearer agreements about the role and relationship between OLAF and the European Parliament and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Seventhly , we need clear rules about the openness of information intended for the general public .
Eighthly , the role of the supervisory committee , including in terms of staff and the composition of the committee itself , must be reinforced .
They should be experts , appointed for five years , with investigative experience in the judicial world .
Ninthly , we need a better procedure for the appointment of the Director-General .
Tenthly , the role of whistle blowers and of people under investigation must be better protected .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the EU 's money streams are prone to fraud .
Since a huge chunk of its outgoings are related to the common agricultural policy and regional funds , the Union is becoming nothing but a middleman .
As a result , responsibility is shared with others who consider the pledged funds as their own .
Collecting funds centrally to subsequently share them out to interested parties or projects in municipalities or provinces renders control more difficult .
This week , we invited the Council to agree that more funds should be given for school fruit .
An arrangement of this kind is useful for the children 's health , but this is best organised on a small scale at local level rather than the most large-scale level we know in Europe .
We may be able to reduce the risk of fraud considerably by focusing money streams on budget support or levelling contributions for the poorer regions , with the only criterion that the residents of those areas must be given every opportunity of staying in their regions of origin to live and work .
If we remove discrepancies in income , create jobs and provide good facilities , much of the labour migration will become unnecessary .
This will also reduce the ensuing problems .
We have not reached that stage yet .
As long as the outgoings remain prone to fraud , extensive checks and fraud control will need to remain in place .
A high level of funding and staffing are not enough : The anti-fraud office OLAF can only function properly if it can be completely independent and critical in respect of the Commission and Council .
When the present Director was appointed , the recommendation by an independent selection panel that put forward the seven most suitable candidates was put aside .
The Commission considered the present Director to be its favourite candidate from the outset .
He is also rumoured to want to exert too much influence over the selection of his staff , making them too dependent on him .
None of this does anything to boost confidence in the seriousness of fraud control .
Many voters consider this chaotic Europe as a fraud paradise .
Moreover , it appears that whistleblowers cannot pass on their suspicions related to fraud to OLAF in a safe manner .
If their roles leak , they can be dismissed for violating secrecy by way of penalty .
Moreover , all too often , we wait until the press drags a scandal into the public arena and the statute of limitations has run out on offences .
Also , there is not enough provision for hearing both sides of the argument .
Too many investigations are delayed or stopped before a satisfactory outcome has been reached .
The Gräßle report makes the first small steps in the right direction .
It could lead to more autonomy for OLAF , to less control of the working method by the European Commission and to better protection for those involved .
My group supports these first steps , but we do not labour under the illusion that they will solve the problem .
The supervisory committee will need to be strengthened further and codecision about amending this Regulation No 1073 / 1999 must not be delayed or stopped .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , there have been countless scandals as a result of corruption , fraud and irregularities throughout the EU 's history .
Public trust in the EU is low .
In Sweden , we measure the Swedish people 's trust in various institutions each year .
At the top we find , for example , the health care service , the police and the royal family , and lower down come the politicians , trade unions and the evening papers .
At the very bottom are the European Commission and the European Parliament .
This pattern is consistent .
Thus , the EU needs an effective anti-fraud authority .
But we have had bad experiences of OLAF , including a lack of independence , a lack of transparency , secret lobbying in connection with the appointment of the director general and the Supervisory Committee .
Our rapporteur , Mrs Gräßle , has put a lot of work into guaranteeing independence , transparency and strict observation of the rules .
I call on the House to give its full support to Mrs Gräßle 's proposal .
It is an important first step on the EU 's long path , if possible , to win the trust of its citizens .
Allow me to finish by making a particularly strong plea in favour of an amendment that I myself have put forward .
This requires all EU bodies to respect journalists ' sources .
After the scandalous Tillack affair , where the actions of the OLAF leadership warrant sharp criticism , this reform is absolutely necessary .
In the end it was the European Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg that fully acquitted Tillack last year .
Neither OLAF , the European Parliament nor the European Court of Justice accepted their responsibility .
( NL ) Madam President , it is very important for the European Union to have an efficient and well-developed anti-fraud office , all the more so given how much budgets are increasing and foreign aid growing , without it always being possible to monitor effectively whether the deployed means are spent wisely .
I think that public opinion , the tax payer in other words , often questions this , with good reason .
This report contains a large number of sound proposals and I for one will be endorsing it , even though I believe that more thought should be given to OLAF 's independence .
OLAF is a Directorate-General of the European Commission , and the political responsibility rests with the Vice-President of the Commission .
Operationally and in terms of research , the office is independent , but this hybrid status is potentially problematic , to say the least .
I am convinced that independent status could only reinforce the office 's clout .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Dr Gräßle .
Our rapporteur tried to reconcile all the parties and by doing this she could identify current problems , could find practical solutions and could find compromise .
At present things are not too satisfactory .
We see the Court of Auditors refusal to sign off the EU 's account for the 14th time in a row due to the number of irregularities and fraud cases which involve EU money .
It is high time to support a tougher approach tackling the misuse of EU funds .
Since the establishment of the European Public Prosecutor 's office is postponed , it is high time to move forward in the fight against fraud by strengthening the independence of the European Anti-fraud Office and by strengthening the investigative power of OLAF .
There is an important point in the Gräßle report : strengthening cooperation with the Member States .
Although the regulation states that all national and international partners must provide all the cooperation necessary , there is no detailed legal basis for such cooperation .
The number of obstacles even increases when we come to cross-border anti-fraud cooperation .
There is a great need , therefore , for the amended regulation which comprises a better cooperation management between OLAF and the competent authorities of the Member States .
The only institution which really has the means to protect the financial interest of the EU is the European Parliament .
If we do not stand up for the fight against corruption and fraud , there is no one to replace us .
Finally , I would like to raise an interesting point .
While the European countries are among the so-called ' cleanest countries ' in the 2008 Global Corruption Perception Index , according to recent studies these wealthy countries like to show preference for using illegal means , for example bribery , in their outside overseas businesses .
I agree with all those who find these double standards unacceptable .
( ES ) Madam President , I want to start by congratulating Mrs Gräßle and in particular thanking her for her openness to suggestions and proposals .
I can say that - and I congratulate you on this - you successfully led a dynamic work team to achieve the best possible results .
Congratulations , Mrs Gräßle !
I believe that the most important element in this text , which my Group at least also fought for and on which Mrs Gräßle 's attention was focused , is the guarantee that the rights of citizens under investigation will be protected .
The principles of presumption of innocence , privacy and confidentiality , the procedural guarantees and also the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union will from now on be the key points of this procedural code for OLAF investigations .
We want this to be published as soon as possible and to be sent - in fact it must be sent - to the Review Adviser appointed for this purpose so that a response can be given to citizens ' complaints within 30 working days .
The role of the Supervisory Committee has also been reinforced .
This must protect the independence of OLAF through regular monitoring of the implementation of its investigative function .
In addition , and this is something I must highlight and which I assume Mrs Gräßle will also highlight , it can appear before the Court of Justice , as can the Director General , who can also bring the institutions before the Court of Justice .
This was something that the rapporteur was keen to ensure .
In this way , the role of the Director General of OLAF will also be more protected and have greater safeguards .
The role of the European Parliament in the institutional conciliation procedure is also reinforced .
I believe that this is an important and innovative element .
Although we would have preferred not to increase the extension periods , because two years still seems to us to be too long , we understand that investigations can be difficult and complex .
However , we hope that the Commission - and here I must also thank Mr Kallas for his openness and for the support that he gave us - after the four-year period when the report on the regulation 's implementation should be presented to us , will be able to tell us how we can improve this point of reducing the investigation periods as far as possible .
We are still hoping for a European Public Prosecutor , a desire that we share with the rapporteur . Thank you , Mrs Gräßle !
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am filled with sadness .
At Mrs Gräßle 's proposal , OLAF is unwittingly being accorded additional powers , while OLAF itself is not subject to adequate supervision .
In 1999 , the then Committee of Wise Men predicted that , as an internal Commission office , OLAF would refuse to work with a powerless supervisory committee .
The effects are clear for everyone to see .
Unhindered by accountability and control , OLAF 's management , and particularly its Director-General , has slipped up time and again .
Staged staff selection , violation of the rights of the defence , concealment of evidence and submission of criminal dossiers with lapsed prosecution deadlines .
The pièce de résistance is OLAF 's own dreamed up charge of bribery against a journalist who was too well informed for OLAF 's liking .
In fact , OLAF even managed to secure a house search , at which point the journalist 's belongings were confiscated .
OLAF subsequently lied about the full facts to the Commission , Parliament , the law courts , the ombudsman and the public prosecutors in Belgium and Germany for years .
In fact , OLAF has sent its own researchers out with false information .
How far can they take this ?
The Commission is aware of this , and says this has to stop , but claims it is not authorised to act .
This is precisely why the Commission has withdrawn this proposal .
As you already indicated , it was made with the best of intentions .
Our increasing insight into current abuses , though , make it necessary for a different supervisory body to monitor OLAF , and one of the options indicated by yourself is coming to an end .
The solution is an independent OLAF which operates independently of the Commission and under competent supervision , that is not appointed by politicians but by public prosecutors of the Member States , until such time as a European public prosecution is formed .
( DE ) Madam President , the fact that the European Union has such a poor public image unfortunately has a great deal to do with OLAF .
I agree with the previous speaker that OLAF is neither fish nor fowl and it takes a characteristically arbitrary approach .
OLAF employees have been coming to me and telling me how depressing things are , that two types of measurements are used and that no clear standards are set .
One OLAF employee even compared OLAF 's practices with those of the secret police , in other words , an undemocratic institution .
The occasion was , of course , once again the so-called Galvin report , the internal report in which many of the practices of Members of the European Parliament are disclosed which , if OLAF were to use the same standards , would have led to large-scale investigations , including one of Herbert Bösch , who refers to himself as the father of OLAF .
What is happening in this case to the German Members among others ?
What is happening to many other Members ?
Instead of taking the correct approach and doing what was done in my case , in other words , saying that we are acting on our own initiative , where there is clear suspicion of fraud , for example tax evasion or illegal party funding , OLAF sits back and does nothing .
Of course , this also has a lot to do with the personal approach of the current Director General .
This is a challenge for you , Commissioner .
What is happening here is not worthy of a democracy .
In my case , they made up technical errors and searched and searched .
In the end there was no truth in the accusations , which was embarrassing for OLAF .
However , in cases where there may be some truth in the suspicions of fraud , they do nothing and simply look the other way .
For this reason , I am of the opinion that many EU officials work in the same way as OLAF and that an EU officialdom of this kind can no longer be supported , that many EU officials should be brought before a court and that we need true democracy at a European level at last , with separation of powers , and not an OLAF like the one we currently have !

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to clarify that Mr Martin , who is just coming in , has stated in one of his points , that OLAF should have investigated Mr Bösch .
That should not be allowed .
It would mean that there is a suspicion of fraud in this case , because I know that OLAF can only carry out investigations in the case of suspected fraud .
I would ask the Bureau to resolve this issue .
I reject the accusation .
This sort of thing simply should not be allowed !
I hope that appropriate measures are taken against Mr Martin .
Without any evidence , he has stated that OLAF should have taken proceedings against Mr Bösch and other German fellow Members .
This should not happen and I expect measures to be taken in this case .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , the Member States , Europol and Eurojust will now have to concern themselves on a regular basis with OLAF 's findings .
The information provided by the European Anti-Fraud Office will pass directly to the police and to the justice system and will be binding .
As a member of the Committee on Regional Development , I warmly welcome this reform .
OLAF must make use of its new powers , because the structural funds are a major problem for us .
The number of irregularities has increased dramatically and the amount of damages rose from EUR 43 million in 1998 to EUR 828 million in 2007 .
This increase is not acceptable .
Therefore , it is good that we are improving the controls and the prosecution process .
However , we must also press more strongly for the Member States to publish the names of their subsidy recipients .
We should also explain one of the causes of the abuse .
I am of the opinion that we put too little emphasis on the responsibility of the regions when we allocate the funds .
For this reason , we must increase the mandatory joint financing by the regions and the project promoters and we must offer more loan-based programmes .
If the recipients of the funding can identify more closely with the potential lasting success of their projects , there will be less abuse and less work for OLAF .
Madam President , before I make my point , I would just like to make a comment to my colleague , Mr Martin .

Whilst he has some very valid points to make , in his scattergun approach he should not try and take out an honest , decent and good man like Mr Bösch , who in my experience of his chairmanship of the Committee on Budgetary Control - even though we might disagree on many points - is exactly what I have described him as .
My concern with OLAF 's problem is that it has a huge conflict of interests going on .
It is not necessarily OLAF itself , but the strange relationship whereby it is part of the Commission , even though it is occasionally called upon to investigate that body .
That is why I am concerned that OLAF , which was born following the 1999 ' Wise Men 's ' report - and that report called for it to be independent of the Commission - spends less and less of its time investigating internal Commission matters .
Certainly some of its other investigations are very sexy and exciting , but I am not convinced that Mrs Gräßle 's report addresses the problems of OLAF 's independence in this way .
Finally , I am concerned that there is another level of conflict of interests .
Should OLAF members of staff be allowed to have relatives working in parts of the EU institutions that they might be investigating ?
Indeed , should we not - this Parliament that has banned spouses from working for MEPs - now extend this call to say that only one family member should work in any of the EU institutions to prevent such future conflicts of interests ?
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that it is particularly important for OLAF to make a distinction between disinformation , which in some cases is controlled from outside Europe , and the bureaucratic treaties which are often 50 to 60 pages long and the manuals of over 600 pages , where , of course , the most errors occur .
We should explain here that clear and simple regulations are much easier to follow than complex and comprehensive ones .
This is why I am specifically calling on the Council to improve the basic conditions as quickly as possible .
We need OLAF for transparency and justice in Europe .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I am grateful for all the remarks , which reflect very clearly the controversial nature of this topic .
As Ms Gräßle mentioned , this proposal started in 2004 , when times were completely different .
I like the expression ' there is a conflict of interests ' .
There is a clear institutional conflict of interests between independence and accountability .
We must continue to work and have this debate .
Whatever will happen cannot happen without collaboration between Parliament , the Council and the Commission on how to solve this conflict of interests .
As I have said , there are not many , but some , possibilities .
Most of you clearly support the idea of greater independence , which also means greater accountability .
Let us find out what is possible .
There are certain clear limits within the Commission .
It is very clear that the directorate general cannot go independently to the courts : it is not possible within the legal framework .
A very important point mentioned by many of you was the right to go to the Member States .
Again , it is the Commission that takes action in the Member States , and there are clear limits to the extent of involvement by the Commission which is acceptable to Member States .
The Commission is accountable here and to the public for OLAF 's activities , so we would be very happy to have a more independent OLAF , which could go independently to the courts and be independently accountable , with a separate discharge .
We would welcome all these things and also very clear supervision both of the investigations and of the content of those investigations .
At present we do not have a public prosecutor .
This is what we await , but while we are waiting we must find some other solutions .
Let us continue this work .
As I said , we will formulate a concept paper on the basis of this discussion .
I am looking forward to fruitful debates with the honourable Members and the rapporteurs on this issue .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the debate .
I believe that the Commissioner has now realised how important the independence of OLAF is to this Parliament .
I would also like this debate to be included in the discussions which we will now be holding .
I would like to request that we start these discussions gradually , that we exchange ideas about the amendments and that we do not reach the position of saying ' that is not possible ' .
This is the will of Parliament .
We are part of the codecision-making procedure and we will require the EU Commission to take part in the procedure as well .
We are supporting you .
We want you to retain your influence on OLAF , but you must exert your influence in the right place and provide OLAF with more support than was previously the case .
We are only partially satisfied and that is also the result of the work of the EU Commission .
There are many subjects on the table which need very serious discussion .
I am ready for this and I am looking forward to the debate .
However , I would like there to be a sort of loosening-up exercise at the start of the debate for the Commission , because there is no point in us even sitting down together if everything that you have presented today is already cast in concrete and set in stone .
We must talk very seriously together about what is possible and also what is not possible .
I would like to reject two points .
One is the distorted image of OLAF which some fellow Members are painting on the basis of their own small-minded self-interest .
It is a distorted image which has nothing to do with reality .
I would like to make sure that OLAF is aware that this image does not represent the majority opinion of the House .
We believe that OLAF is doing an important job and this also applies in the case of Mr Martin .
It was not the case that there was no truth in the story .
However , it was true that the Austrian state prosecutor 's office did not want to follow up on the results of OLAF 's investigation .
That happens frequently .
You , Mr Martin , must also speak the truth in this House .
This applies to you too .
I would like to say to Mr van Buitenen that I very much regret that you did not accept the offers of cooperation .
We have spoken together twice , but I do not believe that you can look at OLAF on the basis of individual cases .
Something always goes wrong in organisations , but looking at the whole organisation on the basis of these individual cases does not give the right picture .
I have tried not to do this . I would like to make this very clear .
On a personal level , I hold you in high esteem and I have read all your books .
However , I believe that there are different ways of working and in politics we always run the risk of coming to the wrong conclusion by focusing on individual cases .
I believe that the report in front of us is a good one .
( DE ) Madam President , I refer to Articles 145 and 149 on personal statements , which allows me three minutes .
What is happening here is simply outrageous .
OLAF is making something out of nothing and making an accusation against me on the basis of its own investigations .
This had a huge impact on our election success in 2006 .
A year later the state prosecutor decided that there may have been a few small technical errors , but that they did not under any circumstances justify an investigation of any kind .
No proceedings were taken and the whole thing was abandoned .
Nothing happened at all .
What Mrs Gräßle has said here is slander .
It is a continuing attempt to destroy my reputation .
This is exactly how OLAF exploits the situation .
If OLAF comes to a conclusion , but the Member States do nothing , then the person is still guilty .
That is a complete scandal !
Where are the double standards in this scandal , Mrs Gräßle ?
The double standards lie in the fact that where there are genuinely suspicious circumstances relating to Members of this Parliament , relating to other Members , no investigation is carried out and nothing at all is done .
This is undermining democracy in Europe .
This is because a secret tool which is under political control is being used to speak out and to act against troublesome opponents and then attempts are made to make something out of this and genuinely false statements are made , despite the fact that government institutions - and I have a high opinion of the relatively independent Austrian judicial system - say that there is no truth in it .
This is a slap in the face for every voter and a slap in the face for Europe 's credibility .
If you are elected with 14 % of the vote and then you are humiliated like this and incorrect facts are passed on repeatedly , this ruins what was previously regarded as a fair and integrative system .
You are damaging Europe and destroying democracy , Mrs Gräßle !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Review of recommendation 2001 / 331 / EC providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspection in the Member States ( debate )
The next item is the Oral Question - B6-0479 / 2008 ) by Mr Ouzký to the Commission , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the review of Recommendation 2001 / 331 / EC providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States .
author . - Madam President , it is difficult to stand up now after that particularly lively debate and switch to another topic !
I would like to stress that the good and consistent enforcement of environmental legislation is essential for its credibility , for a level playing field and for ensuring that the environmental objectives will be met .
The issue of environmental inspections is , therefore , very important for the work of my committee , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
On 14 November the Commission published the communication on environmental inspections in the Member States .
This communication reviewed Recommendation 2001 / 331 / EC of the European Commission , providing minimum criteria for environmental inspections .
The communication contains some worrying messages .
It states that the information submitted by the Member States on the implementation of the recommendation is incomplete or difficult to compare .
It states that there are still large differences in the way environmental inspections are being carried out in the EU .
It states that the scope of the recommendation is inadequate and that it does not include many important activities such as Natura 2000 and the control of illegal waste shipping .
It states that inspection plans have not been implemented and where they do exist that they are often not publicly available .
My committee noted with concern the conclusions from the Commission stating that the full implementation of the environmental legislation in the Community cannot be ensured .
This would not only lead to continuing damage to the environment , but also to the distortion of competition within and between the Member States .
My committee therefore formulated four questions to the Commission , which can be summarised as follows .
First , why does the Commission only wish to amend the recommendation - why does it not propose a directive on environmental inspections ?
Second , why has the Commission opted instead for attaching environmental inspection requirements to existing directives individually , a process that will take a lot of time ?
Third , why is the Commission not prepared to use a directive to define terms such as ' inspection ' and ' audit ' , which are interpreted in different ways by Member States ?
Fourth , why is the Commission not prepared to transform IMPEL into an effective EU environmental inspection force ?
I would like to thank the Commission in advance for its reply and I would like to conclude by emphasising that , in my opinion , the implementation and enforcement of environmental legislation should get the same political attention as the adoption of the legislation in the Commission , in the Council and in Parliament .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very happy to be presenting my green credentials in addition to my anti-fraud credentials , so changing topics is also a pleasure .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for this discussion on the very important topic of environmental inspections .
Recognising the need for EU-wide action , Parliament and the Council adopted the recommendation on environmental inspections in 2001 .
The objective was to lay down common criteria for environmental inspections in order to ensure a better and more consistent implementation of environmental legislation through the Community .
At the time there was a long discussion on whether these criteria should be binding or non-binding .
As a compromise , a non-binding recommendation was adopted .
Member States pledged to implement it fully and the Commission was asked to review this decision on the basis of the experience with the implementation of the recommendation by the Member States .
The Commission launched the review process with its communication of November 2007 .
In this communication the Commission concluded that , although the recommendation has led to improvements in environmental inspections in some Member States , it has unfortunately not been fully implemented in all Member States .
The Commission thus put forward its preliminary views on how the situation could be improved .
The measures that we deem necessary are : firstly , a modification of the recommendation to make it stronger and clearer , including a better reporting mechanism ; secondly , where necessary , to complement the recommendation with legally binding inspection requirements in individual directives ; and thirdly , to continue supporting the exchange of information and best practice between inspectorates in the context of IMPEL .
The Commission is now gathering the input of the other institutions and of stakeholders on these initial proposals and will then present its final proposals .
Now , coming to the questions raised , I would like to make the following remarks .
Firstly , I would like to clarify that the views presented in the Commission 's communication of November 2007 do not exclude the possibility of the Commission presenting a proposal for a directive on environmental inspections in the future .
The Commission 's view , as expressed in its communication , is that there is a need for EU-wide legally binding rules to ensure effective environmental inspections .
In that respect we have the same position as Parliament .
The question is , however , whether such rules should be horizontal and cover all environmental inspections or whether they should be sectoral and apply to specific installations or activities .
Both of these approaches have their advantages and disadvantages .
A horizontal approach would be simpler and quicker to put in place .
On the other hand , the sectoral approach would enable us to better address the specific aspects of the different installations or activities .
For instance , the requirements for inspections of waste shipments are completely different from those for the inspection of industrial installations .
By being more targeted we could set more effective requirements .
To some extent , the sectoral approach is the one that we have already been practising for several years .
For example , in the Seveso II Directive , we have provisions on inspections of installations in order to prevent accidents .
These provisions have proven to be very successful .
We have now included inspection requirements in our proposal to revise the IPPC Directive .
Another sector where we see the need for further action is the implementation of the EU Waste Shipment Regulation .
The growing problem of illegal waste shipments is a risk for human health and the environment .
There is clear evidence of illegal shipments recorded during joint EU waste shipment inspections coordinated by IMPEL .
Recent trade data and studies on the export of certain waste streams , in particular electrical and electronic waste and end-of-life vehicles , indicate that significant volumes leave the EU .
In many cases these shipments seem to violate the EU Waste Shipment Regulation 's export bans .
Serious incidents of EU exports for dumping of waste in developing countries , such as the Côte d 'Ivoire incident in 2006 , as well as a recent Greenpeace report about waste illegally shipped to West Africa , underline the severity of the problem .
The Commission is currently examining the need for additional initiatives , including improved legislative requirements , in order to further and strengthen the inspections and controls of waste shipments .
As we stated in our communication , we also see a need to establish common definitions for terms that are relevant for inspections .
For this purpose we think that a horizontal recommendation would be an appropriate instrument .
As regards the idea of transforming IMPEL into an EU environmental inspection force , IMPEL was created as an informal network of Member States ' inspection authorities .
Its objective is to facilitate exchange of information and best practice between the people who are actually applying environmental legislation in the Member States .
I think we should preserve this role of IMPEL of bringing together the expertise of inspectors and allowing for an informal exchange of ideas at European level .
From the Commission 's side we will continue our support to IMPEL and reinforce our successful cooperation .
This year IMPEL was transformed from an informal network into an international association .
This will not only give IMPEL more visibility but also open new possibilities of activities for IMPEL .
To go further and create an EU environmental inspection force with powers of entry and powers to refer Member States to the Court of Justice is an interesting and ambitious idea . However , it would raise important legal and institutional questions .
We should also look at the instruments for the improvement of the enforcement of EU environmental legislation at our disposal at present and consider whether these could be further developed or put to better use .
For example , the horizontal infringement cases that the Commission launched against Member States for systematic failure to enforce certain obligations , such as for the presence of thousands of illegal landfills in some Member States , have led to the establishment of improved enforcement strategies in the Member States .
Another example of an initiative that has led to better enforcement is the joint inspections of waste shipments throughout the Community organised within the framework of IMPEL with the support of the Commission .
We would consider ways to reinforce this cooperation and encourage all Member States to participate in it .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I find what the Commissioner has said rather disappointing .
I know that he is standing in for Mr Dimas and could not help but read out what was given to him , but I think we need rather more than that .
Environmental legislation is something that most people - perhaps all people - in this Chamber are in favour of - perhaps even including UKIP , who are apparently not here and are perhaps ironing their Union Jacks .
The trouble is that we do not know what is happening in the Member States , and the proposals from the European Commission go only a very little way to improving that situation .
We , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , are still in favour of having a directive rather than a recommendation .
I do not , myself , see why we could not have a general directive regarding environmental inspections and specific rules attached to specific directives where that is appropriate .
Let me then turn to the question of an EU environmental inspection force .
It is perhaps a little strange that this idea comes forward from the mouth of a British Conservative - vote Blue , go Green - but we do need this , because , otherwise , the Commission is entirely dependent on the Member States for the information that they choose to give it .
It is extraordinary that nine years after the Landfill Directive came into force , Spain is now being prosecuted before the European Court of Justice for having 60 000 illegal landfills , taking up more than half-a-million tonnes of illegally dumped waste .
We think we know what is happening south of Naples .
The Birds Directive adopted in 1979 is still being widely neglected .
The Commission often finds that its prosecutions before the Court of Justice on environmental matters are initiated by private citizens .
I do not think that this is good enough .
We should tell the people of Europe that we cannot be sure that the environmental legislation which we are adopting is being complied with .
Given the fact that we are now looking at climate change legislation , that is very serious .
We must return to the issue of an EU environmental inspection force , which I fully support .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , on behalf of my group and as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , may I express my full support for the questions .
I share Members ' concerns expressed in these questions .
The Commission 's Communication of November 2007 does indeed give rise to many controversies and to doubts among all those concerned about the environment and those who wish environmental law not simply to be made in the European Parliament , but to be enforced , and to be enforced in the spirit in which it was intended .
To achieve this , we need an effective system of monitoring introduction and compliance with the law , which we still have not developed .
We have national systems which operate divergently and differently , while at the EU level we have a recommendation .
As we all know , recommendations are not binding .
This is stipulated in Article 249 of the Treaty of Rome , which specifies the differences between a directive and a recommendation .
I would therefore ask the Commission to treat the matter with all seriousness and to present the whole system of compliance monitoring , inspection and the resultant reports in the form of a binding instrument , a directive on compliance with environmental law in the European Union .
We cannot leave the matter where it is now and we cannot expect that amending one of the 2001 recommendations , that is , adding new Member State duties to the recommendation , will change anything .
Commissioner , it will change nothing at all .
The fact is that it we want to have effective environmental laws , we must have an effective enforcement and monitoring system .
To repeat : you have asked whether we should introduce sectoral or global monitoring regulations .
I on the other hand want to ask whether you would like to protect the whole of the environment or only individual sectors .
And this gives you the answer .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , in recent years , we in the European Parliament have approved a great deal of environmental legislation .
The environment is at the top of the agenda , and rightly so .
The important thing , though , is not just to produce legislation : it also needs to be implemented , and this is exactly where the problems appear to be .
According to information from the European Commission , the implementation of environmental policy leaves something to be desired at times .
Current environmental inspection policy is contained in the recommendation , which is interpreted quite differently in various Member States .
It has also been reported that environmental inspections have been carried out incompletely , all of which means that , despite existing environmental legislation , the environment does not always benefit .
If we want the quality of the environment to improve , we must , as an absolute priority , put effective controls in place to ensure that this legislation is implemented .
Commissioner , you claim to be presenting your green credentials .
In this respect , though , there is still quite a bit to be done .
I myself was rapporteur for a regulation on the transfer of waste in 2007 and before , and there is much room for improvement in that area .
In the context of better implementation of environmental policy , would you be prepared to make the existing recommendation binding ?
( PL ) Madam President , I share the view of the European Commission that large discrepancies exist between the different methods of monitoring environmental compliance used by different Member States , which make it impossible to ensure consistent introduction and enforcement of EU law .
In my work as an MEP I have had the opportunity to study the results of a number of IMPEL projects , including one concerning the crossborder movement of waste through sea ports .
I have discovered that cooperation between the various IMPEL inspection services consists not only of the sharing of experience , but also , and perhaps even most importantly , of joint monitoring operations and exchange of information about environmental crimes and offences .
Some dishonest companies deliberately transfer their unlawful operations to countries where they know the control system to be weaker and where they can continue to operate with impunity .
If control systems in all Member States were uniform , this would not be happening .
This is another argument in favour of the European Union having an efficient and uniform system for monitoring facilities for compliance with environmental requirements .
Inspections are an important instrument in the process of introduction and enforcement of EU laws , but in spite of this Member States give them different political priorities .
This is why I fully support the European Commission 's proposal amending the existing recommendations to make them more effective .
I agree with the proposal to include legally binding requirements concerning the inspection of specific facilities and operations in sectoral regulations .
When we have done this , we will be able to give inspections a higher political priority and improve enforcement of environmental laws throughout the Community .
- ( RO ) Inspections represent an important element for guaranteeing application of and compliance with Community environmental legislation .
In this sense , the Commission recommendation providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States was an important step forward when it was adopted in 2001 .
However , the evaluation of this recommendation 's application has highlighted more matters for concern .
The Commission 's Communication records the fact that there are still large disparities in the way environmental inspections are being carried out at local , region and national level .
In addition , it has been noted that the national measures adopted in the Communication 's wording differ very greatly , both in terms of application and control .
The shortcomings with this recommendation do not seem to have been remedied satisfactorily in the Commission 's Communication .
Even if this is proposed to accommodate the problems mentioned above , it is missing one key element , which has brought about modest success for the recommendation .
I mean the very legal nature of this document .
I believe therefore that only revising this recommendation will do no more than maintain the current state of uncertainty .
Only a directive can bring about a significant and effective improvement for environmental inspections .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for their remarks and observations concerning environmental issues , which are so sensitive , as we are all in favour of improving the environment .
Two remarks concerning them raised observations .
The Commission shares the view that legally binding requirements for environmental inspections are really needed and are valuable .
The Commission is working in that direction .
The question is where to have those binding requirements as regards the transformation of IMPEL into a European inspection force .
The Commission still takes the view that it is better to preserve IMPEL as it is .
I have received one motion for a resolutionpursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. pending voting time , and resumed at 12.05 p.m. )

1 .
Investigations conducted by the European Anti Fraud Office ( OLAF ) (
2 .
Draft amending budget No 8 / 2008 (
3 .
Special report by the European Ombudsman following the draft recommendation to the Council of the European Union in complaint 1487 / 2005 / GG (
4 .
Social security systems and pensions (
5 .
Conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment (
6 .
Single application procedure for residence and work (
- After the vote on Amendment 10 :
( FR ) Madam President , I think you need to repeat the vote on Amendment 1 , because there was the same majority that voted in favour of Amendment 1 .
You rushed the gun in saying that it had been rejected .
I think it is too late .
It was clearer for me on the first vote than it was on the subsequent ones .
I am sorry , but I have made my mind up on that one .
7 .
Amendment of the single CMO Regulation (
8 .
A facility providing financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments (
- On Amendment 1 :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , I think the oral amendment was sent to you in writing .
Rather than saying ' the Council and the Member States ' , I propose that we say ' the Member States within the Council ' .
In English it would read , ' the Member States within the Council and the Commission ' , with deletion of ' and the Member States ' .
( FR ) And I trust that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats can accept it .
It is more consistent and more effective .
9 .
EU and PNR data ( vote )
- Before the vote :
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the European Commission , group chairmen , ladies and gentlemen , first of all it is not without emotion that I address you at voting time .
I am delighted that the French Presidency has been given the opportunity to speak to the House on European PNR .
This project raises a great many questions , fears and expectations , which all deserve close consideration .
It involves a large number of public and private agencies and it is the internal security of the European Union , its notion of fundamental freedoms and rights and even , from certain points of view , its international policy which are at stake .
That is why this programme needs a methodical , concerted and progressive approach .
We have had open , well-argued debates on specific and concrete questions over the last six months .
We have heard from companies in the air travel sector , the services in charge of security in the Member States and the EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator .
We have worked with complete transparency with the data protection authorities and , I must say , the contribution by the European Data Protection Supervisor was extremely helpful .
The French Presidency obtained the opinion of the Agency for Fundamental Rights and this initiative was a first .
In the same spirit of openness , the Council communicated its wish to associate very closely with this House , regardless of the legal basis or institutional framework actually in force .
That is why we proposed to this House that views should be exchanged as frequently as possible on this programme .
Your rapporteur also received detailed information informally at each step of the work carried out over the last six months .
Next week the Presidency will present a written progress report to the Justice and Internal Affairs Council for approval .
I promise the House that this summary document will be sent to you .
The discussion between us needs to be able to cover all the important issues raised by this programme .
They are of three orders .
The first is that this instrument is an indispensable tool , as evidenced for example from its use in the fight against drugs .
In France , the data programme is responsible for 60 % to 80 % of drugs intercepted at airports .
One and a half tonnes of drugs a year is hardly anecdotal and what is valuable in the fight against drugs is equally valuable in the fight against terrorism .
For the EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator , who works in close contact with the services in charge in the Member States , the data from this programme are undeniably useful , mainly by reason of the particular vulnerability of terrorists at border crossings .
The second important issue is that we obviously require a set of principles to protect rights and freedoms which will need to be respected throughout Europe whenever data are used .
These data are collected and processed today using very different methods , which is unsatisfactory within the framework of the European Union .
We need harmonised standards and whatever is useless or disproportionate must of course be discarded or sanctioned .
Finally , the third important issue is of an international order .
There is an interest in developing a global policy , in having an alternative model to the American model and Europe must be in a position to promote this model at international level .
The European Union has the authority to intervene in the concerted global effort in order to influence the way in which these data and programmes are used and regulated .
It is a question of influence ; it is also a question of respect for our values .
Our airlines and our fellow citizens are asking us to do this in order to limit the constraints caused by overly diversified national requirements .
That , Madam President , committee chairmen , ladies and gentlemen , is what we need to reflect on together .
( Applause )
Madam President , I will be very brief .
I thank the Council for its statement .
I would like to say that - on behalf of the shadows of the other groups as well - I think the European Parliament is a serious partner , fully available to give input in this process .
However , we will only issue a formal position once there are full , satisfactory and detailed answers to all the concerns and objections that were raised on several occasions by the European Parliament , the European Data Protection Supervisor , the national data protection authorities , the fundamental rights agencies and the airlines , because I think they are entitled to a real answer .
Council has often pledged its commitment to the reforms of the Lisbon Treaty .
I would ask the Council , in the absence of those reforms , to act in the spirit of the Lisbon Treaty and to follow the recommendations of this House or to explain - not so much to the European Parliament but to the European citizens .
Eight years after Nice , decision-making on these issues in the area of police and justice cooperation unfortunately still takes place behind closed doors , not subject to any meaningful democratic scrutiny .
Therefore I wish that the Member States would show the same determination , courage and resolve to democratic reforms as they did in the financial crisis .
Finally , I appeal to my colleagues to endorse this resolution and give a very clear political signal to the Council .
( Applause )
( FR ) Madam President , as Minister Jouyet is to leave us , I think that Parliament should thank him .
He has been one of the most assiduous ministers we have known .
I wish him good luck .
( Loud applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
Such good humour today !
10 .
Financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments ( vote )
11 .
Response of the European Union to the deteriorating situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 1 :
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there is agreement among the political groups to delete the word ' special ' when talking about European special forces .
Therefore : ' delete the word " special " ' .
12 .
European Space Policy ( vote )
13 .
Cluster munitions ( vote )
14 .
HIV / AIDS : early diagnosis and early care ( vote )
15 .
Situation in the beekeeping sector ( vote )
16 .
Environmental inspection in Member States ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( FR ) Madam President , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is trying desperately to contest the competence of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality on the question of equality between men and women in the workplace .
It has seized our initiative to draft a report on the discriminatory effects of pay differentials and other inequalities on women 's pensions and on the trend towards the individualisation of social security rights .
The outcome is a hotchpotch report which strings together universally known generalities .
We are a long way from the unequal treatment of women on pensions and the remedies on which the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality wished to predicate its report .
As the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights on the basis of Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure , I did my best , with the unanimous support of the Committee on Women 's Rights , to propose specific corrections within the framework of the pension system reforms .
There are six very precise corrections designed to plug the gaps in women 's insurance as a result , for example , of maternity and their family commitments .
Can you believe that the Committee on Employment expressly rejected them , in flagrant contradiction of its obligations under Rule 47 ?
I am sorry that we have lost a battle , but the war and our fight will continue .
( NL ) Madam President , I have voted against the Klamt report for the simple reason that the entire concept of economic immigration and what is being referred to as the ' blue card ' bears witness to short-term thinking .
We should , instead , adopt a policy of training , re-training and getting the approximately 20 million unemployed that are currently in the European Union back into jobs .
We should , instead , learn from our past mistakes .
A case in point is the importing of guest workers and their families in the 70s and 80s , which turned into a major social problem .
They are now trying to appease the public by promising that this only involves highly-qualified and temporary immigrants , but who am I to doubt the words of Louis Michel , who states that other immigrants should also remain welcome .
In other words , the floodgates remain open .
All they are doing is creating a new one .
This is about a coalition against society .
Big business wants cheap labour and joins forces with the multi-cultural Left , with society left to pick up the tab .
( FR ) Madam President , I voted for the Parish report on the integration of the CMO in wine , the single CMO , with a heavy heart , because I consider that this single CMO is not a simplification and does not increase transparency .
It will make life more complicated for wine-growers and for the entire wine industry .
The Commissioner tried to reassure us yesterday evening .
I hope that the Commission will keep its word and that , most importantly , the profession will continue to be adequately represented on the advisory committee , as it has been since the first CMO in wine .
( DE ) Madam President , this morning I voted with some hesitation in favour of the report by Neil Parish on the creation of a single market organisation for a wide range of different agricultural products .
I welcome the Commission 's objective of simplifying European agricultural policy .
This means that in future there will only be one market organisation which will replace the 21 existing market organisations , for example , for fruit , vegetables , milk and wine .
However , the administration of the resulting highly complex document must be made as simple as possible .
For this reason , I am very pleased that the Commission gave the assurance in yesterday 's debate that it will take up my idea and include in the EUR-Lex European search engine the functionality to allow users to access only the articles which relate to their specific agricultural product .
The Commission has also confirmed that the wine market organisation , which was negotiated with some difficulty and which includes many of Parliament 's requirements , will remain unchanged .
It is only for this reason that I felt able to vote in favour of the report .
- ( SK ) I am delighted that , a few days ahead of 1 December , which is recognised as World AIDS Day , we are addressing this global problem .
The number of people infected with the HIV virus is growing .
About 14 000 people are infected every day , and 2 000 of these are children under 15 years old .
In addition to the usual hot-spots such as Africa and the Far East , the number of infected people has risen in Eastern Europe and in Central Asia .
In 2006 the number of infected people in these regions rose to 1.7 million .
The largest increase was recorded in Russia and Ukraine , where about 270 000 people were infected with the HIV virus .
The spread of HIV in these areas is caused mainly through drug abuse and the use of dirty needles .
In the case of Ukraine the figures are all the more alarming as they involve a direct neighbour of the European Union .
The fact that we have failed to bring the HIV problem under control despite worldwide prevention programmes should lead us to reassess these programmes and to intensify efforts aimed at prevention and the production of effective cures .
Madam President , in 1994 the West turned its head while genocide occurred in Rwanda .
The same could now happen in eastern Congo .
The immediate priority is humanitarian , but beyond that there is a delicate and tangled political mess to sort out .
This is partly because the international community not only washed its hands of the genocide in Rwanda , but allowed the Hutu génocidaires to flee to eastern Congo where President Kabila did little to rein in the militias , to the disgust of Kigali and the local Tutsis .
The UN and the AU must now take the lead in addressing the immediate political and security issues at stake , but we should also recognise that the competition for natural resources is behind funding much of this bloodshed .
China is a serious player in the region but has little interest in the human rights of Africa .
The Commission should examine whether a certification process for minerals and other resources could be applied now in Africa in the same way that the successful Kimberley Process has worked so well with the diamond industry over blood diamonds or conflict diamonds .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution .
( FR ) Madam President , this resolution is a little late coming .
It is rather ' mustard after dinner ' as , since Directive 91 / 414 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market was adopted , very little has been done to promote research into the effect of pesticides on bees , especially on the complete reproduction cycle of bees .
It is all the more astonishing that , during the vote at first reading of the Breyer report on the placing of plant protection products on the market , in other words on the reform of Directive 91 / 414 , many of those who today voted in favour of a resolution spoke out against the amendments guaranteeing better protection for bees .
It is not good intentions that will take us forward ; it is facts and acts and I trust that , when we vote on the Breyer report at second reading , my fellow Members will remember this resolution and vote in favour of the bees .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to say to Mrs Hennicot , who only recently joined this House , that she obviously cannot know what we have been calling for since 1994 , especially in this domain .
I should like to thank all the Members who contributed to this debate and to the resolution on the alarming situation in the agricultural sector .
There was not a crowd - nor was Mrs Hennicot here - yesterday evening towards midnight , which is understandable , to follow this excellent and very substantial debate aimed at encouraging the Commission to step up its efforts in the face of this very worrying crisis in the bee-keeping sector .
I see with pleasure that the Commission has understood us .
I should like to point out to the services that Amendment 1 , which was adopted and which my group voted against , is a purely editorial amendment .
There is a mistake in the German translation of my recital B ) .
We therefore need to correct this translation , which says exactly the same thing as the amendment in German .
As regards the amendment on the authorisation of plant protection products which has since been withdrawn , I agree with its content .
However , as it reproduces word for word the text voted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the placing of these products on the market , I and my group felt that we should not plagiarise this text and should give way to the Committee on the Environment .
However , our recommendation and claim are extremely well formulated in paragraph 8 of the resolution , in which we call for exactly the same thing , in other words for research work on links between bee mortality and the use of pesticides to be stepped up with a view to taking appropriate measures in terms of the authorisation of these products .
Obviously pesticides that kill bees must not be authorised .
It is what we have been saying for years .
Ms Lulling , thank you for your attention to the detail of this measure .
We can assure you that the language versions will be carefully checked .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my excellent friend and fellow Member Ingeborg Grassle , I voted for the legislative resolution approving , subject to amendment , the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
I support better protection of the rights of persons under investigation by OLAF and reinforced cooperation with the Member States .
There was a growing need for public governance of anti-fraud investigative activities by OLAF and independent control of the procedures and duration of enquiries , while guaranteeing the confidentiality of investigations .
Inge Grassle has done a tremendous job of work in this report and deserves our thanks .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for Mrs Gräßle 's report because anyone involved in an investigation conducted by OLAF needs to have the opportunity to make comments , at least in writing , about the matters relating to it .
These comments should be presented to the Member States involved , along with other information obtained during the course of the investigation .
This is the only way to present national authorities with complete information relating to the case , while also respecting the principle according to which both parties need to enjoy the opportunity to present their own point of view .
At the same time , the report also ensures cooperation with third countries and strengthens the role of the OLAF Control Committee .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the report by Mrs Gräßle on investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
It is , in fact , extremely important for us to amend the regulation on such investigations , since certain interinstitutional relations must be reviewed .
In addition , we need to amend the regulation with regard to the rights of persons involved in investigations and with regard to the exchange of information between OLAF , European institutions , Member States and informants .
Finally , I congratulate Mrs Gräßle on her initiative ; she has produced some further interesting proposals , concerning , for example , the new role of the Director General of the Office , who would have powers to open external investigations not only at the request of a Member State or the Commission but also at the request of the European Parliament .
Thank you , Madam President .
I voted in favour . The key point of this debate is not only the specific issue being tackled by the Committee on Petitions , with reference to the dissemination of German in relation to its use by Community institutions .
First and foremost , this is a general issue of access to documents by citizens of all nationalities , and , as a result , of the transparency of the Community institutions .
From this perspective , therefore , I believe it is absolutely vital for the Council to carry out a thorough examination of the issue with a view to promoting an increase in the number of languages used on Presidency websites .
Such an increase could take place gradually , on the basis of appropriate , objective criteria to be defined .
We should , however , bear in mind the fact that the greater the number of languages used , the greater the number of citizens that will be able to have a closer relationship to Europe .
Citizens should view the European institutions in the way in which they view the buildings that house us : our institutions ought to be accessible .
in writing . - ( PT ) We generally agree with the report and , in particular , with what it says about the Ombudsman 's conclusions in that : ' the Council 's refusal to address the substance of the complainant 's request constitutes an instance of maladministration ' and ' the information on these websites should , ideally , be made available in good time in all official languages of the Community ' .
However , we disagree with paragraph 1 ( d ) of the report 's conclusions , which states : ' if the number of languages is to be limited , the choice of the languages to be used must be based on criteria of objectivity , reasonableness , transparency and manageability ' .
We would argue that the Council 's website should , like those of the European Parliament and the European Commission , contain all its information in all the official languages of the European Union .
Only in this way can the multilingualism and cultural diversity supposedly defended by Community leaders , but which in practice are constantly being called into question for the sake of economising , actually be defended .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although there are some contradictory aspects in the resolution adopted by a majority of this House , with the odd positive aspect , the main argument is that , because of the ageing population and demographic change , greater fragility of the universal and public social security system is justified in order to respond to the interests of the private financial sector , which wants to manage the greatest possible slice of this cake .
Just look , for example , at the following paragraph : ' Recalls that the trend towards individualisation , contributes to the modernisation of the second and the third pillars , without calling into question the first pillar of social security systems ; this to enable people , especially women and other vulnerable groups , to have more freedom of choice and thus become more independent and able to build up their own , additional pension rights ' .
In other words , in the name of freedom , the aim is to encourage people to find alternative financial solutions to public social security , even where the clearly negative results of this are well-known .
Recent cases in the US are a perfect example of this .
However , capitalism always tries to use propaganda to further its own aims .
This is why we have voted against .
in writing . - ( FR ) The rapporteur , Mrs Stauner , has given a lucid analysis of the challenges presented by the ageing of our populations and the decline in our active populations to our social protection systems , to which she appears to be attached .
That is a first good point in her favour .
A second good point is the timid question which she raises about the real efficacy of the usual panacea proposed , which is to organise the installation en masse of immigrant workers who , we hope , will pay pensions and health systems for the old Europeans , a panacea of a staggering cynicism and selfishness defended by people who often claim to have a monopoly on sympathy and tolerance .
Finally , she earns a last good point for her critical analysis of the trend towards the privatisation of health systems and the purely financial approach to the reform of national social security systems .
However , this report fails to address the main point : as it is the demographic decline of our continent which is at the root of these problems , that is what we need to remedy .
The Member States can no longer avoid an ambitious family policy to encourage the birth rate to rise , as a pledge to the equilibrium of their social security systems and , more importantly , to their dynamism , prosperity and , quite simply their survival .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report observes that in most Member States the population is getting older and that the social security and pension systems will therefore be put under strain .
The solution put forward to resolve this problem is the usual one , namely various EU measures .
The June List is of the opinion that the EU ought not to concern itself at all with matters relating to Member States ' social security and pension systems .
The European Parliament has views on the statutory pensionable age , employment contracts , what form of pension system Member States should introduce , labour taxation , sharing of the tax burden and how care should be organised in the EU countries .
These are matters that should be dealt with entirely at national level .
General pointers from the EU institutions on these matters contribute absolutely nothing .
We have therefore voted against this report in the final vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although the report by Mrs Stauner refers to the Lisbon Strategy , that patent Europeanist failure , it deserves to be supported because it questions the credo of immigration as a remedy to further deterioration in the demographic , economic and social deficits of Europe .
Immigration , selective or otherwise , distorts the identity and culture of the people of Europe and aggravates community divisions and the tensions that derive from them , in the image of what is happening in every multi-ethnic and multicultural society in the world .
It is neo-proslavery which only benefits the money-grubbers of globalisation , who see in this cheap labour a means of exerting pressure on wages against a background of already very high unemployment .
It will allow the elites of third countries to be pillaged , thereby exacerbating their situation .
It is a delusion in strategic terms , because the behaviour of immigrants will end up being modelled on that of Europeans ; I am thinking here mainly of the unfortunate tendency to have fewer children in a society which is truly disorientated on all counts .
Apart from supporting families and a higher birth rate in Europe , the new Europe of the nations needs a policy of national and Community preference , a policy of national and Community protection .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report reveals the full extent of the deeply anti-grassroots aspirations of the EU and euro-unifying capital in terms of abolishing social insurance systems .
It terrifyingly parades the pretext of demographic decline in the EU to propose an increase in the retirement age and the application of the ' three pillar ' system , namely :
poverty-level pensions from the national social security systems ;
the expansion of ' occupational ' pension funds which provide a contribution-based pension ;
recourse by workers to private insurance ( ' individualisation ' in the euro-unifying terminology ) , the so-called ' third pillar ' .
It thereby paves a very broad way for the monopoly insurance companies to increase their profits by entering yet another profitable sector .
This attack forms part of a bundle of EU anti-labour measures , such as the general application of ' flexicurity ' , the ' readjustment ( that is , abolition ) of labour legislation , the institutionalisation of ' slavetrading ' employment agencies , the directive introducing inactive working time with a 65-hour week and the arrangement of working time on an annual basis .
The working class must reply to the increasingly savage attack by euro-unifying capital with a counter-attack , by setting up an anti-monopoly alliance which will claim its grassroots power and lay the foundations for the satisfaction of grassroots needs and grassroots prosperity .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union cannot have a higher employment rate as long as we have social categories which are much more weakly represented and social groups excluded from the labour market .
People with disabilities or those with serious health problems would like to work , but most times , they are subject to serious discrimination by employers .
In addition , special fittings are needed to ensure that these people can carry out their job properly , but employers are not prepared to invest very much in this area .
Financial measures adopted in the Member States have not had the expected results .
In Romania 's case , I can mention the deduction , when calculating taxable profit , of sums relating to the purchase of equipment and to equipment used in the production process by a disabled person , of the transport costs for disabled people from their home to the place of work , as well as the discount from the insurance budget for unemployment of the specific costs for preparation , professional training and advice .
Setting up certain specific enterprises , as described in the report , offers a concrete solution for including these social categories which are vulnerable in the labour market .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased with the excellent work done by Mrs Stauner on the future of social security systems and pensions and I have supported it by voting in favour .
I endorse the reasoning on which the report is based and I believe that we , the European Union acting together with the Member States , ought to try to find an appropriate solution to the problems raised , as quickly as possible .
Europe is a continent with an ageing population , and its mean birth rate is below the natural population replacement rate .
In less than fifty years the population of Europe will be smaller and older .
Immigration will certainly not be the solution to the problem : rather , there is a need to attract and retain a greater number of people in high-quality jobs , to provide a high level of social security protection and job security , to improve education and training for our work force , and to modernise the old pension systems , noting the instability linked to privately-funded systems , which are endorsed by many .
in writing . - I fully support the introduction of the Blue Card .
However , with the adoption of the PPE and PSE amendments , I fear that Europe 's forward-looking strategy on legal migration will soon vanish into thin air .
The current text is simply off-putting to most highly qualified workers considering legal immigration to the EU .
Highly qualified workers will not be encouraged to work on the EU labour market , not least because of the bureaucratic obstacles that were endorsed in the current text .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the report on conditions of entry and residence for third-country nationals for the purposes of highly-qualified employment , also known as the EU Blue Card .
The report that was voted on in Parliament improves the directive , in particular with regard to the equal treatment of workers from third countries , as it prevents discrimination against these workers .
It is also a positive move that Member States are to have the opportunity to investigate their own need to open the way for the immigration of workers .
We also welcome the fact that Parliament has rejected the proposals put forward by the Commission which have allowed employers to discriminate against people for thirty years .
It is pleasing to see that the possibility for EU Member States to take workers from sectors in third countries where there is a shortage of workers is also being restricted .
This prevents the EU contributing to a brain drain of highly qualified workers from , in particular , the developing countries .
At the same time , we regret the fact that Parliament was unable to agree on the issue of collective agreements also applying to workers from third countries .
We also regret the fact that Amendment 79 was not adopted .
Finally , the setting of pay levels is not a matter in which the EU has competence and it must ultimately be possible for this to be decided by the social partners in the respective Member States .
We expect the Swedish Government to continue the fight in the continuing Council negotiations .
Thank you , Madam President .
I voted in favour . This is an extremely important provision .
The creation of new rights for highly-qualified workers from third countries represents an opportunity both for migrants and for the host countries .
Above all , it is vital that this should take place within a framework of criteria common to all the EU Member States , to avoid any disparities and also to increase Europe 's ability to attract such individuals , which still lags far behind the figures achieved by the United States and Canada .
Within this framework of shared rules that we are preparing to adopt , I wholeheartedly support the amendments by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
A minimum wage no lower than that of a similar worker from the host country is a guarantee of equality that we consider to be vital .
Similarly , we advocate extending the blue card to those already resident in the Member States and lengthening the extension in the event of job loss to six months .
Finally , we have a duty to cooperate with countries outside the EU to support the training of highly-qualified staff in the key sectors that might feel the effects of the brain drain .
The adoption of this measure will , in addition , encourage legal immigration and will enrich the EU with professional skills and human experience , within that perspective of exchange which has always constituted the true essence of the European spirit
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Klamt report on the introduction of a ' European Blue Card ' because , for the first time , it also offers us the opportunity at European level to move from a ' no ' culture , the culture of fortress Europe , to a ' yes ' culture , a culture of an open Europe , so that we can at long last develop positive management of migratory movements and grant workers a certain number of rights .
This process will need to be quickly followed by the adoption of other measures in favour of other categories of foreign workers and I shall be looking out for them .
We could certainly have gone even further ; we would have liked to see a horizontal directive rather than a sectoral directive , but the acquis is there , especially the principle of ' an equal day 's pay for an equal day 's work ' , the refusal to start a brain drain , especially in key sectors such as health and education , and the doubling of the period of residency rights for the purpose of looking for a new job once a contract of employment has ended .
This text therefore seeks above all to promote legal immigration channels , not a form of selective immigration , to which I am opposed .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for Mrs Klamt 's report because it offers the possibility of work to immigrants with high professional qualifications .
It stipulates in the report that EU states are obliged to give priority to European citizens , something which benefits Romanian citizens from the perspective of the restrictions applied to the labour market by a number of EU states .
The report offers people who meet the conditions provided for by the directive the opportunity to have an EU Blue Card issued , with an initial validity of two years , which can be renewed for a further two years .
If the employment contract lasts for a shorter period than two years , the Blue Card will be issued for the duration of the contract , plus a further three months .
in writing . - I regrettably abstained on the vote on the report by Ewa Klamt , the proposal for a Council Directive on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment , as Ireland did not opt in to this proposal under Article 3 to the Fourth Protocol to the Amsterdam Treaty and already has an existing national policy in this area which offers flexibility and a wide degree of discretion in terms of adapting to labour market conditions .
in writing . - ( SV ) Competition for ambitious , skilled workers has only just begun .
In order to succeed in globalisation , Europe must become more attractive in the fight for the world 's talent .
The Commission 's proposal for a blue card to facilitate entry into the European labour markets is therefore extremely welcome .
I myself have long been a keen advocate of the blue card and other ideas to facilitate entry into Europe 's labour market .
Unfortunately , the proposal has been watered down so much by the majority in Parliament that I chose to abstain in the vote .
I will continue the fight in the EU for a considerably pithier blue card than that which Parliament felt able to support .
in writing . - ( FR ) The EU Blue Card , which it is claimed is reserved for highly qualified workers , offering cardholders freedom of movement and establishment in all the Member States of the European Union , will be a new suction pump for immigration which will be no more controlled at EU level than it is today in many countries at national level .
Opening instant admission rights to family members with no real limit in time will encourage permanent populating immigration .
It is the bureaucratic organisation of the new modern form of slavery , which from now on will choose its victims on the grounds of their diplomas , not for their muscles or their teeth .
It will deprive developing countries of the brains which they sorely need , thereby aggravating their economic situation and guaranteeing the pursuit without end of increasing illegal immigration .
It introduces a minimum wage threshold which is completely absurd and arbitrary , taking no account of reality or of the sectors or professions in question , with a double foreseeable consequence : a lowering of the salaries of the most highly qualified Europeans , who will be even more tempted than they are now to relocate out of Europe , and the exploitation of the immigrants , in the absence of any guarantee that they will be paid a salary which is truly commensurate with their qualifications .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite Parliament 's adoption of amendments - which we voted for - which lessen some of the negative aspects of the proposal to create the ' Blue Card ' in the European Union , we consider that these amendments question neither the motives nor the central objectives of the proposal for a directive presented by the European Commission to the Council .
This ' Blue Card ' is an instrument that seeks to respond to the neoliberal objectives of the Lisbon Strategy in terms of the need to exploit labour .
In the context of capitalist competition , particularly with the US ( which has the ' Green Card ' ) , the EU is trying to entice ' highly qualified ' labour , at the expense of human resources in third countries .
In other words , this ' Blue Card ' ( which reduces immigration to exploitation and which discriminates between and selects immigrants according to the labour needs of the EU countries ) and the ' return directive ' ( which will increase arbitrary expulsions and worsen the difficulties and obstacles encountered in family reunification ) are different sides of the same coin .
In other words , they are instruments ( which are consistent with each other ) and pillars of the same policy : the EU 's inhumane immigration policy which criminalises and expels or exploits and discards immigrants .
That is why we have voted against .
in writing . - On behalf of ALDE I would like to state the reasons for our abstention on the final vote .
To be clear : ALDE is a strong supporter of the Blue Card .
However , ALDE feels that the scheme has been watered down significantly .
Far too many restrictions have been introduced .
The EU 's immigration package is supposed to have two pillars : combating illegal immigration and creating better opportunities for legal migration at the same time .
The proposal as amended by this House does not bring about the much needed change but confirms Member States ' protectionist practices instead .
By adopting this report , Parliament has weakened an already very modest EC proposal .
A missed opportunity !
The current trend is that the vast majority of highly qualified workers migrate to the USA , Canada or Australia instead of the EU .
If we want to reverse this trend , we have to be ambitious .
The current text is simply off-putting to most highly qualified workers considering legal immigration to the EU and thus does not help in any way in efforts to make the EU more attractive for highly qualified workers .
Political courage is urgently needed .
in writing . - ( FR ) The interventions by Mr Jean-Pierre Jouyet , President-in-Office of the Council , and Mr Jacques Barrot , Vice-President of the Commission , during the debate on the EU Blue Card and the single permit which amalgamates the residence permit and work permit were highly illustrative .
Here is a short anthology .
To quote Jacques Barrot , ' These texts demonstrate the true scope of this Immigration and Asylum Pact which the French Presidency has brought to a successful conclusion and prove that this pact is , in fact , a balanced pact that expresses the will of Europeans to open the door to migratory movements which may be particularly useful and prove to be very positive for the future of our European society ' .
He also said , ' The possibility of being able to return to the country of origin for two years without losing the status of long-term resident is essential ' .
To quote Jean-Pierre Jouyet , ' these two texts are a beginning , not an end , and leave room for circular migration ' .
He also said , ' These two texts demonstrate that the European Union is truly committed to promoting legal immigration ' .
There can be no doubt henceforth ; our leaders and our French representatives in the European institutions support mass populating immigration from outside Europe leading to national disintegration policies .
We shall be voting against .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Klamt 's report on the conditions of entry and residence in the European Union of third country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment starts from a correct premise but arrives at the wrong conclusions .
It is in fact correct that qualified immigrants from outside the Community prefer to emigrate to the United States or Canada than to Europe .
To want to reverse the trend and make them come to us smacks of a worrying masochism and loss of clear-headedness .
Are we that incapable of training engineers , computer scientists and doctors that we need to bring them over from the developing world ?
Is it humanely acceptable to steal the brains from countries which have an absolute need for these qualified employees in order to develop ?
Do you believe that by favouring the selective immigration which Mr Sarkozy wants that legal and , more importantly , illegal immigration will be stopped ?
Last question : what remains of the Community preference if we attract qualified persons by giving them the same rights as Community nationals , including the same salary rights ?
The replies to these questions illustrate the danger of the sort of Europe that practises a real crime against humanity with regard to the developing world .
For these reasons , we cannot vote for such a report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The EU Blue Card , a real open sesame designed to generate additional qualified immigration from outside Europe , will be an economic , social and humanitarian disaster for the people and nations of Europe already suffering in the face of illegal immigration which is out of control and legal immigration which is increasing exponentially .
In order to prevent the inevitable social dumping which the arrival of engineers or other qualified specialists from other continents would entail , their salary will need to be at least 1.7 times higher than the minimum salary in the host country .
That will go down well with French blue collar workers .
Immigrant workers will also be able to bring their families over under a fast-track procedure , thereby favouring family reunification , never mind how widespread and dangerous it is already .
Moreover , immigrants will be able to accumulate periods of presence on European territory in order to obtain the status of long-term resident .
The circle has been closed : the conditions of mass establishment and naturalisation in the Member States are in place .
What is also scandalous is that this will aggravate the brain drain from third countries , especially Africa , by capturing their elite and guaranteeing their impoverishment once again .
Once again the people of Europe will not be consulted on this globalist and immigrationist policy by Brussels .
Now more than ever our fight must be that of rediscovered sovereignty and of the right of the people to stay as they are .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Klamt report , which makes the EU a more attractive destination for highly qualified workers from third countries .
It establishes a flexible fast-track procedure for the admission of highly qualified third-country workers , including favourable residency conditions for them and their families .
in writing . - ( NL ) Most people wish to continue to live and work in the environment where they grew up and whose language they speak .
People leave their areas of origin for two important reasons .
The first is that they run the risk of being locked up or killed .
In order to escape that fate , they become refugees .
The second is poverty .
People move away to areas where the pay is higher , even if they do not receive their due pay , if their jobs are unsafe , if their housing is poor or if they have poor prospects .
Changing expectations for future demographic developments and a shortage of people in certain jobs mean that immigration is suddenly seen as useful once more .
Refugees who , out of sheer necessity , come to EU countries spontaneously are increasingly less welcome , whilst privileged people with high qualifications are encouraged to move here .
This selection method means that these people with sound qualifications are taken away from the countries where they were trained , while it is exactly those countries that need them the most .
Without them , it is difficult to catch up , which is the very reason for their poverty .
If a blue card spawns brain drain , then this is bad news for Europe and the rest of the world .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Blue Card concept in Ewa Klamt 's report , which is based on a proposal by the European Commission , is an elite immigration concept which will prove to be disastrous .
The only positive element of this is that the Blue Card concept at last represents an acknowledgement of the fact that immigration into the European Union and therefore into Germany is both necessary and right .
The Blue Card concept will allow the EU to pick out the best of the immigrants , on the principle of keeping the good ones and discarding the rest .
From the perspective of those of us on the left , this elite concept is not acceptable .
People must be allowed to enter the EU to look for work and they must be given asylum when they are in trouble .
The concept of the Blue Card will mean that highly qualified and often desperately needed workers will be attracted away from their countries of origin .
This will increase the problems in these countries and make worldwide inequality worse .
A study carried out by the German Institute for Employment Research indicates that the Blue Card would result in an economy in which ' above all vacant positions are filled more quickly and the wages paid to resident skilled workers are kept at a lower level ' .
The effect of this would be that in certain sectors of the economy wage levels would fall significantly .
Overall the Blue Card concept is part of the misguided EU anti-migration policy .
The Blue Card concept transforms people ( who are immigrating ) into economic factors and represents a concept of ' selective immigration ' .
in writing . - ( RO ) The demographic forecasts indicating that the EU 's working population is going to shrink by 48 million by 2050 and that the dependency ratio is going to double , reaching 51 % by 2050 highlights the fact to us that , in the future , ever-increasing numbers of immigrants with a variety of skills and qualifications will be attracted to some Member States to counterbalance these negative trends .
The significant discrepancies with regard to the definition and admission criteria applied to highly qualified workers obviously restrict their mobility throughout the whole of the European Union , affecting the efficient redistribution of legally residing human resources and preventing regional imbalances from being eliminated .
As a representative of a Member State which joined the European Union in 2007 , I voted in favour of this report , which will regulate effectively current and future requirements for highly qualified labour , taking into account the principle of Community preference applied to EU citizens .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am totally opposed to the report by Mrs Klamt on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment .
The so-called ' blue card ' , a sort of crude copy of the US green card , would only be detrimental to the current state of the European social system , and the job insecurity and unemployment which torment our highly qualified personnel .
I am strongly opposed to this proposal , which would mean that our highly qualified workers would have to compete with non-Europeans and , what is more , probably at a disadvantage .
It would also help to mop up skills and potential in the non-EU countries themselves , encouraging that very brain drain that we are currently seeking to combat in Europe .
in writing . - ( SV ) Positive aspects of the report are lawful immigration and the fact that employers who break the rules can be excluded from the procurement of EU aid , but , unfortunately , the European Parliament has weakened the protection of workers and , in practice , the pay requirements only give high-salaried workers such as engineers and doctors access to the system .
The brain drain problem could also have been dealt with better and therefore I am abstaining from the vote , despite the positive aspects .
in writing . - ( SV ) The blue card is basically a very good idea and I have always advocated making lawful immigration easier and unlawful immigration more difficult .
Unfortunately , the original proposal has now been watered down so much and has become so bureaucratic that , in line with my political group , I choose to abstain .
in writing . - ( NL ) The blue card seemed like a good start to streamlined migration policy in the European Union .
European migration policy is necessary , to my mind , not least because , by 2050 , the European working population will have dwindled by 20 million people .
The Commission proposal , which was insubstantial to start with , has , however , been pared down considerably by the European Parliament .
The Commission proposal left some room for migration of people without a higher qualification but with strong skills .
Parliament , however , nipped this proposal in the bud by tightening up the conditions for migration considerably .
The income threshold was set by the European Parliament at 1.7 times the average wage of the Member State .
This is far too high .
If we want to compete with the US and Canada , the countries that attract the most highly qualified , then we will have to simplify the rules for people to come and work here .
Moreover , Parliament 's requirement that immigrants must have five years ' working experience , including two years in a ' senior position ' , is unacceptable .
It is beyond me why this proposal has not been expanded into a migration procedure for everyone who can find a job here .
The blue card will make legal migration possible , but because this certainly does not apply to everyone , I have abstained .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European Union must face up to the issue of economic migration .
Unfortunately , compared with the United States , Canada and Australia , it is not seen as an attractive destination by migrating skilled workers .
The main causes of this situation are the lack of a uniform migrant reception system and problems associated with movement between EU states .
To change this state of affairs , we need an integrated and consistent European migration policy .
We must not forget that by attracting skilled specialists the European Union will gain - will increase - its competitiveness and will have the chance of economic growth .
It is predicted that in the next two decades the EU will find itself short of 20 million skilled workers , mainly engineers .
We must not dismiss these predictions .
It is my view that employing migrants can in no circumstances be a long-term solution to the European Union 's economic problems .
The EU should take further action in terms of economic and employment policy , though at the present time it needs economic migrants , if only because of the ageing of its population and increasing demographic changes .
In view of the above , I have supported the introduction of a European Blue Card scheme for skilled migrants .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my fellow Member Patrick Gaubert , I voted for a legislative resolution approving , subject to amendment , the proposal for a Council directive on a single application procedure for a single permit for third country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State and on a common set of rights for third-country workers legally residing in a Member State .
I should like to welcome the important work done by Patrick Gaubert on such a sensitive subject , which is designed to contribute towards efforts to develop a global European immigration policy .
Working on a common set of rights for third-country nationals already legally resident in a Member State and on a procedural aspect , namely the granting of a single permit at the end of a single application procedure , had become the logical thing to do .
in writing . - I felt obliged to abstain on the vote on the report by Patrick Gaubert on the proposal for a Council directive on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State and on a common set of rights for third-country workers legally residing in a Member State .
I did so because regrettably Ireland did not opt in to this proposal under Article 3 to the Fourth Protocol to the Amsterdam Treaty .
Demographic forecasts and the current economic situation prove that an effective immigration policy is needed in Europe so that our labour force requirements are regulated appropriately .
In the coming decades Europe 's economic and social development will depend on an influx of new economic migrants .
This means that we need active Europe-wide policies for admitting both highly-skilled workers and less-skilled workers .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has just adopted by a very large majority two reports on the admission of migrant workers into Europe , thereby demonstrating the real capacity of the European Union to introduce specific instruments for the concerted management of economic migrants .
The adoption of my report on the single procedure for granting a residence permit and a work permit formally refutes the unfounded accusations of a number of heads of state of Africa and Latin America about a ' fortress Europe ' which is closed in on itself .
This vote in plenary affirms the principle of equal treatment of legal immigrants with European citizens and grants them a set of social and economic rights .
These decisions will help to improve their integration ; migrant workers do not represent a danger to our job markets .
The report on the EU Blue Card will in fact allow graduates and highly qualified immigrants to access the job markets of the countries of the European Union more easily , thanks to more attractive reception conditions .
Europe has demonstrated that it is capable of adopting a dignified , solid and open immigration policy .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Gaubert wishes to send out a message that Europe is open to legal immigration by granting legal immigrants all sorts of rights and restricting the facility for Member States to limit the overall equality of treatment between European nationals and immigrants in the Member States , in other words by introducing a European obligation to engage in positive discrimination .
Let Mr Gaubert be assured : it is a well-known fact in every emigration country that Europe is like a sieve .
Hundreds of thousands of legal and illegal immigrants enter it every year , attracted not by the prospect of work ( in France , only 7 % of legal immigrants come for work ) , but by the still too numerous social benefits and other rights offered to and sometimes reserved for them , without anything being demanded of them or with no facility to demand anything of them in return , not even a minimal knowledge of the language of the host country , to go by what Mr Gaubert says .
At a time when our countries are entering a recession , when our economic and social models have been undermined by globalisation , when the number of unemployed and poor European workers has exploded , we urgently need , on the contrary , to demand the application of the principle of national and Community preference in all sectors .
in writing . - ( PT ) As with the EP 's opinion on the ' Blue Card ' , despite Parliament 's adoption of amendments - which we voted for - which lessen some of the negative aspects of the proposal to set up a ' single application procedure ' for a permit for an immigrant to reside and work in a European Union country , we consider that these amendments question neither the motives nor the central objectives of the proposal for a directive presented by the European Commission to the Council .
As underlined by our parliamentary group , the aim of the ' single application procedure ' is to harmonise procedures and immigrants ' rights ; in certain fundamental aspects , however , it will restrict these rather than reinforce them .
For example , this is the case with making immigration dependent on the a priori existence of a work contract and not making the conditions for immigrants in general equivalent to those laid down for the ' Blue Card ' .
In other words , this ' single application procedure ' and the ' return directive ' ( which will increase arbitrary expulsions and worsen the difficulties and obstacles encountered in family reunification ) are different sides of the same coin .
In other words , they are instruments ( which are consistent with each other ) and pillars of the same policy : the EU 's inhumane immigration policy which criminalises and expels or exploits and discards immigrants .
That is why we have voted against .
in writing . - I support workers ' rights , which is why I voted in favour of this report .
This should provide workers in third countries with a much simpler system for a single work and residence permit .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am abstaining because a ' no ' could be interpreted as indicating that I am against immigration , which is not the case , but the report is problematic because a common procedure means that the EU will have power over immigration policy , which means there is a danger of it being bad .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am choosing to vote against the amendment , not because I think it is bad in itself , but because I want to wait for the larger and more well thought-out directive that is being prepared by the Commission .
It is important for us not to rush through legislative proposals within such an important area as this .
in writing . - ( PT ) The main issue in relation to wine is the content of the recently adopted CMO which , in our opinion , includes some very negative aspects , particularly for Portuguese production , which is fundamentally based on small and medium-sized agricultural holdings .
Its practical effects are already starting to be felt , as reported to me by many farmers with whom I have been in contact .
However , there do not seem to be any great difficulties with the inclusion of the wine sector in a single CMO which will bring together all the market regulation instruments , which may or may not be common to the various sectors .
It may be purely a question of simplification , provided that this does not mean the elimination of instruments or have any other legal meanings .
As the problem with regard to wine lies in the reform already approved and carried out , albeit with our opposition , it is now somewhat irrelevant whether this sector is included in a single CMO or not , as this does not alter the practical effects .
That is why we decided to abstain .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List thinks that it is a good thing for the current 21 regulations on the sector-specific organisation of the market to be revised and consolidated in one regulation in order to streamline and simplify the legislation .
However , as the Commission observes , the fundamental policy has not changed .
The June List has therefore voted against this report , as we do not support the current common agricultural policy .
in writing . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I have only voted in favour of the Commission proposal to integrate the wine CMO into the single CMO with all the other agricultural products because the Commission assured us in yesterday 's debate that , as soon as the Council 's proposal is accepted , it will include the functionality in the EUR-Lex search engine to allow users of the individual CMOs , for example for wine , milk or fruit and vegetables , to access only the articles related to their specific product .
In addition , the Commission has also guaranteed that future changes will only be made to individual products and other products will not be arbitrarily changed at the same time .
The discussion has made it clear that , in future , although there will only be one document instead of 21 , this one document will be just as extensive as the 21 individual documents .
However , the administration of the resulting highly complex document for the single CMO must be made as simple as possible .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the amendment to the EU regulation on establishing a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments .
This means that the financial aid ceiling has increased from EUR 12 to 25 billion for EU Member States which are not part of the euro zone and are experiencing difficulties with their balance of payments .
The European Parliament believes that Member States which do not belong to the euro zone should be encouraged to look at obtaining , within the Community , possible medium-term financial support to be able to cope with their balance deficit before requesting aid at an international level .
The current situation provides additional proof of the euro 's usefulness in terms of protecting Member States which belong to the euro zone and invites Member States which do not belong to the euro zone to join it immediately , thereby meeting the Maastricht criteria .
in writing . - The current financial situation demonstrates the protective effect of the euro , and we should do all that we can to encourage all non-Eurozone Member States to adopt the euro as soon as they meet the criteria .
It is also my view that non-Eurozone EU countries which need financial support should first look to the EU before approaching international bodies .
It is for these reasons that I supported this report .
The June List believes that it is very important for Member States in the European area to be in a good economic position and is in favour of an independent European neighbourhood policy .
However , we believe that a common European aid system for medium-term financial assistance provides neither a guarantor nor a solution for that not being the case .
Such a system creates an unnecessary and bureaucratic procedure in which those Member States requiring help in reality become dependent on EMU countries with outsider-imposed requirements for ' political and economic measures ' .
Countries that are members of the European Union - as they should be - but are not members of the monetary union - as they should not be - are forced to keep a fixed exchange rate with the euro and thus with their most important trading partners .
We therefore believe that it is unsound for countries that are not members of the monetary union to choose to fix their exchange rate and then need to be rescued by large regional and / or international bodies .
The June List is therefore of the opinion that the appropriation of EUR 25 million to support Member States ' balances of payments is unnecessary .
We believe instead that those countries that are members of the EU but have not joined the monetary union should maintain a regime with a floating exchange rate .
This type of problem will then disappear and taxpayers will save EUR 25 million .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is undeniable that both terrorism and organised crime are terrible threats that must be combated with instruments that are as effective as possible .
It is also important to avoid each Member State creating its own PNR data system .
At the moment there are three Member States that have done this , resulting in various differences between them in relation to both the obligations imposed on carriers and their objectives .
However , a basic rule of data protection is that any new instrument should only be adopted where the need to transfer this personal data and the specific aims of this transfer have been clearly proven .
The proposal presented to us by the Commission is too vague and does not clarify the added value that collecting PNR data will bring , nor what the relationship will be with existing measures for controlling entry into the EU for security purposes , such as the SIS ( Schengen Information System ) , VIS ( Visa Information System ) and API ( Advance Passenger Information ) system .
I believe it is vital , before we take any final decisions , to clearly demonstrate the usefulness of this data and the specific aims which it is intended to address , ensuring that the principle of proportionality is respected and that appropriate legal safeguards are created .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution on the proposal for a Council framework decision on the use of Passenger Name Records ( PNR ) for law enforcement purposes .
I did so as any proposal in this area must be proportionate and in compliance with the European Court of Human Rights and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Commission 's proposal could have a considerable impact on the personal life of European citizens and it has failed to provide sufficient evidence that the mass collection of data is needed at the EU level .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Commission wishes to collect and exchange passenger information at EU level in order to combat crime and terrorism .
Included in the information that is to be collected and made available to crime prevention authorities are aircraft passengers ' credit card numbers , plane seating requests , contact details , baggage information , frequent flyer information , language skills and the age , name and contact details of any person accompanying a child on a journey as well as that person 's relationship to the child .
This type of mass recording will undoubtedly result in the infringement of privacy .
The proposal does not take account of the often lauded but seldom applied principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
We welcome the fact that the European Parliament is critical towards the Commission 's proposal and would like to point out that it is doubtful whether this type of EU legislation is required .
We have therefore voted in favour of the European Parliament 's resolution , as it disassociates itself from the measures proposed by the Commission .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although we disagree with certain aspects of this resolution , particularly its failure to demarcate the ' fight against terrorism ' , we consider that it reaffirms some serious reservations about the creation of a PNR data system ( covering passengers of air carriers ) within the EU .
Among other aspects , the resolution :
regrets that the justification of the proposal to set up a PNR data system in the EU has left so many legal uncertainties with respect to compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) ;
believes that the aim is not harmonisation of national systems ( given that these do not exist ) , but rather the obligation to set these up ;
expresses concern that , in essence , the proposal gives law enforcement authorities access to all data without a warrant ;
reiterates the concerns regarding the measures outlining an indiscriminate use of PNR data for profiling and for the definition of risk assessment parameters ;
highlights that the information so far provided by the US has never conclusively proven that the massive and systematic use of PNR data is necessary in the ' fight against terrorism ' .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by Mrs in ' t Veld , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council framework decision on the use of Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) for law enforcement purposes .
I fully share the aims and concerns raised by my fellow Member , both in relation to the proportionality of the measures proposed by the Commission , and in relation to the legal basis of such a provision and the dangers , which I raised on various occasions during meetings of the Civil Liberties Committee , for personal data protection .
The need to guarantee a high level of security to citizens is sacrosanct , and it seems to me that currently there are many systems in force .
I believe that before introducing further measures we need to evaluate the full , systematic implementation of existing mechanisms , to avoid the risk of creating greater problems than those we are seeking to overcome .
in writing . - Paragraph 2 of this resolution deals with membership of the Eurozone .
In line with the convention of the UK Conservative Delegation on issues relating to the euro , we have abstained on the final vote .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for this resolution , but I would have preferred the text to have been adopted with Amendment 1 , paragraph 19 , which was unfortunately rejected by a few votes .
That amendment would have made our specific commitment in this extremely delicate and crucial area even more valid .
Nonetheless , I hope that the adoption of this resolution will lead to intervention on the ground by the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the EU response to the deteriorating situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo as I feel that what is happening is very worrying , given the millions of deaths , hundred of thousands of refugees and heinous crimes against those who are totally defenceless .
There is also potential for the conflict to spread to neighbouring countries .
This motion for a resolution is along the right lines , particularly as it calls for the perpetrators of these crimes against humanity to be brought to justice and for efforts to be made to strengthen and comply with existing agreements , either by giving MONUC more resources or by applying international pressure on those involved .
I also want to highlight the call for the European Union to prevent European companies from exploiting minerals originating from that area , as the sale of these funds the conflict .
We must do everything in our power to prevent another tragedy in Africa .
in writing . - ( SV ) The situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo is dreadful .
We wholeheartedly support international solutions , which ought to be implemented within the framework of UN cooperation .
However , we do not believe that the EU should use international crises and conflicts to strengthen its foreign policy .
We have therefore voted against this resolution .
in writing . - ( EL ) The ΕU as a whole , just like strong individual Member States , must take a serious share of responsibility for the deterioration in the already tragic situation of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo , as a result of the civil war , and of all the nations of the African continent .
The systematic , long-standing plundering of the wealth of this specific country and of Africa in general by European colonialists in the past and imperialists today and the fomentation or exploitation of civil conflicts in order to impose their interests , have resulted in a situation where Africa is the richest continent in the world with the most hungry , poor and downtrodden inhabitants .
The proposed strengthening of the various forms of interventionist activity by the EU , mainly through the military strength of the UN , without excluding simultaneous political or other activity by the country in question , has absolutely nothing to do with the alleged humanitarian protection of its population , as hypocritically stated in the joint resolution by the Liberals , Social Democrats and Greens .
The humanitarian interest is the pretext .
The basic objective is for the countries of the EU to secure a greater market share , which is of course connected - as the resolution indirectly admits - with the unimpeded and continuing overall plundering of the rich mineral wealth of the country .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats believe that space should not be militarised and are of the opinion that research and investments should focus exclusively on peaceful aims .
However , we cannot support Amendment 6 , which rejects all indirect military use , as a large number of applications , such as satellite navigation and communications services , are also used in peace-keeping efforts , which in some cases are military in nature .
This technology is also very useful to civil society and we do not believe that civil use should be restricted because it also has military uses .
in writing . - While I support the thrust of this resolution , I and my British Conservative colleagues are wholly opposed to the Treaty of Lisbon and cannot therefore support the reference to it in Paragraph One .
in writing . - I supported this resolution on ' how to bring space down to earth ' as I believe we should support a European space policy .
In Ireland decreasing numbers of young people are choosing science as a career option - a trend that is repeated across Europe .
Space exploration is inspiring for young people and encourages them to choose a career in science and technology ; it also strengthens research capabilities in Europe .
However , I am of the view that the use of space must serve exclusively non-military purposes and we should reject any direct or indirect military use of systems such as Galileo .
in writing . - ( PT ) Among the important issues and priorities highlighted by this European Parliament resolution on the European space policy , this brief explanation of vote is intended to denounce the fact that a majority in this House advocates the use of space for military purposes .
This is the conclusion that can be drawn from the rejection of the proposed amendments tabled by our parliamentary group which reiterated that outer space must be used for exclusively peaceful purposes and that outer space must be used for exclusively non-military purposes , thereby rejecting any direct or indirect military use .
By contrast , a majority in Parliament considers that there is a ' growing interest in a strong and leading role for the EU in a European space policy ( ESP ) in order to foster solutions in the field of the environment , transport , research , defence and security . '
In this respect , a majority in Parliament calls on the Council and the Commission ' to encourage synergies between civilian and security developments in the field of space ; points out that the European security and defence capabilities depend among other things on the availability of satellite-based systems ' .
In other words , space can be used in the militarisation of the EU and in the arms race .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am truly sorry that the excellent proposal for a resolution on the future of European space policy , which has just been passed , makes no reference to the Kourou space centre .
The space history of Europe inevitably passes via Guyana .
It is so obvious to everyone that we no longer think of pointing out that all the Ariane rockets are assembled there and are launched from this launch pad .
My thanks to the French Presidency , represented by Mr Jean-Pierre Jouyet , who had the presence of mind to mention it during yesterday 's debate .
To my mind , European space strategy must without fail incorporate proper consideration of future developments of the European Spaceport , both in terms of infrastructure and staff and in terms of research projects .
The Kourou site is the window of the European space programme .
Guyana , which is an outermost region of the European Union , deserves to be recognised for its past and future contribution to this strategic policy .
I would have liked to see this House pay homage to the Guyana space centre and explicitly express the pride which it inspires in all Europeans .
In just a few decades , Kourou has become a major constituent element of our European identity .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Convention on Cluster Munitions ( CCM ) adopted by 107 countries in 2008 will be open for signature as from 3 December and will enter into force once 30 ratifications have been secured .
The Convention will prohibit the use , production , stockpiling and transfer of cluster munitions as an entire category of weapons and States Parties will be required to destroy stockpiles of such munitions .
This motion for a resolution , which we support , calls on all states to sign and ratify the CCM at the earliest opportunity and to take steps at national level to begin implementing the CCM even before it is ratified .
The motion for a resolution calls on all states not to use , invest in , stockpile , produce , transfer or export cluster munitions until the CCM has entered into force .
It also calls on all the EU Member States to provide assistance to affected populations and to support the clearance and destruction of cluster munition remnants .
Finally , it calls on all the EU Member States not to take any action which might circumvent or jeopardise the CCM and its provisions , in particular through a possible Protocol to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons which might allow the use of cluster munitions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the need to ratify the Convention on Cluster Munitions by the end of 2008 .
This proposal , which I fully endorse , will prohibit the use , production , stockpiling and transfer of cluster munitions as an entire category of weapons .
I also approve of the fact that it will be compulsory for EU Member States which have used cluster munitions to provide technical and financial assistance for the clearance and destruction of cluster munitions remnants .
Finally , I welcome the initiative of my fellow Members calling upon all the Member States not to use , invest in , stockpile , produce , transfer or export cluster munitions , independently of the convention 's ratification .
in writing . - The British Conservative Delegation voted for this resolution as a straightforward endorsement of the recently negotiated UN Convention on Cluster Munitions .
We believe that the Convention has successfully combined principled and practical humanitarianism with appreciation of the military requirements of responsible armed forces .
We have consistently held the view that an indiscriminate ban on the use of all types of cluster munition would negatively affect the operational effectiveness of our armed forces .
We therefore draw special attention to the clearly defined exemption in the Convention for the next generation of " smarter ” munitions which are designed to self destruct and present a minimal risk to civilians .
The British Ministry of Defence is currently developing a munition that falls within the terms of this exemption .
In general , we believe it is important to maintain a sense of proportion in relation to risk management by our armed forces .
While the British Armed Forces always seek to minimise harm to the civil population and limit collateral damage we should never lose sight of the fact that we are fighting terrorist and insurgent elements totally without scruples in the methods they employ for the indiscriminate destruction of innocent human life .
It is these elements that should be the target of our ire .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for this motion for a resolution .
Early diagnosis and research provide a solid foundation for health protection .
In the case of HIV , results from recent years demonstrate how important it is to encourage research .
From this perspective , therefore , we need to remove obstacles of any kind to research , which for those affected by HIV represents a real hope of being able to lead a qualitatively more satisfying life .
This requirement should be supported in concrete terms through the use by the Commission of political , economic and financial resources .
At the same time , the Council and the Commission ought to ensure that discrimination against those affected by HIV is declared illegal in all EU Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) The MEPs elected by the Portuguese PSD ( Social Democratic Party ) support the resolution which encourages the promotion of early diagnosis and care of HIV infections in each of the Member States .
The most recent statistics still indicate not only an increase within the EU of the number of new HIV infections , but also a large proportion of HIV infections which are still undiagnosed .
One of the reasons for the rapid spread of HIV infection in many EU countries is the fact that many intravenous drug users are infected and spread the disease by sharing needles .
The annual report of EuroHIV on trends in drug consumption in the European Union puts Portugal as the country with the highest number of detected cases of HIV / AIDS among drug users .
The annual survey of healthcare , the Euro Health Consumer Index ( EHCI ) 2008 , reports that Portugal is towards the bottom of the ranking of healthcare systems in Europe .
One of the criticisms levelled at the Portuguese health system is that it has still not solved its problem of access to treatment and waiting times .
Eurostat still indicates Portugal as being the country with the highest AIDS-related death rate .
The comparative analysis of data from Portugal and from its EU partners reveals that something is wrong with our national strategy .
We must identify and analyse what is going wrong .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on early diagnosis and care of HIV / AIDS as , in my opinion , we urgently need to reinforce the measures and actions for diagnosing and treating this disease , given the alarming rise in the number of new HIV infections in the European Union .
Actions to prevent and treat the disease are vital in order to stem the growing tide of infections .
I therefore feel it is essential to promote easier access to information , advice , healthcare provision and social services .
Moreover , it is vital that the Member States enact provisions which effectively outlaw discrimination against people living with HIV / AIDS , including restrictions that impact on their freedom of movement within their jurisdictions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to say that I voted for the motion for a resolution on early diagnosis and early care with regard to the HIV virus .
In order to protect European citizens and their health , the Commission has an obligation to promote early diagnosis and to reduce the barriers to testing for this disease , as well as to provide early care and to communicate the benefits of early care .
In view of the fact that the EuroHIV and UNAIDS reports confirm that the number of new cases of HIV is increasing at an alarming rate within the European Union and in neighbouring countries and that in some countries the number of people estimated to be infected with HIV is almost three times the official figures , I welcome the proposal , which also calls upon the Commission to establish an HIV / AIDS reduction strategy focused on drug addicts and intravenous drug users .
in writing . - ( PT ) We want to highlight some of the aspects of this resolution with which we agree , in particular : ' unfair competition from products originating in third countries and imported into the Community market ' and the ' serious threat of a decline in bee colonies due to the significant reduction in the supply of pollen and nectar ' .
These problems must be solved by applying Community preference and tackling unfair competition from apiculture products originating in third countries .
Research into parasites and diseases - which are decimating the bee population - and their origins , including the responsibility of GMOs , should be immediately stepped up by making additional budgetary resources available for this research .
The one aspect missing from the resolution is the responsibility of the common agricultural policy reforms for this whole problem .
Rural desertification , dismantling of production over vast areas and introduction of genetically modified species have led to a loss of biodiversity .
Similarly , production methods which ignore the specific soil and climate conditions of each region have been promoted .
An agricultural policy which reversed this trend , in addition to the measures indicated above , would significantly help to solve the problems in the beekeeping sector .
in writing . - ( SV ) This resolution deals with the fact that bee populations are dying of unexplained causes .
We share the view that research is needed to get to grips with this problem .
However , we do not share the view that it is necessary to give more subsidies to beekeepers and to provide more protection against the surrounding world ( protectionism ) .
in writing . - ( SV ) The proposal submitted by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has some good and some not so good aspects .
We are in favour of the Commission initiating research on parasites and diseases that are decimating bee populations .
However , the resolution also contains proposals that we are unable to support .
For example , the European Parliament ' urges the Commission to propose a financial aid mechanism for apiaries which are in difficulties due to bee mortality ' ( paragraph 11 ) .
We cannot support any such costs to the EU 's budget and the European Parliament 's federalist majority ought not to express their support for this without acknowledging the financial consequences of such a position .
We have therefore voted against this resolution in its entirety .
in writing . - ( RO ) The dramatic reduction in the bee population and , by implication , in pollenisation is jeopardising the production of fruit , vegetables and crops in the European Union .
The drop in the number of bees is due to both different parasites and mycoses found in the atmosphere and spraying pesticides .
The main problem is the infection caused by the varroa parasite , which is manifested by deformities at the level of the wings and abdomen , and underdeveloped bees unable to fly and with a very short lifespan .
If left untreated , varroa may lead to the disappearance of a whole colony of bees in a few months .
The prolonged use of pesticides has also resulted in the reduction of the bee population , even when they were used to destroy mycoses and parasites .
Certain scientists believe that another cause for this phenomenon is the electromagnetic wave radiation emitted from mobile phones , which penetrates the bees ' navigation system , leaving them unable to return to the hive .
Research in this field will need to be developed in order to find solutions to combating the diseases which affect bees .
Furthermore , efforts made by farmers to reduce the number of times plant protection products are applied during blossoming will also help to halt the decline of these insects .
in writing . - ( DA ) On behalf of Ole Christensen , Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , Dan Jørgensen , Britta Thomsen and Christel Schaldemose .
The Danish delegation of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has voted against the resolution concerning the situation in the beekeeping sector .
It is our view that the resolution bears the hallmarks of protectionism and an attempt to establish more subsidy schemes for the EU 's farmers .
We are of the opinion that bee mortality is a huge problem that should be dealt with at EU level , but using the right mechanisms .
This will entail , for example , additional research and a focus on the protection of our ecosystems , including restricting the use of pesticides .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution on the review of Recommendation 2001 / 331 / EC providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States .
Good and even enforcement of Community environmental law is essential and anything less falls short of public expectations and undermines the reputation of the Community as an effective guardian of the environment .
If our legislation is to have any credibility it needs to be enforced effectively .
in writing . - ( PT ) Without doubt , we need to pay more attention to environmental issues and we need to adopt measures to prevent the constant environmental damage which is compromising the present and future of our planet and the quality of life of our citizens .
We must therefore be more alert to compliance with rules ensuring respect for the environment and taking into account the specific conditions of each country , including the social implications .
We also need a policy with more solidarity that takes account of different levels of development and economic capability .
Not all these aspects are duly safeguarded in the EU 's environmental law , nor are its policies duly consistent .
We therefore have grave doubts about the political will of the European Commission to solve this complex problem and we run the risk of worsening regional and social inequalities with some of the proposals put forward in this resolution .
That is why we decided to abstain .
in writing . - ( PT ) I congratulate my colleagues on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their wording of both the oral question and the motion for a resolution , because they clearly indicate the need to correctly implement Community environmental law .
In this respect they urge the Commission to come forward with a proposal for a directive on environmental inspections , clarifying the definitions and criteria and extending the scope .
Both documents also underline the need to strengthen the European Union Network for the Implementation and Enforcement of Environmental Law ( IMPEL ) and to support environmental education and information provision , the specific content of which must be determined at local , regional or national level on the basis of the needs and problems identified in a given area .
If the EU is not strict in enforcing its environmental policy , public expectations will be frustrated and the EU 's role as an effective guardian of the environment will be undermined .
in writing . - ( EL ) We voted against the motion for a resolution which supports the position that the proper and equal application of Community environmental legislation is vital , because this legislation does not protect the environment ; it protects the vital interests of the EU monopolies .
The call for the adoption of a Community body of environmental inspectors constitutes direct intervention in the internal affairs of the Member States in order to secure the application of the ' polluter pays ' principle , which permits the destruction of the environment in return for payment of a cheap consideration , the ' green taxation ' which the grassroots classes have to shoulder , emissions trading , the promotion of entrepreneurship and competitiveness as the determining criteria for the development of what are otherwise innovative ' environmental ' technologies , the use of genetically modified organisms in agriculture and the abolition in practice of the principles of precaution and prevention .
The EU and its environmental policy , which serve the interests of big business , breed food crimes , the atmospheric pollution of city centres with ' modern pollutants ' , the destruction of forests , soil corrosion and desertification and the pollution of seas and waters .
The environment will constitute a business sector with the objective of maximising the profits of the economic oligarchy .
It will suffer the consequences of the unthinking and unaccountable exploitation of natural resources and it will be spoiled by capitalist barbarity .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.00 and resumed at 15.00 . )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
1 .
Somalia
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Somalia .
author . - Mr President , Somalia is a country whose citizens live in very dire and chaotic circumstances , fraught with dangers to their well-being and to their very existence .
This House - and indeed the international community in general - time and again have dealt with the unacceptable situation in that country .
Both the EU and the UN and other foreign agencies have given - and continue to give - much financial and other support to the Somalian people .
But to add to the country 's grave state of affairs came the involvement of the so-called Islamic courts .
These are in effect a manifestation of the practice by criminal and evil people of exercising terror on fellow citizens by using religion - in this case Islam - as an excuse .
The recent execution by stoning to death of the 13-year-old girl victim of rape , Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow , is another example of this practice .
But the most recent worrying phenomenon in the gradually disintegrating society of Somalia is not just the barbaric extent of such acts of atrocity but also the fact that such a despicable act was carried out by a group of 50 men and was watched by about a thousand spectators .
Such a gruesome performance of sadistic behaviour is easy to condemn but hard to understand using humanly accepted parameters of societal psychology .
The Government of Somalia , aided by the international community and the African Union , must forthwith demolish the devilish Islamic courts and those that support or propagate their practice in the country .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I want to express our total condemnation of the murders being committed in this region of Somalia in the name of God .
Few atrocities have been committed by someone who has not invoked the name of God or a religion .
I must particularly condemn the way in which this atrocious murder was committed : a 13-year-old girl was raped , she was then accused of adultery and then five men - if we can call them men - hurried to stone her to death , even preventing someone from trying to save her , in a stadium with around 1 000 spectators .
This event , combined with the acts of piracy which so far this year have involved almost 100 boats being hijacked along the coast of Somalia , constitutes a wholly unacceptable humanitarian situation .
The international community cannot remain impassive .
It must not remain impassive in the face of cowardice and the use of religion to justify the commission of atrocities .
We therefore have to re-establish order , by supporting the legitimate government of Somalia so that it can take back control of the whole country and establish a rule of law which respects human rights .
I believe that there have been few occasions when we have been presented with such a clear situation which requires us to act .
I believe that we cannot remain impassive here in this Community of 500 million people and 27 countries , the most important in the world .
We must intervene .
I do not know how we can do this , but I believe that we must , and quickly .
The Socialist Group does not agree with the amendments tabled at the last moment , which have not been duly negotiated .
We support the text of the joint motion for a resolution and hope that this will mark the start of the European Union 's serious concern about this type of humanitarian issue and its condemnation of the misuse of religious concepts to commit atrocities in the name of God .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I have participated in dozens of human rights debates in this Chamber , but I am perhaps especially moved today , because in fact when we speak of large numbers , of thousands of dead , it gradually stops making an impression .
However , when we look at the murder of one specific person , of a child in fact , a thirteen-year-old girl called Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow , then indeed the cruelty of the act forces us to think about what we can do .
In fact of course , what is happening in Somalia is not restricted to just this one horrifying , cruel murder enshrined in the majesty of the local Islamic religious law .
It also includes - and this is worth mentioning , and has not been mentioned by previous speakers - suicide bombings which have recently killed thirty people .
It includes public floggings carried out in the country 's capital to demonstrate the power of radical Islamists .
It includes many human rights violations .
It also includes - although this is mentioned less often and should be emphasised - the recent abduction of two Italian Catholic nuns from Kenya , who are now being held in Somalia .
In summary , we must today say a resounding ' No ! '
author . - Mr President , every Thursday afternoon during our plenary sessions in Strasbourg we learn of yet new tragedies , vile crimes , atrocities and grave injustices .
The competition for the three places allocated to urgency debates is the best indication of man 's continued inhumanity to man .
Against this dismal backdrop it is hard to imagine that any case could still manage to shock us .
We may say we have heard it all .
Yet every once in a while we deal with a case so utterly repugnant that we are proved wrong .
The stoning to death of a 13-year-old girl child in Somalia is just such a case : first the victim of a mass rape , subsequently found guilty of adultery while the perpetrators of the rape go free , and finally sentenced to the most horrible of deaths .
As colleagues have already mentioned , 50 men stoned her to death , with a crowd of a thousand bystanders watching the horror unfold .
To their credit , some of the gathered crowd tried to save the petrified child .
However , militia opened fire on those who had the decency to try to protect this victim of an inhuman and bigoted practice .
One young boy paid with his life , the victim of militia gunshots .
In the face of this horrific crime , what can we possibly do to right the wrong ?
We must give every support to the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia , as only by reasserting some control and rule of law in areas of the country controlled by the radical opposition groups can there be any prospect of avoiding a repetition of this and other atrocities .
The Somali Government should restore the honour of the victim , Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow , posthumously .
This Chamber expresses its sincere condolences to Aisha 's family .
It was I that proposed Aisha 's case be placed on today 's agenda .
Thank you for supporting that request .
May we never have to debate a similar instance in this Chamber again .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are today discussing an event in Somalia which is beyond the imagination of the average European .
The first impulse that comes to mind on hearing about it is a refusal to accept it .
You simply do not want to believe that such a thing is possible at all .
Nevertheless , we should realise that it is possible , since the situation in Somalia makes various things possible , however unacceptable or unimaginable they may be .
What is more , the situation in Somalia affects the situation in the Horn of Africa , which is already so difficult and complicated .
The human rights situation in the region and in the country will improve only when its political situation changes .
We should therefore support the implementation of the Djibouti peace agreement , since without peace , stability , improved security and responsible government we will hear more often of tragedies such as Aisha 's death .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I must add my voice to those of all my fellow Members who have spoken on this issue .
This is yet another country where religious fanaticism is taking hold and where , in the name of justice hiding behind a religion , all the fundamental principles of our whole civilisation are being called into question .
This situation is absolutely intolerable .
I must say , in addition to everything that has already been said , that we must not under any circumstances forget the famine which is spreading throughout this region , both in Somalia and also in Ethiopia .
Obviously this has nothing to do with and cannot excuse what is happening , but we must also look into the extremely serious humanitarian problem which is developing right now in Somalia .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the problem of human rights violations in Somalia , which we are discussing today , extends beyond the cases quoted in the resolution , which do indeed serve as dramatic proof of the barbarous treatment of the weakest , including girls , women and abducted nuns .
In Somalia , where 95 % of the population are Muslims and which is one of the poorest countries in the world , the majority of the people live on the brink of destitution , illiteracy reaches 70 % , and average life expectancy is 47 years .
Although Somalia regained its independence over 40 years ago , conflicts are still caused by competition between clans for grazing land and water sources .
Before independence , the conflicts were suppressed by the colonial powers .
Left to their own devices , the Somalis started a civil war , which intensified as the economy collapsed .
In such circumstances , the fight against terrorism and piracy should be based above all on the elimination of poverty and destitution by humanitarian aid to the poorest and facilitation of development .
However , Somalia 's hard-won stability was destroyed by foreign intervention conducted under the banner of war against terrorism .
The divided , poor , uneducated and easily manipulated Somali tribes are becoming an easy tool with which to continue anarchy and division .
All peoples have the right to choose their own way of thinking and their own way of life , and international aid should not be used to spread the donors ' own ideology or expand their influence .
Not for the first time , opponents are using religion in order to discredit it and to win power , and this is happening not only in Somalia , but also in Vietnam and India , where the persecution of Catholics has become an element of election campaigns .
However , where Christians are being persecuted , Parliament 's left-liberal elements do not permit a debate aimed at the prevention of persecution and human rights violations .
( PL ) Mr President , NGOs are warning that Somalia has become an example of the most ignored of humanitarian tragedies , which is being played out before the whole world .
Large numbers are dying of hunger , thirst and disease , and every fourth Somali child dies before the age of five .
The country 's capital , Mogadishu , is deserted .
Artillery fire rains down on ordinary people .
The civilian population is terrorised by suicide bombers .
Pirates plague the Somali coast , while on land Somali Taliban forces are occupying increasingly large areas , moving gradually towards the capital and introducing the harsh Sharia law .
Let us be under no illusions , the law is applied arbitrarily for their own purposes .
If we include the disasters caused by drought and floods , the true scale of the tragedy becomes apparent .
Natural disasters we can at least understand , but how is it that in poor Somalia there are so many weapons ?
In my view , it results from the cynical behaviour of some countries , which want to conduct their frequently dirty business in that poor part of Africa , while we are pleased and consent to the Olympic Games being held in China .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , the unstable peace in Somalia manifested itself today in the shape of the work of professional pirates .
The case now before us in the European Parliament did not receive the same sort of attention : the stoning of Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow .
That might be regarded as a still greater tragedy than the activities of pirates .
It provides an image of a country which is living in an Islamic Middle Ages .
The joint motion for a resolution perhaps gives too much unambiguous support for Somalia 's transitional federal government .
The Council of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development , which is made up of countries in the region , met the other day .
It condemns the Somali Government 's unwillingness to work towards its commitments and peace policy .
Representatives of other countries in the region say that the government lacks the political will and initiative to commit to peace , and that is the biggest challenge to the prevention of insecurity .
Parliament 's resolution , however , is important for Aisha , and so our group is prepared to adopt it .
We are not going to wipe the slate clean with the Somali Government in our efforts to achieve peace .
Mr President , Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow was barely a teenager .
She would probably have never known anything about the European Union or its Parliament .
Even as she was being gang-raped , or lay dying under a deluge of stones , she would probably never have imagined that politicians far away would recognise her ordeal and commemorate her very short life .
But I am sure that as she died , she knew that she was the victim of a grave injustice .
The sickening crimes she suffered are made all the more shocking by the bizarre details of this case : the crowd of one thousand people ; the venue of a stadium , as though it was some kind of spectator sport ; the truckload of stones ordered specially for the purpose ; the gunmen who fired at people trying , to their credit , to save this poor girl 's life .
Somalia is a failed state , and there is little the EU can do practically to address the barbarity of the various clans and Islamist militias in charge of areas outside the government 's control .
Where we can take a stand , however , is by asserting our own values , which are incompatible with Sharia law .
That is not just my opinion , but also the opinion of the European Court of Human Rights .
This tragic case merely reinforces our determination never to surrender our hard-won democratic freedoms to obscurantism .
( PL ) Mr President , Somalia has for years been the scene of brutal battles , lawlessness and marine piracy .
Recently , two Poles fell into the hands of kidnappers .
But what happened on 27 October is beyond human comprehension .
A thirteen-year-old girl , Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow , was stoned to death .
The child had been raped by three men .
The perpetrators have not been arrested or tried .
In Kismayo , she was stoned to death by fifty men in the presence of around a thousand witnesses .
Aisha was punished , in accordance with Islamic law , for the rape inflicted on her .
This shocking act is not an isolated matter , but the brutal operation of Islamic law in the name of a God who punishes the victim for the crime inflicted on her .
I call on the government of Somalia to put an end to this barbarous practice , to mete out an exemplary punishment to the perpetrators and to rehabilitate Aisha .
Mr President , on 27 October a 13-year-old girl named Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow - and let us not forget the name - was stoned to death in Somalia by a group of 50 men in a stadium in the southern port of Kismayo in front of around a thousand spectators .
She was accused and convicted of adultery in breach of Islamic law , but was in fact the victim of rape by three men .
There has been no arrest or detention of those accused of her rape .
I strongly condemn the stoning and execution of Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow and I am horrified at such a barbaric act perpetrated against a 13-year-old rape victim .
As Unicef stated in the aftermath of her tragic death , a child was victimised twice : first by the perpetrators of the rape , and then by those responsible for administering the justice .
This abhorrent treatment of women can in no way be condoned and permitted under Sharia law .
This episode highlights not only the vulnerability of girls and women in Somalia , but the inherent discrimination such individuals have to endure .
( PL ) Mr President , we are today debating the murder of a girl who was stoned to death in Somalia .
We are also aware that two Catholic nuns have been kidnapped and are being held in Somalia .
All this is overshadowed by the piracy rampant on the Somali coast .
We have heard that it is all due to the fact that in practice the Somali government is not functioning at all .
Where in this situation are the mighty of this world ?
Where are the mighty United States , China , Russia and the European Union , which claim to be civilised countries ?
When countries are not in a position to intervene in defence of the weakest , who are being attacked by the actually not-so-mighty , they cannot be regarded as civilised .
Where are we in this situation ?
Mr President , I appeal to the mighty of this world : Do what is right !
Do your duty !
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission and Commissioner Michel , I wish to share some remarks about this issue of human rights in Somalia .
Firstly , I would like to share the concern about the continuing conflict and political instability in Somalia .
Somalia remains a context where fundamental rights and respect for basic human dignity continue to be shunned by armed entities perpetrating systematic and widespread attacks against civilians .
In the last few months , an escalating wave of attacks on humanitarian workers , peace activists and human rights defenders has been sweeping southern and central Somalia .
At least 40 Somali human rights defenders and humanitarian workers were killed between January and September 2008 alone .
As a result of these attacks , a number of humanitarian organisations have been forced to withdraw staff from Mogadishu ; humanitarian access received further blows ; and human rights and humanitarian conditions further deteriorated .
The Commission , together with the Member States and other international actors , is committed to helping at this critical juncture .
The EU supports the efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights , including the Independent Expert on Human Rights in Somalia , Shamsul Bari , to come to the creation of a mechanism to investigate systematic human rights abuses by all parties .
At the development level , the EU is strongly involved in supporting human rights organisations , mainly in training and funding for identification , documentation , monitoring of human rights abuses , and advocacy .
In particular , the Commission is increasingly involving civil society in any programme of reconstruction and national reconciliation , including exchange programmes for civil society with other regional organisations , paralegal training , public awareness campaigns , and women 's groups ' work on enhancing their political representation and participation in reconciliation processes .
Moreover , the EU supports programmes focusing on law enforcement and reinforcing the judiciary .
Meanwhile , we need to work to improve security and to make the Somali reconciliation process move forward .
A climate of insecurity will only serve to worsen the human rights situation and encourage violations of international humanitarian law .
Any lasting peace in Somalia must be based on accountability and justice for the human rights violations committed by all sides throughout the Somali conflict .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , among this week 's urgent resolutions , the Somali case is the one that perturbs us in particular .
Three weeks ago a 13 year old girl , Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow , was stoned there after having been raped by three men .
Nothing happened to the men , but the girl was sentenced for adultery under Sharia law .
The stoning took place in a stadium in Kismayo , in southern Somalia , in the presence of 1 000 spectators , while 50 men carried out the execution .
The sentence was handed down by the Al-Shabab militia who control the city of Kismayo .
They also killed a boy who tried to stop Duhulow from being stoned .
This harsh and inhuman interpretation of Sharia law , that adultery should be punished by stoning the guilty one to death , has assumed inconceivably cruel dimensions ; it has led to the murder of an innocent child , who was the victim of a crime .
It is important that we condemn the sentence and execution by stoning and insist that the Somali Government and the African Union should do the same , and that they take concrete steps as soon as possible to ensure that no such sentences are passed any longer .
While we show our support for the attempts by the Somali Government to take control of the city of Kismayo , we also have to call on it to bring Duhulow 's rapists to justice .
As the resolution on Somalia proposes , the Member States of the EU should do more to assist Somalia , so that the country might have a democratic government , and so that the government receives the help it needs to try and take control of all the country 's regions .
2 .
Death penalty in Nigeria
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution on the death penalty in Nigeria .
author . - Mr President , the judicial system of Nigeria is fraught with inadequacies , neglect and corruption .
To add to such a dreadful state of affairs , anachronistic Islamic Sharia courts have jurisdiction over criminal courts in one third of Nigeria 's states .
Such religious courts , run by sick-minded fanatics , continue to this day and age to terrorise the population by handing down sentences of death , flogging and amputation .
We in Europe , of course , condemn the operation of such anachronistic religious courts , but how about the Islamic world itself ?
Why do Islamic political figures and Islamic states , some of which are globally and regionally very powerful and influential , and some of which we have trading partnerships with , why do they not take responsibility and strongly fight against Sharia law , Islamic courts and other such evils ?
Why do Islamic religious leaders themselves in some of the more advanced Islamic countries not condemn such use of Islamic religion ?
In my opinion their silence or lukewarm reaction amounts to quietly supporting such activities and such a stance is , for me , just as criminal as those who actually administer Sharia law .
Let our message of disgust with this aspect of Islamic fundamentalism reach those in the Islamic world who should be doing something drastic to change things for the better , but unfortunately they are not .
Mr President , I feel that the case of Nigeria , although obviously not comparable to what is happening in Somalia , runs a serious risk of developing into a similar situation .
As has been said , Sharia law is effectively being applied in one-third of the country and there has been a clear deterioration in human rights .
At this point I must say that , before talking about or condemning any religious leaders , particularly any Islamic religious leaders , we must bear in mind that our fundamental role is to maintain dialogue with and encourage those Muslim leaders who do not share this fanatical view .
I can assure you that there are many such leaders , and I personally know a large number .
The problem now is that , instead of the European institutions communicating with the country and with Islam , which has the same values and viewpoints as we do , they are doing the opposite .
The European institutions seem to be preoccupied with appeasing the most fanatical and the worst offenders , those who are butchering the human rights of all Muslims , because Muslims are - and we need to realise this - the main victims of this situation .
They are our main allies .
They are the people with whom we need to work .
They are the people with whom we Socialists will certainly be able to tackle these challenges .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , this debate is of course in some senses a debate about the death penalty as such , but I do not want it to move in that direction , because in fact we should be discussing this specific situation .
Of course , we are familiar with reports which tell us that the recent reduction in the number of death sentences has not reduced the country 's crime rate .
This tempts supporters of the death penalty to continue calling for it .
But the fact is that last year only 7 out of the 53 African Union countries carried out death sentences , while in 13 the death sentence has been suspended , and in another 22 the death sentence is simply not used .
I think that Nigeria should adopt this way forward , perhaps under pressure from the European Union .
We could point to the fact that death sentences are carried out on the very young and the young .
There are very many such people , at least 40 in Nigeria .
This is a particularly shocking situation , when such young people are awaiting execution .
This is of course a much wider issue .
This is a country where it is very easy to sentence someone to death , especially since one quarter of Nigeria 's regions are governed by Sharia law , an Islamic , a Muslim law which indeed allows the amputation of hands and feet , and also uses flogging .
This is an unacceptable situation . We need to speak out about it .
draftsman . - ( DE ) Mr President , Nigeria is one of the largest and one of the most important countries in political and economic terms in Africa .
For this reason , it is also a major partner for us .
Unfortunately , the situation relating to the rule of law there leaves a lot to be desired , in particular with regard to the justice system .
During this debate we have focused on the death penalty .
In Nigeria a large number of people are on death row .
A quarter of them have been waiting for five years for their appeals to be concluded and 6 % have been waiting for 20 years .
This situation is not acceptable and therefore we call on the European Commission to help the Nigerian authorities to improve the rule of law and to make recommendations which may be helpful .
The President has also established committees which have made recommendations on Nigeria that indicate the right direction to move in .
However , I believe that more political pressure must be applied in this area .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , being sentenced to death for being poor is a reality in Nigeria .
I appeal to the Nigerian authorities to impose a moratorium on executions and to commute the death sentences .
Hundreds of those sentenced to death are people unable to afford a fair trial .
Sentenced on the basis of testimony extracted under torture , without the means to employ qualified defence counsel , without a chance of finding files lost five or fifteen years ago , they await their execution in inhuman conditions .
The windows of their cells frequently overlook the execution yards .
Approximately 40 of those condemned to death are juveniles .
Their alleged crimes were committed when they were 13-17 years old .
Appeals take five years on average , but sometimes up to 20 .
Forty-one per cent of the condemned have not filed appeals .
Their case files have been lost , or they do not know how to complete the application by themselves , and cannot afford a lawyer .
Nigerian law does not allow torture .
It does not recognise testimony obtained in this way as valid .
Nevertheless , the police use torture .
Trials are lengthy .
The testimony of victims of torture is frequently the only evidence in a case .
It is virtually impossible for the poor to get a fair hearing .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the death penalty is a dreadful affair in itself .
Rather than trying to help those who have hurt their fellow human beings or society as a whole to function as better people in future , revenge is taken by letting the condemned die .
This is an irreparable decision which is at times even based on a miscarriage of justice .
It becomes even more dreadful if it is not exceptional crimes that are penalised .
In Nigeria , it is more a case of poor organisation of justice combined with administrative chaos .
In addition , it is also increasingly about persisting in primitive , fundamentalist opinions in the northern federal states , in which it is assumed that Man has been commissioned by God to eliminate their sinful fellow men .
Unlike Somalia , the outgrowths of which were discussed in the previous item on the agenda , Nigeria is a functioning state .
It is a state , though , full of federal states functioning independently from one another , coordinated by a central authority which , often by means of coups d 'états , has ended up in military hands .
Things appear to be better in Nigeria at the moment , without dictatorship and without the violent conflicts of the past .
A number of regions in the north , like Iran , parts of Somalia and the north-west of Pakistan , form the trial region for a hark-back to the Middle Ages .
It is also a form of class justice .
The condemned are mainly poor people without any legal aid .
We must pull out all the stops to rescue those people from chaos , arbitrariness and fanaticism .
( LT ) Today the principal message the European Parliament sends to the Nigerian Federal and State governments is to immediately halt executions , to declare a moratorium on the death penalty and to abolish the death penalty altogether .
After all , 137 of 192 United Nations Member States have abolished the death penalty .
Even among the 53 African Union Member States , Nigeria is one of the few where the death penalty is still carried out .
Both the National Study Group and the Presidential Commission working in Nigeria itself recommended that the death penalty be abandoned , as it does not reduce crime .
I urge , ask the Council , Commission and Member States to take advantage of all available opportunities and contacts with the institutions of the Nigerian state authorities as we strive to halt the killing of people , above all minors , in the name of the law in Nigeria .
( PL ) Mr President , the death penalty has always given rise to reflection and to many questions .
First , does one person have the right to decide about another person 's life ?
Second , can this decision be made if a confession has been extracted under torture ?
Should young , underage criminals be executed or educated ?
Such questions can be multiplied , but the answer will always be the same : no one has been granted this right .
Humans have granted it to themselves .
But since this is the case , humans can abolish it , renounce it and commit these acts no more .
I address these words to the Nigerian authorities , but also to all those who consider themselves to be lords of another person 's life and death .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , since its independence , Nigeria has enjoyed only three periods of civilian rule and has endured 29 years of military rule .
Nine years ago , Nigeria took a step towards democracy and came back to civilian rule , even though all elections since then have been widely criticised for irregularities , fraud and violence .
The April 2007 elections could have set a good example for other countries , but the opportunity was missed and the new government took up office amidst doubts of legitimacy .
It is in this context , and bearing in mind the importance of a stable Nigeria for Africa , that a suitable strategy has to be found to engage the government there in a constructive dialogue over human rights .
The Commission fully shares the concerns expressed by honourable Members on the issue of the death penalty , and agrees with the need , pending complete abolition of the death penalty , to declare an immediate moratorium on all executions .
At the same time , it should be acknowledged that the situation of human rights in Nigeria has generally improved since the return to civilian rule .
Indeed , some steps have been taken to launch a debate in the country over the usefulness of the death penalty as a deterrent to heinous crimes .
Several prisoners on death row have been pardoned this year and Nigeria has committed itself to an intensified high level political dialogue with the EU which covers , inter alia , human rights issues .
The Commission has contributed significantly to starting this process , which could lead to a global EU political strategy vis-à-vis Nigeria , and which has already led to an important ministerial troika and to a comprehensive joint communiqué .
In the context of this dialogue , it will be possible to discuss constructively human rights issues , and to undertake a range of cooperation activities in crucial sectors such as peace and security , and governance and human rights .
Examples of cooperation initiatives under consideration include : support for improving the investigative capacity of the Nigerian police ; access to justice and support for prison reform ; support for anticorruption efforts ; support for the democratic process ; and support for federal institutions dealing with human trafficking , illicit drugs , human rights and counterfeited medicines .
To be effective , these actions will have to be made known to civil society and ordinary citizens .
The Commission will develop a strategy , based on a combination of support for local mass media and cultural initiatives , to support sensitive cooperation initiatives and to disseminate to the public educational messages concerning respect for human rights and basic freedoms , the basic values of democracy , good governance , care for the environment and so forth .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The issue of human rights still requires our attention , even when the world is facing economic crises .
Poverty and the lack of political and economic prospects always result in a deterioration of people 's living conditions .
Respect for human rights features lower down the list among the urgent problems and it is easy for us to overlook , blinded by our own economic woes , the fact that there are places in the world where people are still punished by the death penalty .
I am referring in this instance to Nigeria , a country with a population of 140 million , where 725 men and 11 women have been awaiting execution since February this year for committing acts such as armed robbery , manslaughter or treason , according to Amnesty International .
Furthermore , alarming reports highlight that many of these did not go through a proper trial procedure , with evidence even being extracted under torture .
These people will be hanged for actions which they may not have committed because in Nigeria the poor have absolutely no protection at all from the justice system , even though we are talking about a member state of the International Penal Tribunal .
It is the duty of the international community to make every effort necessary so that the Nigerian government declares an immediate moratorium on all executions and commutes all death sentences to prison sentences .
3 .
The case of the al-Kurd family
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution on the case of the al-Kurd family .
author . - Mr President , let me commence by stating that I am speaking in a personal capacity on this topic .
Let me also say that I am well aware , as you all should be , that whatever is said in this Chamber regarding Israel gets scrutinised very meticulously by the Israeli authorities and then gets totally disregarded as far as the substance of the matter is concerned .
The only action taken is to attack , in various ways , those MEPs who criticised in any way , shape or form Israeli wrongdoings .
I have had personal experience of this .
During the recent debates in this House on Palestinian prisoners in Israel , I used strong language to attack the Israeli Government officials .
I did this in order to stress to them that their stance on the Palestinian prisoners was - and still is , I am afraid - utterly inhuman and criminal .
Subsequent to my speech , not only did the Ambassador of Israel to Cyprus embark on a political defamation campaign against me , but , more importantly , the Speaker of the Knesset , Ms Dalia Itzik , wrote an official letter of complaint against me personally to the President of the European Parliament .
Mr Pöttering replied as diplomatically as he could , and I thank him for defending the right of free speech of MEPs in debates taking place in this House .
I also thank him for copying his reply to Ms Itzik to me .
I have that letter here and I submit it to the Secretariat so that there is evidence that what I am saying is true .
Furthermore , I have this message for Ms Itzik : in the European Parliament , and in the EU in general , we have the right to express our opinions freely and democratically .
Perhaps you , Ms Itzik , should do the same in your parliament and in your country too .
As regards the subject matter of this resolution , I wish to say the following .
First , this is not a judicial civil matter , as some ill-informed or ill-informing Members of this House might propose : it is clearly a political matter ; it is a continuation of the policy of successive Israeli Governments to kick Palestinians out of their homes and lands and to absorb by force - or by using legalistic tricks - as much of the Occupied Territories as possible into the state of Israel .
Secondly , an attempt is made by the Israeli mission to the EU , in a document sent selectively to some MEPs , to argue that property concerned belongs to Israelis for historical reasons .
It is claimed in that document that two Jewish NGOs bought the land on which the buildings in the contested neighbourhood are built during the rule by the Ottoman Empire .
Quite honestly , such a claim cannot be taken seriously and deserves no further consideration .
In conclusion , let me reiterate my position so that there can be no mistake : I respect the right of the Jewish people to have their own state , but the Jewish Government must respect the right of the Palestinian people to have theirs .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , there are two aspects to the painful problem of the expulsion of the al-Kurd family , one political and one humanitarian .
The political aspect is the status of East Jerusalem , which is claimed as an integral part of Israel by the Israelis .
Let us remind ourselves that neither Europe nor the international community has ever understood it as such .
In Resolution 252 , the UN Security Council quite clearly stated that all legislative and administrative measures and provisions adopted by Israel , including the expropriation of land and property which tend to alter the legal status , are invalid and cannot modify its status .
The Security Council reminded Israel as much in 1980 , when it adopted measures to make unified Jerusalem its capital , and Resolution 476 calls for the immediate cessation of policies and measures affecting the character and status of the holy city .
Resolution 478 affirms that all measures taken to modify the status of the city are null and void .
Neither the UN nor Europe has ever gone back on this point .
That is why , despite all the respect that everyone in the House has for Israeli independence and justice , we know that it can only be based on the laws of its country , which conflict here with international law , and that , moreover , international law does not grant it any jurisdiction over East Jerusalem .
The expulsion of the al-Kurd family therefore needs to be placed in this political perspective and cannot be seen merely as a property dispute .
The al-Kurd family has been expelled for the benefit of a Jewish family which only recently emigrated to Israel .
They have been deprived of their property right after having fought for 40 years and some of our parliamentarians who met them can describe the human drama that this expulsion represents better than I.
I welcome the fact that we are calling across the party divide for justice to be done and for their property to be restored to them .
( Applause )
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the middle of the night of 9 November , the Palestinian al-Kurd family were thrown by the Israeli police out of their house in Sheikh Jarah , in East Jerusalem .
The family consists of the mother , the semi-paralysed father with heart problems and five children , a family that have been refugees from their land since 1948 , thrown out of a house in East Jerusalem , along with thousands and thousands of other Palestinians .
Today , once again , they are without a house , although they had bought the house and had lived there since 1956 .
A group of extremist settlers - not poor Jews who were persecuted and escaped from the dreadful tragedy of the Holocaust , but fundamentalists who believe that that land is theirs by divine right - is claiming ownership of the house and 26 other homes in the same district , on the basis , as Mr Matsakis said , of an Ottoman code dating from the nineteenth century of undoubted authenticity , disputed even by the US authorities .
There is , however , already a plan : an Israeli association wants to build 200 homes on the ruins of the houses of the Palestinians who are to be thrown out .
Only last week , with the European Parliament 's delegation in the occupied Palestinian territories , made up of MEPs from all the political groups , we visited the al-Kurd family in their house , and were direct witnesses of the bullying and violence that they were subjected to daily by the settlers , who were already in some of the houses .
Now they are homeless , and in our resolution we are asking in paragraph 4 , and I am sorry that the PPE which stands for compromise and which had voted for that paragraph - which asks for the al-Kurd family to have their house returned to them - is now asking for a split vote , because in the compromise everyone was in agreement .
Today , though , as well as being without a house they are also without a tent , because the tent , which had been put up inside the courtyard of a Palestinian-owned house , has twice been destroyed by Israeli bulldozers .
Another 500 families in Sheikh Jarah will also suffer this fate if we do not intervene very strongly in respect of these crimes - these constantly authorised continuous demolitions .
I therefore believe that , as Mrs De Keyser also said , the policy towards East Jerusalem is a colonial policy by Israel that is not recognised by the international community .
It is time , I believe , for us to say most emphatically not just ' please , Israel , respect international law , ' but for concrete steps to be taken to prevent their actions from continuing to destroy the peace between Palestinians and Israelis .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I have the feeling that this matter differs from those we discussed before .
The drama of the thirteen-year old girl murdered before the eyes of a savage crowd in Somalia and the matter of the death penalty and of the hundreds awaiting execution in Nigeria are different from the issue we are discussing now .
We must say that we are the observers of a drama involving a Palestinian family , and we must give this our attention .
On the other hand , I would like to emphasise that unlike Nigeria and Somalia , this is not a black-and-white issue .
The territory 's complicated fifty-year history shows that the victims have frequently been both Jews and Palestinians .
The balance of harm inflicted by the two sides is certainly not equal , and this is not what we are discussing now .
I have intervened to say that we must in future try to see these matters in a broader context .
It may be that this will give us the right to a fairer judgment than is sometimes the case now .
draftsman . - ( DE ) Mr President , the history of the people of Israel is an endless tale of expulsions .
Two thousand years ago they were driven out of their original homeland and became scattered all over the world .
Over the centuries they have been persecuted and thrown out of the countries where they have found refuge .
The dreadful climax of this process was the holocaust , the crime against humanity , which led to a huge number of Jewish people returning to the Holy Land , the land of their ancestors , with the result that clashes , expulsions and legal disputes have once again been taking place there .
In a situation of this kind , the European Parliament can do nothing more than to support to the best of its ability the declared intention of the Israeli state and the peace-loving section of the Palestinian population , which I cannot guess the extent of , in order to come to a peaceful and consensual solution .
There is no sense in picking out an individual case in an emergency and then deciding dogmatically that it will be resolved one Thursday in Strasbourg .
However , there are clear reasons why we have taken part in this resolution .
We wanted to become involved in this discussion process and we believe that human rights are indivisible .
Of course , we are not indifferent to the fate of the al-Kurd family and we want to discuss their fate .
However , we do not believe that we can do this authoritatively .
Therefore , we think that point 4 is dogmatic in a way which does not do justice to the case .
For this reason , our approach is to intervene on behalf of human rights , the peace process and , of course , the al-Kurd family , but we can only do this as part of a dialogue with both parties and not by unilaterally taking sides .
Therefore we strongly support the decision , but would ask for a split vote on point 4 , because this is an issue which must be decided on the spot .
We offer our services for this purpose .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , qui bonum , allow me to disagree with the way in which this Parliament has been unwisely drawn into the specific political interests of the parties to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict .
This is all about the fundamental ambiguity of Resolution 242 - which is older than I am myself - as this resolution does not specify the boundaries of legal jurisdiction for East Jerusalem .
Is this a civil dispute ?
It is not .
Does it involve the Fourth Geneva Convention ?
It does not .
We are carelessly anticipating here the negotiations of a future peace conference , without having any right to do so .
The head of the delegation to Palestine was drawn into visiting a lawfully convicted family , thereby inciting the extreme provocation of Israeli officials , out of which has come a resolution which , unfortunately , will achieve nothing .
What is needed is to create the preconditions for a fundamental political change in the views of the European Parliament towards the participation of Israel in community programmes and to bring about an improvement in political relations , which we have unfortunately not been able to achieve through democratic means .
Instead of a democratic solution there is the way of our MEPs , who gave the Israelis a reason for cracking down .
Instead of solving the problems , we are pouring petrol onto the fire .
This is not a dignified role for our parliament .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I am happy to say that I was one of those who was part of this Parliament 's official delegation to the PLC two weeks ago , and we visited the al-Kurd family .
At that point they were still hopeful that the Israeli courts would deliver a just decision .
It is regrettable that they had a vain hope and that they have now been completely evicted from their home and , not only that , have been removed from the immediate area of their home , where they were staying in a tent .
It is difficult to maintain any shred of hope that a sustainable two-state solution is still possible , given the war of attrition against the Palestinian people , which we witnessed on our recent visit and which this eviction is a reflection of .
It is quite appalling that we are , at this point in time , even considering upgrading relations with Israel when there are so many breaches of international law , families being evicted , settlements being put in place .
Eleven thousand Palestinian prisoners are in jail .
Forty elected representatives of the Palestinian people , including the Speaker , are in jail , as are 300 children under the age of 18 , including children as young as 12 years of age .
This is not acceptable from a state which claims to be a democratic state and which claims to be complying with the norms of international law .
It is not the case .
The EU must insist upon the Israeli Government restoring the al-Kurd family to their home .
Israel must be told in no uncertain terms that , if it wants to continue to do business with the EU , it must comply with democratic and humanitarian norms in practice as well as rhetorically .
Certainly any idea that the EU should upgrade its relations with Israel , as some Member States are proposing , should be dropped so long as injustices of this kind continue .
I would like to conclude with a point of order .
I think that the proposal here of oral amendments on a Thursday afternoon - amendments which do not reflect the facts on the ground and which do not have the support of the joint authors of this resolution - is an abuse of the ability to place oral amendments .
I believe that this matter should be looked at by Parliament 's secretariat and proposals brought forward to ensure that it does not happen again .
We shall of course take account of your proposal , Mr De Rossa .
It will be sent to the proper party , knowing that oral amendments on Thursday afternoons are somewhat of a case unto themselves in that , even if there happen to be too few Members to stand and oppose them , the House can still vote against them .
Mr President , on this point , although I strongly disagree with the oral amendments , I will nevertheless defend the right of MEPs to place oral amendments , even on a Thursday afternoon , and I will condemn most strongly the groups - and my group is one of the first that I condemn - which do not manage to have their MEPs here on a Thursday afternoon .
I do not wish to start a debate , as I am sure you understand .
I am just advising you of the law that applies in this House .
Of course , every Member has the right , during voting time on Thursday afternoons , to table oral amendments .
In accordance with our rules , a certain number of Members may oppose them .
I should also like to advise you that these questions have already been decided at the highest level in the past .
Obviously , if ever it was because of the Members ' disaffection that an oral amendment which the House obviously did not want was imposed purely by reason of the fact that there were too few people present to oppose it , we would revert to the initial text , in order to avoid having an orally amended text which was unacceptable .
Of course if you wish I can supply precise and detailed information on previous examples .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , before we start the clock ticking I would also like to make a point of order on this matter .
I consider it absolutely irregular and unacceptable that Parliament 's Rules can be altered because Members from one side of the House choose not to turn up on a Thursday afternoon .
That is their problem - not ours - and we are perfectly entitled to operate within Parliament 's Rules , which should be the same for every period within the working week during Strasbourg part-sessions .
I would be grateful if you could now restart the clock for my speech .
Mr President , in these urgency sessions we debate the gravest abuses of human rights , involving torture , rape and murder .
The al-Kurd case in East Jerusalem does not fall anywhere near that category .
It is a civil dispute between two private parties , and we really have no business interfering in such a dispute .
The family was evicted by the police , who were enforcing an order of the Israeli Supreme Court .
The family knew well in advance that eviction proceedings would be taken .
The family had not paid their rent for 40 years , in spite of a court order ordering them to do so .
This case has little implication on the wider issue of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
Normally these debates are conducted in a bipartisan fashion .
This debate , however , is simply another example of pandering to anti-Israeli hostility and sentiments , particularly on the other side of the House .
Try as they might , they cannot disguise the fact that Israel is a democracy where the rule of law and independence of the judiciary remains paramount .
I wish we could say the same about the Hamas-led authority in the Gaza Strip .
Colleagues , are there not many more pressing issues in the wider world that merit our attention in a human rights debate ?
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make one thing clear , so that we are agreed .
The rules of the European Parliament are not altered on Thursday afternoons .
They are different on Thursday afternoons and it is our Rules of Procedure that are different .
For example , during debates on Thursday afternoon , with the catch-the-eye procedure , we have two speakers rather than five .
If there is a request for a referral because there is no quorum , the point is not carried forward , it is annulled .
Requests for oral amendments are also governed by different rules , not rules at the disposal of the president of the sitting , but rules already formally included in our Rules of Procedure .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on the night of Sunday 9 November , Israeli troops evicted the Al-Kurd family from their house in Sheikh Jarrah in the East Jerusalem area , where they had lived for over 50 years .
The eviction resulted from a ruling handed down by the Supreme Court of Israel last July , which had brought to an end a long and very controversial trial conducted in Israeli courts and before Israeli authorities .
It must be emphasised that the family was deprived of its home in spite of forceful protests on the part of the international community , and that the Supreme Court decision in fact paves the way to the seizure of a further 26 houses in the same area .
The fate of the Al-Kurd family and the numerous instances of destruction of the homes of Palestinian families in the East Jerusalem area by the Israeli authorities give rise to great concerns .
Such actions are illegal in international law , and the international community and in particular the Middle East Quartet should do everything in their power to protect Palestinians living in this area and in other parts of East Jerusalem .
We should call on Israel to stop settlement expansion and construction of the Wall beyond the 1967 borders .
These actions conflict with international law and seriously endanger the prospects of a lasting peace agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis .

( PT ) Mr President , I believe that there are two fundamental issues in this debate , the first of which is that we are dealing with a judicial system that is one of the most independent in the world .
This judicial system even forced the President of its own country to resign just a short while ago .
Secondly , this legal dispute that was ongoing for decades and that concerned ownership and non-payment of rent cannot be compared , for example , with the expulsion of millions of Iraqis who until very recently were left on their own without anyone bothering to challenge the legitimacy of the Iraqi government and without anyone having a sense of balance about what is happening in that whole region .
For it is balance that we must talk about .
The issue of balance is fundamental .
I must say that I have been horrified at what I have heard here , in terms of challenging the existence of the State of Israel .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is greatly concerned about recent developments in East Jerusalem , in particular the destruction of Palestinian-owned houses and the expansion of settlements in East Jerusalem .
At a time when confidence-building measures are urgently needed to support the negotiation process started in Annapolis , such measures are extremely unhelpful .
The EU , in its statement of 11 November , called on the Israeli authorities to put an early end to such measures .
The EU has also , on numerous occasions in recent months , expressed its concern about the decision of the Israeli authorities to approve the construction of new settlements in East Jerusalem .
The creation of facts on the ground undermines the chances for a negotiated settlement of the conflict .
Jerusalem is one of the so-called final-status issues to be resolved between the parties in negotiations .
The Commission has provided assistance to help preserve the Palestinian presence in East Jerusalem and is committed to continuing this support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Somalia ( vote )
2 .
Death penalty in Nigeria ( vote )
3 .
The case of the al-Kurd family ( vote )
- Before the vote on recital B
Mr President , I propose an oral amendment to recital B , which would add the wording ' on disputed ownership ' .
I can read the whole thing out if you want .
It reads : ' whereas this eviction was carried out on the basis of an order issued by the Israeli Supreme Court on 16 July 2008 following long and controversial legal proceedings on disputed ownership before Israeli courts and authorities ' .
Otherwise it does not make any sense as regards what the controversy is .
One has to actually specify what the controversy was in law .
Clearly forty Members have not stood to oppose the inclusion of this oral amendment .
I shall therefore submit recital B as having been amended orally .
Mr President , in order to have more support for this recital , I would like to propose an oral amendment to Mr Tannock 's oral amendment .
It is just to add the word ' apparent ' before ' disputed ' , so that it reads ' on apparent disputed ownership ' .
Then Mr Tannock will be satisfied that we have put the subject matter in the recital , and we will leave the matter open .
Mr President , I am afraid that I do not know the Rules in precise detail , but I do not think you can submit an oral amendment to an oral amendment literally in the Chamber unless the whole House agrees .
I , personally , do not agree with that , and , I suspect , neither would most of my group .
There is no such thing as an ' apparent ' dispute : a dispute is a dispute .
It went before the courts and that is the verdict .
But I wanted to explain what the dispute was all about .
I have been advised that the precedent is as follows : where there is an oral amendment to an oral amendment , if the first person who tabled the oral amendment accepts the second oral amendment as a consensus , it is taken into account .
If the second amendment to the first amendment is not accepted by the author , it is not put to the vote .
I am therefore sorry , Mr Matsakis , but we cannot take your amendment into account .
However , Mr Tannock 's amendment was not rejected , because forty Members did not stand and I am therefore obliged now to submit it .
Mr President , I am sorry but I am not completely familiar with the Rules .
Can we not simply vote ?
We cannot avoid voting because we do not have 45 , or I do not know how many Members necessary .
We cannot avoid voting because that is the requirement when you leave .
Surely we can vote on the oral amendments ?
Can we just vote on the parts on disputed ownership and then see if it has the majority or not ?
That is exactly what I was about to propose .
We shall therefore vote now on recital B , as amended by Mr Tannock .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on recital D
Mr President , I am sorry to have to do this again but on recital D I am suggesting once again an additional two words in order to ensure clarity in law , because some of the interventions earlier suggested a certainty .
This is not the case so the full recital would read as follows : ' emphasising the fact that the eviction took place despite international objections ; whereas the US has raised the issue with the Israeli authorities ; whereas this decision may pave the way for the takeover of 26 more houses in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of East Jerusalem , with 26 other families targeted for eviction ; having regard to the political ramifications of this matter for the future status of East Jerusalem ' .
It is very clear .
You cannot say it ' will pave ' : it ' may pave ' , and we need that to be in the hands of the courts , not in the hands of debates as enunciated by some of my colleagues earlier o