Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 3 May 2001 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , even during the election campaign in the Basque region , ETA terrorists have been active in Spain . On 6 May , the President of the Popular Party in the region of Aragon , Manuel Giménez Abad , was assassinated in Zaragoza , and on 11 May , a car bomb exploded in Madrid , injuring thirteen people .
On my own personal behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament , I immediately expressed our deepest sympathy and our sincere condolences to the family of Mr Giménez Abad .
I have also assured the Spanish authorities of our support .
One thing at least emerges clearly from the results of the elections held in the Spanish Basque region : the Basque people , who turned out in force to cast their votes , have rejected violence .
I can only hope , now , that this message will be heard by all the political powers .
I shall now ask you , please , to observe a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Agenda
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 10 May pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
As far as Monday , Tuesday and Wednesday are concerned , no amendments have been proposed .
As far as Thursday is concerned :
With regard to topical and urgent subjects of major importance , two amendments have been proposed .
On Human Rights , it is proposed that the second sub-item , ' Guatemala ' , should be replaced by a new sub-item , ' Human rights situation in Cameroon ' .
This amendment was tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
( Parliament gave its assent ) Still on the subject of Thursday , ' Illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ' , it is proposed by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left that this item should be replaced by a new item , ' Floods in France ' .
Madam President , in voting as we did just now as a group on the Cameroon question , we were assuming that other groups would help us in raising Guatemala , the position of Rios Montt and the very serious human rights violations next month ; we should also like to propose that this topic , major reports and the situation in Congo be dealt with next month , since we are directly involved as the EU and it appears that next month will be possible .
In that case we can deal now with the serious situation regarding the floods in France .
We therefore agree with the substitution proposal .
Madam President , I have a point of order concerning the death penalty in the United States .
I should like to ask you , if you have not already done so , to write to the President of the United States , Mr Bush , to ask that the death sentence against Tim McVeigh , the extreme right-wing terrorist bomber in Oklahoma , be commuted to life imprisonment .
This is on the basis of our longstanding opposition to the death penalty in the United States but in this particular case it is reinforced by the increasing evidence that the bombing was not carried out by a crazed lone bomber but as part of a conspiracy by the extreme right-wing Aryan Republic Army .
To execute him at this stage would be to frustrate the search for truth and justice and serve the interests and ideology of the very people implicated in the crime .
Madam President , you mentioned the elections in the Basque Autonomous Community .
The Spanish Reconquista of the Basque Autonomous Community has not succeeded . We , Euskal Herritarrok , have paid for that .
Yesterday 's elections have been a rough competition on who is best to fight our political option .
It is therefore not astonishing , if we appear as losers .
The real failure , however , is that of the Spanish nationalists , the PP and the Socialist Party and the very government of Señor Aznar .
They have not achieved their goal of ousting Basque nationalists from the autonomous government .
The election results give us a clear message .
A large majority of the Basque people is urging political parties to come back to the 1998 agreement of Lizarra for a breakthrough from the actual situation .
The European Union can no longer consider this issue as an internal question of the Spanish Kingdom .
Madam President , every time there is a killing in the Basque Country or in Spain , and this House carries out its dignified ritual of condemning these criminal acts and holding a minute ' s silence , we are forced to listen to an MEP , a specialist in funeral addresses , taking the opportunity to spread his propaganda on a programme which we would respect if it were not tragically accompanied by crime and murder .
It is an unworthy and , above all , completely pointless exercise which is going to convince no-one in this House .
I would ask him to apply his energy and his speaking skills , if he has any , to convincing his friends to stop their murdering .
Thank you very much , Madam President .
Madam President .
I wish to congratulate Mr Berlusconi on his splendid victory in the Italian elections .
I hope that Mr Michel , the current Foreign Minister of Belgium , and his fellow travellers , the left-wing European press , will now shut up and respect the democratic choice of the Italian people with no more calls for Austria-style sanctions or interference by the EU .
I should like to remind the new Italian government of the commitment made by the previous government of Mr Amato and supported by all the MEPs of the governing coalition here in this House to end the shameful perpetual exile of the Royal House of Savoy and allow them to return to their country of origin by amending the Italian Constitution as soon as possible .
Madam President , I should like to raise a particular issue pursuant to Rule 44 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure on priority questions , which the Commission must answer within three weeks .
I tabled a priority question to the Commission on 15 February 2001 on the work of the national land register in Greece .
It is the only issue on which there is serious political disagreement between the Commission and the Greek government .
The Commission should have answered me by about 10 March . It has not done so .
Parliament ' s services have sent out four reminders .
On 19 March , 2 April , 18 April and 2 May . The Commission has still not replied .
This being the case , I should like you to raise this matter in connection with this question in particular and the need for the Commission to keep to the timetable for questions which we raise in general .
Madam President , now that the Italian elections have taken place and we can no longer be accused of electioneering , I would like to know whether you have received a new petition from the Spanish Supreme Court in relation to the waiver of Mr Berlusconi ' s immunity and whether you are going to deal with it without further delay , since this document has been confirmed in eight judicial decrees , including one from the Constitutional Court which , as you know , is the highest judicial body in Spain , higher than the Council of State .
The Supreme Court has the competence to approach this House directly to demand that a petition be processed .
I would like to know whether you have received it , in the terms that I have mentioned , and how you are going to proceed .
Mrs Sauquillo Pérez Del Arco , I am profoundly grateful to you for having raised this issue , thereby giving me the opportunity to provide Members with vitally important information .
I have to say that I was dying to mention it , but it would not have been possible for me to take the initiative on this subject myself .
There is one essential point .
The Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs wrote to me a few days ago in order to pass onto me the opinion of the Council of State .
You will remember , ladies and gentlemen , that this was what we were waiting for .
The Spanish government had raised the matter with the Council of State , and the latter has issued an opinion .
This opinion , I have to say , confirms the legal caution that I believed we would have to exercise .
In other words , the Council of State takes the view that the request for the waiver of immunity should be sent to us by the Spanish Ministry of Justice , and not directly by the Supreme Court .
That is the position .
Of course it is not for me to comment on the positions adopted by the courts of the Member States .
I think that would lead us away from the matter in hand .
It is quite obvious , Mrs Sauquillo , that for my part I am waiting to receive this request , one of these days , via the official channels , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
If the appropriate authority , which in the view of the Spanish Council of State is the Ministry of Justice , if , as I say , the Ministry of Justice sends me a request for the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of the Members in question , and of other Members as well , I shall of course refer it immediately to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , after having announced it in Parliament .
I believe that matters are clear at the moment .
Moreover , for many of us they have always been clear .
They have been the subject of a certain amount of controversial debate , which I personally regret .
However , please believe me when I say that I harbour absolutely no resentment whatsoever against any individual Member .
Madam President , if I understood you correctly , the Spanish Constitutional Court has confirmed your opinion , and ruled that requests for the lifting of immunity , even from the Spanish Supreme Court , must be addressed to you through the Spanish government .
There was some controversy over whether the stance you took was necessarily correct .
In the light of the situation , I should like to address a further question to Mrs Sauquillio : Do you know whether the dossiers are already on their way here ?
Have you been informed that the dossier is being sent to you again ?
Yes or no ?
Secondly , did I also understand you correctly as saying that you intend asking the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs to deal with the matter as soon as the documents arrive ?
Will you be doing that directly , or will you be informing Parliament first ?
On the basis of what you yourself have said , you ought first to inform Parliament when you have received the file , and only then could you involve the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
That would mean that we could not expect the matter to come before the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs until after the next plenary session .
That is why I am asking you quite specifically : will you be passing the files to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs as soon as you receive the dossier irrespective of the plenary session , I mean the files on the presumed suspect Mr Berlusconi and the file on the presumed suspect Mr Dell ' Utri ?
There are , after all , two cases here .
Thank you , Mr Schulz .
First of all , I should like to thank you for having taken note of the Council of State ' s decision and of the fact that the decision in question , that is to say the opinion of the Spanish Council of State , confirmed the legal caution which I had exercised .
When I said that I harboured no resentment , I was referring to certain Members in particular .
To some extent I was thinking of you , because it is true that you have had some very harsh words to say . However , that is all forgotten now .
I shall now reply very frankly and very clearly to your questions , and to the first one first .
Have I received a new request , via the official channels , from the Spanish Government ?
The answer is no .
So far , I have received nothing .
Secondly , when I do receive such a request , I shall simply follow Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure , which says that any request addressed to the President by the appropriate authority of a Member State - it is clear , therefore , that the authority is the appropriate one - that the immunity of a Member be waived shall be announced in Parliament - that is the rule - and referred to the committee responsible .
This being the case , I can confirm that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is currently looking to see whether all this can be trimmed down and amended .
You may not think that this is the best way to proceed , but for the time being , Mr Schulz , you will understand that I am applying the Rules of Procedure , as voted for by this House .
That is the position , and I think I have made it very clear .
Madam President , I should just like to ask you whether it would be possible for you to pass on to us quickly the letters which you have received and to which you have just referred , so that we can see the exact wording .
Do you mean the letters from the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ?
By all means , in fact I thought that they had already reached you .
Of course , we shall see to it immediately .
Madam President , I am delighted to be able to tell the House , which adopted a resolution on 5 April , during our last session in Strasbourg , calling for the release of Mr Tsiakourmas , who was kidnapped in Cyprus , that the kidnappers have released him .
I am sure that Parliament ' s steadfast and almost unanimous decision helped to bring about his release .
I should like to thank all my fellow Members for voting in favour of this resolution .
I only hope that his release marks the beginning of a change in the behaviour of his kidnappers and that they allow Turkish Cypriots to contact their Greek counterparts , because then the irregular situation in Cyprus would be resolved very quickly .
Thank you , Mr Katiforis .
Manufacture , presentation and sale of tobacco products
The next item is the report ( A5-0162 / 2001 ) by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text for a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture , presentation and sale of tobacco products [ C5-0086 / 2001 - 1999 / 0244 ( COD ) ] .
. ( NL ) Madam President , this is already the third time that we have discussed this topic and the Council and Parliament spent an exciting night bringing things to a conclusion .
It will surprise no one that the discussion in our Conciliation Committee that evening was dominated by the judgment of the Court on the tobacco advertising directive .
There are many legal aspects attached to this and the question is whether we can now be certain about all the legal aspects that were raised .
No , of course not .
After all , we were dealing with a different case with different provisions attached in that judgment by the Court , but we certainly believe that we acted in accordance with the spirit of the Court ' s judgment , and no more could be expected of us .
Agreement was reached on the export provision , so that from 2007 onwards the same criteria will apply to tar , nicotine and carbon monoxide as to products sold within the European Union .
In that sense things have been brought into line with the judgment of the Court .
I am also happy to see that this topic has now also been raised in the World Health Organisation .
We have reached agreement on the publication of ingredients and on the common list of ingredients .
An extraordinarily important and pioneering provision .
Ultimately the internal market is best served by a common regime in the field of ingredients and testing , as is public health .
It is also important from the point of view of a possible future assessment of less harmful tobacco products .
In relation to the regulation of snuff , for example ; it is no secret that I personally belong to the minority here who felt it could perfectly well have been sold in the European Union , but we shall come back to that in the report of the Committee at the start of the next parliamentary term and probably also in relation to other , less harmful tobacco products that are still being developed .
This topic will definitely be a political challenge to us all .
We have reached agreement on warnings .
In our view there can be no question of a ban on tobacco products and whether one likes it or not smoking is an individual , adult decision , as long as one does not harm others , provided it is based on adequate information .
The consequences of smoking are so serious that consumers must be properly warned and we are now going further - though to my taste still not far enough - in the direction of the Canadian legislation , which is more intelligent that what we have been able to achieve so far in the European Union .
I am very gratified that Member States have agreed to the option of printing pictures if they so wish and call on the Commission , when it comes to more detailed regulation at the end of 2002 , to look closely at what has been developed abroad , for example in Canada .
Then there is the matter of misleading descriptions .
Large cigarette manufacturers , such as Philip Morris , agree with what Parliament and the Council were trying to achieve on this point .
Naturally a misleading description , whether a commercial brand or not , cannot be allowed on the market , but legally it is a difficult business , perhaps particularly when it concerns a word like " mild " .
In the Conciliation Committee we finally opted for the formulation proposed by the Council which is based on the cosmetics directive and I believe that in so doing we have chosen a sensible path that is also legally sound .
I should like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation of the Council .
Although the Portuguese Presidency worked on this in the preliminary stages and the Swedish Presidency in the final phase , I have the greatest appreciation for the French Presidency , which played a crucial role on this point and also for the Commissioner .
Perhaps I may for once breach protocol and also mention John Ryan who has been active for years in the Commission on this matter and has played a crucial part .
My thanks also to the parliamentary delegation for their patience during this odd conciliation night and to Sabine Magnano and Klaus Beyer for their administrative support , but I should like to single out Renzo Imbeni , our delegation Chairman that evening , who dragged away our major points from the jaws of hell or at any rate from the jaws of the Council .
I also believe that the participation of non-governmental organisations and of industry was positive .
They were able to achieve a lot with their contribution .
It was a remarkable conciliation .
I have three concluding observations .
In the first place , Parliament , the Commission and the Council gave a joint press conference which was a novelty and a positive experience .
I should like to mention the rapid decision-making .
In scarcely a year we managed to get this controversial and complex legislation carefully onto the statute book .
Where are those slowly grinding Brussels and Strasbourg wheels that are always talked about ?
Finally , the final result is , I believe , better than either the joint position of the Council or the final text of Parliament .
This shows that the codecision procedure with equal involvement of Parliament , despite its cumbersome nature , is nevertheless the best way of reaching decisions in this Union .
Madam President , as the rapporteur has already said , this is not the first time that tobacco has been on the agenda .
We have discussed it on a number of occasions .
It is a thorny problem because various conflicting interests are at issue , especially those of health and of industry . These in turn involve largely small and medium-sized businesses , which form the heart of the economy .
Jobs are also at stake .
It is good that the Commission should have come up with a new directive and should have taken the initiative in the health field of doing everything possible to combat the consequences of smoking , for example by reducing nicotine content , banning harmful substances , by warnings and better labelling , by highlighting the danger of passive smoking and through product information .
In the field of the harmonisation of the internal market , it wants to do its utmost to combat different starting positions and to remove trading obstacles , by , for example , stating nicotine content , and by further harmonising policy on warnings and product information .
I hope that we can really achieve reciprocal recognition of testing methods .
Exports to third countries are a sore point .
Personally I take the view that what we regard as inadmissibly harmful to the inhabitants of the EU should not be exported to other countries , even if they have no legislation in that field .
I deplore the fact that this may have adverse consequences for employment in certain countries .
I would like to observe , however , that in my view more jobs have been lost through restructuring or the closing of companies by the industry itself than from political regulation .
For that reason I am for the time being reasonably optimistic .
I also believe that we have reached a reasonable compromise on transition deadlines .
As regards the legal basis , I would point out that this directive builds on three existing directives .
I therefore assume that we have a good legal foundation , having listened to , among others , the legal advisers of Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
In conclusion two more general observations . The first is on young people and smoking .
I would welcome it if the Member States could strengthen their efforts to advise young people against starting smoking , for example through pricing policy or , for example , by making points of sale unattractive and inaccessible or by prohibiting the free distribution of cigarettes on café terraces or near schools .
That is not universal .
A second observation concerns the subsidies on tobacco .
On the one hand we have this directive aimed at discouraging smoking which points out the health dangers , but at the same time Europe continues to give huge subsidies for tobacco growing .
It is my view that these should be gradually phased out .
Finally , I should like to compliment the rapporteur on the end result and thank him for the successful cooperation .
Madam President , we have reached the final stage of this major directive .
The agreement reached in the Conciliation Committee endorses the rapporteur 's excellent work and consolidates the climate of cooperation established in this House on a matter which is so very sensitive for the European citizens .
The text upon which we are about to vote is a considerable improvement on the text proposed by the Commission and an even greater improvement on the situation prior to that .
For once , the rules harmonising the internal market have given greater consideration to the health of the European citizens than to the interests of the large manufacturers .
This text is , once and for all , a significant example of how the European Union intends to respond to the citizens ' ever-increasing demand for protection of their health .
We hope fervently that other sectors , such as the food safety sector , will soon follow suit .
Without plunging straight into a discussion on the content of the agreement , I would like to stress two key points .
The first is the extension of the obligation to apply tar , nicotine and carbon monoxide ceilings to cigarettes intended for third country markets as well .
This measure was at the centre both of the debate in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and of debate in Parliament .
Some people , protecting the interests of exporting companies , maintained that this act would certainly not represent a Union contribution to the improvement of world health , while others took the line that what is harmful to Community citizens is also harmful to third country citizens , making clear , at the same time , the need for a sufficiently long transitional period to give operators in the sector the chance to convert to other production areas .
We advocated the latter approach , and the text adopted in conciliation takes this line .
The second key point concerns the definitive regulation of the substances added to tobacco products .
Indeed , in addition to being used to achieve the characteristic flavour and aroma of a certain product , these substances serve to increase the dependency of smokers .
Our directive will mean that , not only will manufacturers and importers of tobacco products have to declare the exact composition of products placed on the market but they will also have to justify the inclusion of every single ingredient .
Moreover , by 2004 , the Commission will have to present a proposal defining a common positive list of authorised ingredients .
These are not minor measures . Along with the banning of descriptors and the increasing of the area devoted to medical warnings , these measures can genuinely make a major contribution to the fight against smoking .
Madam President , it is customary in this House to congratulate rapporteurs at length and I often think that this is something of a waste of time when we have so few seconds at our disposal anyway .
Surely it is axiomatic that rapporteurs do their work well ?
However , I should like to make an exception for Mr Maaten .
Because this report proves that if one plays an active role as a rapporteur and hence also takes consultations with the Council and the Commission very seriously and makes a point of getting people together around a table , one can actually succeed .
That is of course also dependent on the Commission and the Council .
That is why it is gratifying that we can present this example at the end of the Swedish Presidency .
In fact you could take this report into the schools and say : Look , this is an example of the way in which a European directive can be produced through consultation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
I wish that were the case on more matters .
Now to come to the point .
I have been in politics for quite a time and when I first took part in framing legislation on limiting advertising and on warnings on cigarette packets , it was actually seen as something completely absurd by many of my colleagues .
Since then the fight against tobacco addiction and the regular use of tobacco has become universally accepted .
Still , there are differences .
I remember that on the first occasion when I went to Sweden for a meeting - I still smoked at the time - the smokers were put in a separate room together , where of course it stank terribly .
That was where you had to smoke , but it did not taste good at all .
Smoking was completely forbidden in the meeting room itself .
There was a sign , and I had never seen that before since I came from a culture where meeting and smoking were as it were associatively linked .
I now observe that the social pressure on smokers has increased in most countries and that great progress has been made thanks to the campaigns , despite scepticism about them many years ago .
The number of non-smoking train compartments must be increased everywhere .
More and more we insist on using and meeting in non-smoking areas .
Nevertheless social pressure must be stepped up to a point where young people especially do not start smoking , and women to not take up smoking either .
It is painful to see that despite the campaigns so many people are still starting to smoke .
I experienced first hand that giving up smoking is a lot more difficult than starting .
Having said this I hope that the strict regulations that run counter to the spirit of the lobbyists and their interests , will be followed up , and I believe that the measures proposed by Mrs Martens to abolish the subsidising of tobacco growing might give a healthy impetus .
Mr President , as we are all aware , smoking tobacco has many serious effects on public health .
It is important to note that these do not just affect smokers themselves , but also those who spend time in smoky environments , those with allergies as well as many others .
Smoking also leads to substantially increased health care costs in many countries .
In our capacity as politicians , our task is to warn of the risks of smoking , to reduce the harmfulness of tobacco products and to attempt to get rid of misleading marketing .
I consider that the conciliation we have achieved with the Council of Ministers is an obvious step in the right direction in this area .
In the GUE / NGL Group , we are , for example , particularly satisfied with the requirements for a lower tar content , the limit values for nicotine and carbon monoxide , clearer warnings and the requirement for companies to list additives .
We see the results in these areas as major progress .
In two areas , we would have liked measures to have been taken more quickly , but we feel that we are at least on the right track .
This applies to the ban on misleading brand names , for which no date has been set for implementation , something which we would have liked to have seen .
This will have to be a future task .
There is at least one commitment in this direction for the future .
We would also like there to have been faster progress regarding export bans on tobacco products that are not approved under EU rules .
It is rather embarrassing that it is all right to export what we consider to be dangerous to health in our own countries .
We should have preferred to have seen these products banned simultaneously in the EU and for export , but at least a ban has been set for the year 2007 .
Earlier in this conciliation , Swedish snuff was discussed , and we believe that a good solution has been arrived at in this area too .
It means that the exemption under which Sweden may keep its traditional snuff will be retained without the market in other EU countries being opened up .
We believe that other EU countries have the right to refuse this product if they wish to forgo it , which no doubt a number of them will .
Overall , we are very satisfied with the result of the conciliation and feel that the rapporteur has done a good job .
If we were to be slightly critical , we could say that the EU has problems of credibility when it comes to its tobacco policy as a whole .
Possibly EUR 1 billion per year is still spent on subsidies for tobacco cultivation .
If we are to make our work on combating the harmful effects of tobacco smoking more credible , it is perhaps time to start phasing out these subsidies .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak on this very important subject .
I congratulate the rapporteur for his handling of this report through three readings and lengthy negotiations with the Council in the conciliation process .
The final text which we will vote on tomorrow is to be welcomed as the fruit of successful negotiation .
The House has made it clear from the beginning that we expect strict rules to be applied in the whole area of producing , packaging and marketing cigarettes and other tobacco products .
It should be noted that 80 % of first-time smokers in the EU are below the age of 18 .
Statistics suggest very clearly that in the EU smoking kills half a million people annually .
Cigarette smoking is the cause of fatal diseases amongst a quarter of all smokers .
Smoking causes 85 % of all cases of lung cancer and half of all premature deaths among life-long smokers are caused by the use of tobacco .
The new regulations being proposed will be a significant step forward .
Member States have been attentive to the concerns expressed by Parliament and have taken the most important aspects of our recommendations on board .
In Ireland smoking kills six times as many people per year as road accidents , work accidents , murder , drugs , suicide and Aids combined .
Seven thousand deaths occur in Ireland each year from tobacco-related illnesses and one third of these occur before the age of 65 .
Twenty-five per cent of all heart-related diseases are caused by smoking .
In conclusion , these are astonishing statistics which I am confident this Parliament will continue to work to reduce .
Mr President , in the time it takes me to make this speech an estimated four people will die in the EU as a result of smoking .
Smokers are less long-lived and their health is less good .
Smoking is therefore a serious threat to public health .
Reason enough to discourage smoking then .
However , many people already smoke .
In Northern Europe these turn out to be people with low educational attainment and lower incomes .
Because of the addictive effect giving up proves very difficult .
Unfortunately it is still the case that many young people start smoking .
The policy of tobacco manufactures expressly targets this market by giving cigarette smoking a tough and sporting image in advertising .
Once the tobacco industry has won over a young person , it is generally assured of another regular customer .
Customer loyalty is further strengthened by increasing the addictive effect through additives that facilitate the absorption of nicotine .
In addition the tobacco industry tries , through the use of misleading messages like ' mild ' and ' light ' , to create the impression that the tobacco products concerned are less harmful .
The directive at present being finalised is an adequate response to the above-mentioned problems .
I should also like to thank Mr Maaten from this platform for his great commitment and for the result achieved .
The Swedish Presidency also ensured that this file was processed quickly , for which it earns my praise .
However , when in December last year Parliament had approved 32 amendments on second reading , things looked very different .
There were disappointed noises from the Council .
Obviously it had not been expected that Parliament would want to change so much in the common position .
Indeed , the Netherlands Minister of Health felt that the European Parliament was weakening the directive .
However , I believe that most amendments were an improvement of the common position .
It is reprehensible that this Minister should have criticised the ' questionable ' role of the European Parliament on the grounds that Parliament was dancing too much to the tune of the cigarette industry .
It is true that the cigarette industry lobby was working flat out , but obviously with little success , and just as well too .
The European Parliament even wanted to make the warning message on a packet of cigarettes more forceful by replacing the general warning ' smoking kills ' or ' smoking can kill ' with more confrontational texts like : In the EU half a million people die each year from the consequences of smoking , or smoking causes cancer and heart diseases or passive smoking is harmful to those around you , especially children .
In fact that is more accurate , since no one dies immediately as a result of lighting up a cigarette .
Unfortunately , however , these texts from the Council were not changed .
Other unhealthy results of smoking included blackened smokers ' lungs and rotten teeth .
Therefore I see no objection to confronting smokers on cigarette packets with what they are doing to themselves and to their environment .
It is precisely the intention that confrontation should have a preventive effect .
I am therefore gratified that Council has adopted this idea from Parliament .
I also support a ban on misleading messages , such as ' mild ' and ' light ' .
Another positive point is that in the preamble attention is drawn to additives which heighten the addictive effect .
Although an outright ban on the adding of ammonia or ammonia compounds would have been preferable .
Finally , Mr President , I again feel obliged to emphasise that European policy is inconsistent .
On the one hand the use of tobacco is discouraged , on the other over EUR 1 billion is spent annually on tobacco subsidies .
I feel that many more roll-ups will be made before these subsidies , which now simply go up in smoke , are reduced to zero .
Mr President , I would like to say that I think that this is a very important matter that we were dealing with today and that we must decide on tomorrow .
I believe it can be said that there is no greater killer on the grounds of lifestyle than cigarettes .
It was good that the industry did not succeed in getting Parliament and others to falter in connection with the legal basis .
Now , we will actually obtain a reduced nicotine content and tar content in cigarettes , and we will also obtain some rules on the additives that the industry has used to date .
These are substances that have helped to make cigarettes even more habit-forming than they would be without these substances .
In actual fact , it is quite incredible that this method of production has been accepted until now .
It is good that we are going to do something about it .
I would also like to point out the new labelling rules - the new rules on warnings on packets .
I believe that the rules that we will now have will make it difficult for consumers of cigarettes - and new potential consumers of cigarettes - not to be aware that cigarettes are actually very harmful to health .
It is also good that we will obtain some rules on the specific positive designations that it has been possible to use for cigarettes , such as ' mild ' and ' light ' .
This should have happened earlier , but it is good that there will now be rules .
I believe that these types of designation are very misleading and give a false impression .
They create a false sense of security among consumers .
Finally , I would like to mention exports .
We have had a discussion concerning what I will call export hypocrisy in this matter .
It cannot be right for us in the EU to sell cigarettes outside our own region that we believe are so damaging to health that they should not be used by our own citizens .
There will be a transitional scheme for these exports .
I do not think that this was necessary , but it was , of course , a political compromise .
At any rate , we can be pleased that there is a time limit of a maximum of three years on this hypocrisy .
I believe that , all in all , this is a good day for EU health policy , and one with which we can be very satisfied .
Mr President , it has taken nearly a year and a half to conclude this tobacco directive , and I wish to thank the rapporteur for all his hard work .
This piece of legislation will have a dramatic impact .
It will transform the way in which cigarettes are sold in Scotland , the UK and the whole of the European Union .
The directive will reduce the most addictive and dangerous substances in cigarettes ; it will ban the use of misleading descriptors such as ' ultras ' , ' lights ' and ' milds ' and it will introduce giant health warnings .
Through the work of MEPs we have also been given a guarantee that the Commission will draw up new rules on the use of picture health warnings on cigarette packs by December 2002 .
After decades of deception and misinformation from the tobacco industry , the message about the true cost of smoking will finally start to hit home .
As we all know , smoking is the biggest cause of preventable illness and disease across the European Union .
Over half a million people in the EU die needlessly each year from smoking .
In fact , someone diagnosed with lung cancer has an average of between three to ten months of life left .
At the end of this month there is the World No Tobacco Day .
There is no better way of celebrating this than by the coming into force of this new directive next year .
At this point I should like to encourage colleagues to sign the written declaration for an EU No Tobacco Day .
However the battle against big tobacco continues .
I look forward to the new proposals for a tobacco ad ban which the Commission will be introducing shortly .
One life lost due to tobacco is one life too many .
Mr President , honourable Members , it is with great pleasure that I reply to this debate on the report of the Conciliation Committee concerning the tobacco products directive .
This directive is the culmination of several years of hard work by the Commission on the basis of the best scientific advice .
We have developed and proposed a qualitative step forward in protecting public health , working within the confines of the legal basis for completion of the internal market .
The directive before you today will represent a significant improvement on our current legislative position and fill many of the gaps , which have made the current rules ineffective .
The present directive will put the European Community at the forefront of efforts to control the death and disease caused by tobacco consumption .
In this way , the addiction of future generations of young people has been taken seriously , and a framework created to reduce the enormous harm caused by this product .
I need hardly remind Parliament of the level of health damage from tobacco to our population which exceeds that from more widely debated causes .
The World Health Organisation estimates tobacco-related deaths in the Community to be more than half a million a year .
This does not include the number of smokers who suffer from serious and debilitating illnesses , such as respiratory disease and heart disease .
This makes tobacco control the most import tool in reducing death and disease in our midst .
I must here compliment Parliament and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Maaten , whose amendments have substantially improved and completed this measure .
The Commission was happy to accept many of these amendments .
Mrs Maes , in her contribution to Parliament , made a statement that this was a textbook example of cooperation between the three great legislative institutions of the European Union ; I would echo that , but refer also to the role of the Court of Justice in its judgment in the case relating to the advertising directive .
I would go further and , say echoing what Mrs Maes has said about this being a textbook example , that this issue - the story of tobacco and the legislation of tobacco - both in the first advertising directive that I am bringing forward soon and this particular directive , is worthy of close examination by any serious student of the European Union or law student .
It provides a clear example of how all the institutions can work well together in formulating policy and bringing forward that policy in the form of valuable legislation within the confines of the competences laid down in the treaties amending the Treaty of Rome , and will allay the fears of anybody who has concerns about the European institutions becoming too powerful , because the lines of demarcation are clearly set out by the Court and respected by the institutions in respect of this legislation .
In short , this is a textbook example as Mrs Maes has said , worthy of further study by young students .
This directive recasts several existing directives from the late 1980s .
We have used this proposal to update and complete existing instruments on the basis of scientific developments , including , for the first time , several important harmonisation measures .
I should like to mention the setting of a reduced tar ceiling in cigarettes and the creation for the first time of a ceiling for nicotine and carbon monoxide .
These ceilings will directly attack the agents in cigarettes responsible for cancer , addiction and cardiovascular disease .
We are not , however , aiming at producing a safe cigarette , since such a product cannot exist , but simply to reduce the most dangerous product constituents .
Importantly , these rules now apply to all imported products and to all products manufactured in the Community .
Thus , we will not export products , which are considered inappropriate for our citizens .
Equally , given the significant amount of smuggling , we do not run the risk of unsafe exports coming back onto the Community market .
I have been particularly upset at the cynical efforts of the tobacco industry to use the spectre of job losses to threaten this measure .
The same threats were also expressed when the original tobacco directives were adopted in the late 1980s .
They were not true then and they are not true now .
There is no room for double standards for our own citizens and for others when we are talking about an addictive and deadly product .
Another innovation in this text is to require the declaration of additives in tobacco products - potentially the most important single measure contained in this legislation .
Currently we do not know what these additives are at Community level and , more importantly , why they are added to the product .
Manufacturers and importers will in future be obliged to declare these constituents .
We will then move towards preparing a legislative proposal when these data are provided .
This will be done before 31 December 2002 .
I am happy to say that preparations for this consequent legislation , arising from the furnishing of this data , will be undertaken during my mandate as a Commissioner .
In the meantime , Member States remain free to protect their consumers .
Another important component of this directive is the substantial increase in the size of health warnings on packaging .
They will be increased to ensure that consumers are fully informed of the health risks they run and , for the first time , information will be provided on how to get help to stop smoking .
The previous rules were worded too loosely and the new directive makes sure that the warnings will be printed in colours that are clearly readable and cannot be disguised as at present .
As a result of an amendment from this House , the introduction of colour photos on warnings is to be introduced for the first time .
This will greatly increase the impact of these warnings .
In recent years research has shown the importance of avoiding misleading product descriptors on tobacco products which may make the consumer believe that a particular product is safer than another .
This directive introduces a requirement not to use such misleading terms on tobacco products .
As such , it aims to protect smokers and non-smokers alike from misleading representations of the dangers posed to them by such products .
In order to provide a mechanism to keep these rules up to date , we have also included a provision for regular Commission reports and a committee procedure .
In a previous declaration when the first reading took place , I undertook to consult with tobacco experts in drawing up this report and any subsequent proposals .
I can inform you today that work is already under way to reconstitute the Commission 's Advisory Committee on Cancer Prevention and to create its working group on tobacco .
However , I must draw your attention to the difficulty the Commission envisages in respecting the deadline imposed in Article 5 ( 3 ) of this text , which leaves little time to consult these committees and subsequently to adopt rules for the use of colour photographs on warnings .
In the coming weeks , I also hope to meet my undertaking to present a new proposal on tobacco advertising and sponsorship .
This will replace the directive annulled by the Court of Justice last October .
I also regard the Community 's legislative activity as complementary to that under way in the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on tobacco control .
I welcome the presence of an observer from the European Parliament in the Community delegation , appropriately Mr Maaten , which early this month met in Geneva when the second round of negotiations for this convention took place .
Finally , let me again express my appreciation for your support and confidence in ensuring the rapid adoption of this important directive and for the words expressed in respect of the Commission 's involvement .
I should like to play tribute in particular to Mr John Ryan and the significant contribution he has made to this issue over the years .
I hope it will be seen in coming years that this directive is a keystone of our efforts to reduce the damage to health by smoking .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Tuesday , at noon .
Animal nutrition
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0136 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 95 / 53 / EC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition and Council Directives 70 / 524 / EEC , 96 / 25 / EC and 1999 / 29 / EEC on animal nutrition [ 13724 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0047 / 2001 - 2000 / 0068 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has accepted most of the proposals approved by Parliament during the first reading .
We have succeeded in getting the most important issues of principle through , for example , that the user stage , that is , those who feed the animals , is also to be covered by the controls .
This is a success , since approximately two-thirds of all animal feed in the European Union is produced on farms .
However , what the Council - and possibly also the Commission - has not taken note of is the fact that we have replaced the word ' contaminated ' with ' contain undesirable substances ' .
We are not , in fact , playing with words here . The term ' contaminated ' must be defined in purely scientific terms with reference to substances and / or bacteria that have been added from outside , whereas ' contain undesirable substances ' also includes those substances that are formed naturally , e.g. in the course of storage , when fat oxidises and mycotoxins are formed .
There are lots of substances that are clearly inappropriate in feed , but which do not come from outside .
They have arisen in natural processes which really should not have taken place .
Hay should not be allowed to go mouldy , since this makes it downright dangerous .
I have reintroduced all the amendments to the effect that ' contaminated ' should be replaced by ' contain dangerous substances ' .
We have also reintroduced Amendment 24 from the first reading , which deals with Community controls .
In this case , the Council referred to a conciliation made with Mr Staes after we had started working on the report in the first reading .
I have now changed the amendment to include the wording of the TSE regulation that was approved at the first plenary session in Brussels .
We should endeavour to create legislation that is clear , consistent and easy to grasp .
That is why I have chosen to copy the wording of the TSE regulation on Community controls word for word .
It is easier for those who have to deal with the laws and who have to comply with them if at least the standard provisions that recur in directive after directive are worded the same .
I think that this is very important .
Mr Staes will submit an oral amendment in this area which involves a certain expansion , and which I am able to approve .
It is of crucial importance that we get a comprehensive control system throughout the Union .
Creating good laws throughout this food safety chain that we are now working on does not involve particularly great difficulties , but it does involve hard work .
The big problem comes with control and compliance .
Good laws are all very well , but they are just words on paper unless we have effective control and compliance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . We now have before us the Council ' s common position on amending the directives containing basic rules for the performance of official inspections of feed and concerning animal nutrition .
Mrs Paulsen has at the end again made the reason for this clear .
The crises and scandals of recent years have made a revision of the rules concerning feed an urgent necessity .
Amending the directive will harmonise the conduct of official feed inspections in Europe and enshrine them in law .
Member States will now be obliged to introduce appropriate emergency measures to deal with serious risks involving feed .
The Commission is empowered to adopt temporary precautionary measures if animal nutrition products manufactured in the EU present a serious risk to humans , animals or the environment .
Member States are obliged to inform the Commission immediately and in full of any case of contamination .
This will ensure that the Commission is able to act at once .
Member States must also prepare an annual report of all incidents and irregularities involving feed and forward it to the Commission .
The Council has accepted the European Parliament ' s core demands for comprehensive feed inspections , namely the use of a generic term covering all products intended for use in the food and feed chain down to the final consumer .
These were included in the common position .
This took account of the intensive debate in the European Parliament .
At this point I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen , sincerely for her handling of this difficult task .
However , the Council was unable to comply with Parliament ' s call for the directive also to be extended to changes that occur as a result of faults and flaws in the manufacturing process .
Mrs Paulsen has just referred to this .
For that reason , the rapporteur has retabled the corresponding amendments from the first reading in the slightly modified form required , as she has described .
The report was accepted unanimously by the Committee on the Environment Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The adjustments made to the tabled amendments were necessary in order to bring them closer to the corresponding articles of Directive 1999 / 29 / EC on undesirable substances and products in animal nutrition .
They were also brought into line with the corresponding article of the TSE Regulation on Community inspections .
Acceptance of the amendments would create a uniform , clear and transparent inspection system tailored to the new requirements of the time .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mrs Paulsen on her diligence in preparing and seeing through this report , and to echo a previous speaker who said of Mr Maaten 's report - but it is equally true of this one - that it is a model of the second-reading procedure .
We are gathered here with a reasonable unanimity in the committee , with a very modest number of amendments but with an absolute certainty that we want to press our point .
If codecision is to have any meaning , that is a position we will maintain to the end .
I am putting the position of my group in the absence of Mrs Roth-Behrendt who , as some will know , is in hospital in Berlin .
I saw her last week in Berlin and I am sure she is making a rapid recovery and would wish all to know that her heart remains in our proceedings in these matters of food hygiene and food safety .
There are only six amendments which the House has to consider tonight : five from the committee as a whole and the sixth tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
My group supports all of them for one simple reason : we surely should have learned by now the lesson that precision and targeting of possible dangers in animal feed is of the essence of the precautions that we need to take .
Over the last two or three years we have seen enough of the dreadful practices in parts of the animal-feed industry , sometimes practices that were already illegal according to the rules of those days .
They need to be tightened up quickly .
Precision is at the heart of what Mrs Paulsen has had to say to us today .
Precision in language most of all : the word " contamination " is not satisfactory when it is used in the phraseology of the food authority proposals , which we will be discussing shortly .
It is not sufficient where we need to be able to have a further process of scrutiny and inspection of damaging materials that may be inserted very early on into the manufacture of animal feed .
I am very glad that one important principle is enshrined in this report as it goes through to the next stage : animal feed should be taken as seriously for all of us in our own interests as human food .
The two are more or less indistinguishable , both in their effects on human kind and on the animals with whom we share this planet .
There is an election going on in Britain and yesterday I was doing my stuff on the doorstep in a country village .
People were asking whether veterinary inspections were secure and safe and could possible be self-policed .
I have known and represented that place for 30 years .
Ten years ago you would never have heard these considerations .
The fact that they are now paramount argues the case for this report .
Thank you very much , Mr Whitehead .
I would ask you to give Mrs Roth-Behrendt our best wishes for a speedy recovery .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my group I would like to thank my colleague for her very creditable work .
The purpose of my speech is mainly to state that we support the amendments the rapporteur has tabled .
They are most justified with regard to the users of animal feed , the farmers .
The term " official inspections " used in the title of the report is a very telling one , as there has been no comprehensive system of official inspections , the consequences of which have been dire .
Furthermore , the way the inspections are defined and described , including the notion of all " products for animal nutrition " , is , in my opinion , excellent .
The amendments also emphasise the need to take account of faults and flaws in the production process .
This is also only right .
One or two amendments likewise very aptly stress the importance of inspections .
For example , the notions of ' country of origin ' and ' Member State of destination ' and co-operation between them , with all their attendant obligations , are described .
Co-operation and inspections must be conducted transparently , including checks made in Member States as mentioned in Amendment No 5 .
This amendment also states that experts should be provided with " all the assistance necessary for carrying out their duties . "
Such definitions and specifications make excellent terms of reference for this directive , its implementation , and its monitoring .
Finally , I would like to make one point , Mr President .
We will recall from recent history such matters as dioxins and the use of swill in animal feed .
We are moving towards an enlarged EU .
The future Member States are predominantly agricultural countries .
It is therefore excellent that the vital matters that are in our hands - such as that of official inspections - are to be straightened out first .
Mr President , I join in the compliments to the rapporteur for her dedication .
Animal feed or , more appropriately , the ingredients used in its manufacture are understandably central to the regulations governing food safety and consumer protection .
This Parliament and the Commission have certainly burnt the midnight oil putting in place controls which must eliminate for all time the reoccurrence of BSE or the dioxin scare , which has cost farmers and the food sector dearly and caused so much worry to consumers .
We have learned an expensive lesson but one that marked an important turning-point in EU food production and one from which we can benefit in the long term .
There is no place for dissidents in this new regime and those found in breach must be strongly disciplined .
While it is not a time for apportioning blame for what has happened , I believe farmers were by and large innocent victims of sections of an unscrupulous animal-feed sector , some of which resorted to the use of sewage sludge as an ingredient in animal feed , while others continued to use illegal meat and bone meal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mrs Paulsen and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for the broad support given to this Commission proposal concerning controls on animal nutrition .
I am also grateful to this Chamber , because adoption of this proposal will mean the fulfilment of one of my first commitments to improve food quality and safety .
As you know , the proposal was articulated on three main issues .
The first is the obligation for Member States to have contingency plans in place to deal with feed emergencies .
Secondly , it will provide a legal basis for the adoption of safeguard measures for products originating within the Community .
Thirdly , it will provide a system to exchange information in the field of animal nutrition , with particular reference to a rapid alert system .
The common position adopted by the Council last February , which was also endorsed by the Commission , improved the Commission proposal .
The three main issues of the proposal were properly addressed in the common position , which also includes many of the suggestions made by Parliament in first reading .
I am satisfied that this agrees with the most fundamental parts of the common position .
Concerning the amendments tabled for this Parliament , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 , which will improve the clarity of the text .
The Commission can also accept Amendment No 5 , because it takes into consideration the evolution of other important legislation in this sector , such as the TSE regulation approved by the European Parliament at the last Parliament part-session .
In principle , the Commission accepts the legitimate expectation of informing the European Parliament on the inspection results .
However , the way Amendment No 6 is drafted cannot be accepted because it does not foresee informing the other Member States for the sake of consistency .
I understand that it was intended to put forward an oral amendment to include this reference ; and if that , is done , I am in a position to accept that amendment too .
If that oral amendment is tabled , it will take the place of Amendment No 5 .
So be it , the Commission can accept that .
In summary , I am pleased to say that the Commission can accept Amendments No 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 .
Amendment No 5 is accepted while Amendment No 6 is not accepted unless in the form that I suggest , which I understand Parliament may put forward .
The five amendments to the Paulsen report are correct in terms of the principles and I hope that the Council will also agree that they deserve to be incorporated in the final directive .
Goodwill has been shown for this dossier by all the institutions and I hope that the final directive can be approved quickly .
I am grateful for the constructive approach taken to this dossier by the European Parliament .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Tuesday , at noon .
Mobility in teaching and training
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0115 / 2001 ) , by Mr Evans , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on mobility within the Community for students , persons undergoing training , young volunteers , teachers and trainers [ 13258 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0029 / 2001 - 2000 / 0021 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , this report comes from a Commission proposal presented in January 2000 , a proposal drafted under Articles 149 and 150 , which called on the Member States to foster the mobility of people undertaking a course of study , a period of training , voluntary work , or work as a teacher or trainer in another Member State , whether on a Community programme or not .
When this recommendation from the Commission was presented to Parliament , it was very quickly clear that it was a flawed document and indeed the Commission accepted this itself .
Perhaps with hindsight it might have been easier if we had rejected it some 18 months ago and started again , but we did not and I and colleagues have worked hard to present something to Parliament and to salvage something from it .
At our first reading in Strasbourg last October , Parliament voted amendments which I felt would improve the quality of the text , and I announced some of the irregularities and flaws to which I alluded a moment ago .
We also sought to extend the scope of the original proposal , for example to include researchers , as had been requested by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Thirdly , we called on the Member States and the Commission to set targets and precise goals to measure the progress towards the goals that had been set , i.e. to set indicators to monitor them .
Colleagues may recall this report came before Parliament at a particularly sensitive time for the Commission .
I understand that it was anxious to match action with resources and for that reason it rejected all those amendments that required it to take follow-up action .
It did not reject all the amendments , only those that asked it to take follow-up action , something that is particularly important .
It also rejected anything related to researchers , which I understood .
Since then , I have had lengthy deliberations and negotiations with Commission staff , whom I thank for their time , with the French Presidency , which prioritised this report , and indeed latterly with the Swedish Presidency , which has equally been generous with its time and energy .
We looked at ways to cover the following important areas : the nature of voluntary work and administrative , financial , linguistic and cultural obstacles to mobility .
The common position which has now been arrived at contributes to the clarity of the text , particularly where it deals with third-country nationals .
It rejects , however , most of Parliament 's amendments on social security and social protection rights , areas that we felt were crucial for interest groups , for students , teachers and others .
This is why we have had to make a few amendments to the common position .
I presented six amendments at second reading , which refer in particular to the action plan that stemmed from the Nice Summit , which it is important to refer to because it clarifies many of the points that we wanted to raise .
I have asked for some follow-up action from Member States .
I have looked at ways in which we can reduce the administrative costs of implementing this recommendation .
I have clarified , I hope , the follow-up action that is expected of the Commission and removed an unnecessary and potentially harmful qualification in the common position .
All of these amendments are admissible and I have had discussions again with the Swedish Presidency to make certain that they are in line .
There will be one or two small technical points that I would like to bring up tomorrow as oral amendments , just to clarify the text and for the sake of linguistic consistency .
I want to make the report unambiguously clear so that it can go through and Member States are absolutely clear what is expected of them .
As a result of this report we will be taking a few , albeit tentative , steps towards creating mobility for those in education , teachers , students , academics and others , so that they can actually move from one country to another within the European Union , make that a reality and take a first step forward .
Mr President , we have previously discussed the tobacco directive , a very controversial topic involving many conflicting interests .
We are now debating a report about which in my view there is very little difference of opinion .
In the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport the report was unanimously approved , and I should like to compliment the rapporteur , Mr Evans .
I am happy with this report .
It further strengthens the joint position and has also taken account of the conclusions of the Nice Summit .
The mobility programme gives students , teachers , volunteers , placement students and others the opportunity of gaining experience abroad .
With an internal market that is operating more and more efficiently , in which people increasingly go and work in other countries , and with an increasingly multicultural society that is extremely important .
That experience may lead to increased knowledge of various languages and cultures , even in European countries .
Perhaps even more importantly , Mr President , it has been shown that participants , develop a greater sense of Europe , the European intellectual tradition and the importance of European cooperation .
For that reason also it is a good and extremely important programme .
That is why it is a pity that , as we know , there are quite a few obstacles facing those wishing to avail themselves of the mobility programme .
Barriers , for example , in the field of social security , medical expenses insurance , residence permits , recognition of study credits , language problems , etc .
At the first reading a first initiative was taken towards measures that would remove these hindrances .
In the joint position , I feel , a good compromise was reached and in any case it is another step in the right direction .
It was possible after all to further improve the text of the recommendation .
There are further guarantees that Member States will not use the freedom of manoeuvre offered by the treaty in such a way that the free passage of individuals is , in practice , unnecessarily impeded .
I should also like to seize this opportunity to highlight yet again a problem that has existed for years , and has been known about for years , and about which complaints are heard whenever one visits one ' s constituency , and that is the enormous bureaucratic maze facing anyone wishing to use this programme .
There is a mountain of red tape .
I am therefore glad that the report on which we are voting this week provides for an evaluation , a report on the implementation of the programme and the measures taken by Member States in this area .
I hope , Mr President , that the cumbersome working practices and procedures will be included in this .
Finally , I welcome the Commission ' s intention to make such a recommendation for researchers .
As the rapporteur has already said : they experience the same obstacles and I am delighted that the Commission hopes to be able to present a recommendation on the subject shortly .
Mr President , the reason why I am taking the floor is because of my pleasure at the result that has been achieved .
This is a great day for education policy throughout Europe .
The adoption of this recommendation must inevitably lead to greater mobility of students and others in education , and the mobility of students is of the utmost importance for the continued development of the European Union .
The more people that move to another country for a period - whether for education or for work purposes - the greater will be the understanding between our peoples at a human , cultural and professional level .
Understanding is the ' glue ' that is required to bind the European Union together .
The greater the mobility of students and others , the more strongly this ' glue ' will be able to hold the European project together .
The second major gain is that we will see better adaptation of the workforce to the international labour market and to the labour market of the future , which will be characterised by flexibility and the ability to adjust .
It is quite simply essential for Europe to meet these requirements if we are to hope to keep up with the other major economic players on the global stage .
The Americans have a very high degree of mobility among students and among their workforce .
This is undoubtedly an area in which we can learn something from the United States .
I must therefore say thank you - a big thank you - and congratulations to Mr Evans , who has done some very substantial , first-rate and persistent work in connection with this report .
I will also allow myself to express pleasure at the fact that this recommendation is directed at people in the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
It is of the utmost importance that young people from the applicant countries also participate in the EU ' s education programmes .
In this connection , it might be asked whether the EU ' s education programmes are adequate .
We should look at whether they can be made more efficient and possibly expanded , so that more young people can go and study abroad .
All young people should try to study in another country sooner or later in the course of their education , and it is also similarly important for teachers and volunteers to receive inspiration from elsewhere .
We are on the right track with this proposal from Mr Evans .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the unanimity in committee shows that , overall , we are satisfied with the progress made since our last debate on 4 October last year .
The tabled amendments refine the draft further , making it clearer and more up to date .
We are still , however , far from our goal in everyday practice .
We must do all we can to get the agreements translated into action and to make the freedoms which we advocate as a basic principle of the European Union an actual part of the daily lives of all people , not just young people , in Europe .
Colleagues , it is true that citizens have already been enjoying greater mobility since the internal market was introduced , but there is still a long way to go .
We must continue to dismantle all barriers to freedom of movement .
Equal rights and benefits , recognition of periods of study abroad , promotion of multilingualism , promotion of information exchange and the dismantling of administrative and financial obstacles must be translated into reality and not just written down in the action plan .
A previous speaker has pointed out that we still have not reached our goal in the matter of taxation , the recognition of health insurance , employment and social law , social security and the mutual recognition of academic qualifications .
I therefore call for a greater application of the EU principle of non-discrimination in all these areas , too , because mobility also needs underpinning socially with some minimum standards so that persons who are mobile are not disadvantaged in other ways .
Mr President , mobility is one of the subjects that the Commission holds dear .
We attach fundamental importance to it , as Members of this House have said , from the point of view not only of the personal enrichment of the individual but also of the creation of the great European family .
To be mobile is to get to know other people , to work better together having studied together .
Mr Evans , I should like to thank you so much for the work that you have undertaken , for your commitment and for your efforts to find solutions to problems that are not always easy , owing to the institutional barriers which , unfortunately , prevent us from making progress as rapidly as all of us would wish .
The European Parliament has proved to be extremely cooperative .
In addition to Mr Evans , I should like to thank all those members of the committee who have helped to ensure that Parliament , the Council and the Commission would together be able to find solutions at the end of a long process .
The text of the Council common position on which Parliament has to vote is the result of a long debate between the three institutions .
I think that the final text reflects the efforts of all those involved in the question of mobility in Europe , even though I agree with those Members who say that a text is not enough , and that it must be followed by specific actions .
However , by continuing the debate on the recommendation , I think that we are nevertheless progressing along the lines proposed at the Lisbon and Nice Summits , which recommended that education and training policies should play a major role in European economic growth and social renewal , and which therefore made mobility one of the key elements of those policies .
It is also from this viewpoint , Mr President , that we should understand the action plan for mobility approved by the Nice Council , since it provides an operational supplement to the measures laid down in the recommendation and constitutes the expression of a new commitment to mobility on the part of the Member States .

On the subject of commitment , I should like to assure this House of the commitment of my colleague , Mr Busquin , who is actively working to ensure that mobility for researchers develops along the same lines .
Before I set out the position that the Commission intends to adopt on the occasion of this second reading , I hope you will permit me to refer back to the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading , since your rapporteur has mentioned them .
I am pleased to be able to say that both the Commission , in its amended proposal of 9 November last , and the Council , in its proposal of 19 January , have accepted , either in whole or in part , the great majority of those amendments , particularly those intended to improve the quality of the text in order to reinforce Community action .
The text of the common position thus incorporates 40 of the 56 amendments approved by Parliament at first reading .
Now , at second reading , Mr Evans is proposing six amendments to the common position , on which I shall now comment .
Some of these amendments , namely Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , add an explicit reference to the action plan for mobility as a new legal act covering the area of mobility .
They are therefore intended to create synergy between these two initiatives .
Synergy implies the agreement of the Commission as well , because we are in agreement with both these texts .
Nevertheless , in the recital amended by Amendment No 1 , I should like to add a reference to the Nice Council , which was originally provided in Amendment No 3 .
This is actually a very small correction that in no way changes the content .
I also agree with Amendment Nos 2 and 4 which provide clarification regarding the action taken in response to the recommendation , in particular with regard to the timing and content of the reports by the Member States and the Commission on the implementation of the recommendation .
I also believe that the greater detail sought by Parliament in Amendment No 3 , regarding the profile of the members of the group of experts , are entirely relevant .
Finally , I support the point of view of Parliament ' s Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , in proposing to remove the time specification of - and I quote - not exceeding , in principle , one year , in the definition of the mobility and activities of volunteers , in Amendment Nos 5 and 6 .
This results in a more flexible form of words , whereby the mobility referred to by the recommendation is the mobility of limited duration which appeared in the Commission ' s original proposal .
So you see , Mr Evans , the Commission is able to accept the six amendments proposed at second reading , subject to a slight change to the wording of Amendment No 3 .
In my opinion , this convergence of the viewpoints of Parliament , the Commission and , I am sure , of the Council too , show that we are all heading in the same direction .
I should also , Mr President , like to thank Parliament , which has always understood the importance of mobility , and which has always demonstrated its willingness to cooperate throughout the process , even at difficult moments . Is that not so Mr Evans ?
We have reached an agreement which is not a political one , but is one that concerns the fundamental needs of our students and teachers .
I should also like to remind the House of the important role assigned to Parliament in Community initiatives on the subject of mobility , such as the communication on the new European employment markets which makes provision , amongst other things , for the setting up of a high-level task force on qualifications and mobility , or the Social Agenda , which recommends the modernisation of the rules in order to ensure that workers ' social rights are retained in the context of mobility .
I should like to draw this latter text to the attention of those Members who have quite rightly pointed out that one of the major problems that still remain to be solved concerns the area of social affairs .
Finally , I should like to make it clear to you how much I am committed , on behalf of the Commission as a whole , to the rapid implementation of the mechanism provided in the recommendation .
This mechanism will enable us to ensure that there is follow-up action , in the form of joint action by the Member States .
In saying this , I hope I have responded to the legitimate concerns that Parliament has expressed throughout the procedure , regarding truly effective follow-up action .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
New technologies in tomorrow 's education
Mr President , the report which I have drafted as rapporteur for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport is based on a Commission text published in January 2000 entitled " Designing tomorrow ' s education : promoting innovation with new technologies " .
As you know , the European Council moved very fast after that with the conclusions from the Lisbon Council in March , containing positions on the transition to a competitive , dynamic , knowledge-based economy , and the initiatives of the European Council in Santa Maria de Feira on e-Europe and e-Learning .
In a sense , therefore , this Commission text has been overtaken by events .
In another sense , however , it has given the Committee on Culture of the European Parliament an opportunity to lay down a number of general guidelines relating to the policies of the European Union , which is not just an economic and monetary area ; it is also an area of education and the European Union has a role to play in establishing a learning society .
These general - shall we say - principles and positions are contained in the report which I have drafted and I shall try briefly to set out the ten commandments of what I think are the most important points .
One : the European Union is not the driving force in the world here ; it is lagging a long way behind , especially behind the United States ; educational establishments are under-equipped in information and education technologies and , in this sense , we need to sound an alarm so that they go into top gear .
An alarm which will result not just in our imitating the United States , but in a model for incorporating these technologies which is based on the political principles of the European Union .
Two : information and communication technologies give rise to numerous risks of discrimination , inequality , exclusion and a new north / south divide in Europe , this time at technological level .
There is a risk of inequality between countries , between regions , between social groups , between minors and adults , between men and women , between pupils and parents and between private and state schools .
All these risks must be taken into account so that we design a knowledge-based society inspired by principles of justice , cohesion and equality .
Three : although we agree that the European Union should be proactive in this area , we must not lose sight , in parallel to these efforts and as we coordinate the efforts of the Member States , of the individual identity of each country and of the cultural identities and diversity which exist in the European Union , especially its linguistic diversity .
There is a discrepancy between major and minor languages ; we do not want one or more languages to hold sway over the others and we need to consider the specific difficulties of the minor languages which do not use the Latin alphabet .
Four : it is important that we help to provide the means needed so that these technologies can be easily disseminated , which means cheaper access , special measures such as preferential charges , tax incentives for equipping educational establishments and intervention to reduce telecommunications prices , especially the cost of accessing the Internet .
Five : we must not confine these technologies to primary , secondary and tertiary and traditional forms of education ; we must also consider adults , lifelong learning and all the people outside the formal education cycle and process , as well as taking account of the huge role of these technologies in combating unemployment .
Six : we need a humane model which is not based on information overload and which can be combined with pupils ' need for free time , with cultivating the imagination , with creativity in all sectors and with developing social conduct in school .
Not technologies that individualise , isolate and alienate pupils .
Seven : special attention to teacher training so as to prevent computer rooms in schools turning into museums . This implies attention both to skills and to the educational and critical approach to these technologies .
Eight : not just processes emanating from above , but interaction with society owing to the wide range of circumstances and the complexity of the problems involved .
These processes should not just put computers in schools and parents ' associations , psychologists and teachers should take part in them .
Nine : due to the rapid advances and changes in these technologies , we must study questions of budget , technological infrastructure and educational continuity .
And ten : the Commission , which has taken important initiatives - especially Mrs Reding - should perhaps study the results of these technologies in schools , the role of the Structural Funds , exchanges of experience between Member States etc. more closely .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to say that several Members may perhaps have reservations on various points ; I personally have reservations about Paragraph 23 on the general acceptance of the Bologna agreements ; however , this report was adopted by a unanimous vote in committee and I hope that Parliament will do likewise .
Mr President , I am sure across this House , and between Parliament , the Commission and the Council , we all agree education is important .
President Kennedy said of America : " Our progress as a Union can be no swifter than our progress in education . "
If that was true for America then , it is certainly true for Europe now .
I am sure we also all agree that education 's prime responsibility lies with , and within , the Member States . We should not forget that prime responsibility for education rests with students and scholars themselves .
We should also do our best to give as much autonomy as we can to schools and colleges .
The question we have to address is : what can Europe do ?
What can we add to the educational business ?
The very existence of this debate shows that in the European Parliament , and indeed with the Commission and the Council , we have been pushing for more attention to be paid to the role of Europe in education .
The prosperity of our Continent depends upon the level of education offered to our citizens .
The other reports we are debating this evening deal with the present and the future .
My report deals primarily with the past .
Some of it is critical , but it is critical of what happened in the past rather than what is happening now .
My report is : White Paper " Teaching and learning - Towards the learning society " .
That is a very impressive title , but I am not too sure that the report was that positive .
After Lisbon and Stockholm , we are left in no doubt as to the importance Europe places on developing a knowledge economy .
I am sure that with Commissioner Reding and her team future Commission activity in response to the increased priority for education agreed at the Lisbon and Stockholm Summits will be better than that detailed in my report .
I am afraid that after reading the Commission Communication , I finished with not much more of an idea as to how far Europe had actually come towards the learning society , and which direction we wished to go .
Sadly , I found the document vague , indicative of a lack of any real action over past years , although there were some notable exceptions .
The main objectives which the Commission tried to attain in the implementation of its White Paper seemed laudable : developing employability and boosting knowledge potential .
I am not quite sure what was meant by helping to build a people 's Europe - that seemed to be a vogue phrase of a few years ago .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's report did not really detail any concrete progress made by the Commission in the five objectives set out .
It was rather enthusiastic , but vague in terms of the impact of certain actions .
What we and the public - and certainly we as the budgetary authority - want to know is how much was spent ?
How much of it was new money ( as opposed to funds already in existing programmes ) ?
What was the European added value ?
What results were achieved ?
And what lessons were learned for the future ?
I ask the Commission to ensure that we have that information so that in future we as the budgetary authority can press for more funding for this very important work .
There are certainly many projects mentioned which are worthy of further exploration : the European credit transfer system , for instance .
But as the debate we had earlier this evening shows us , 40 years on from the start of the EU , 15 years after the Single European Act , we cannot yet say there is mutual recognition of academic qualifications across Europe
There are some things that can and should be done at a European level .
Europe with its richness of linguistic diversity presents problems as well as strengths .
I would say : let us be realistic , rather than too idealistic .
Can we ask the Member States to insist that nobody goes into higher education , unless they have a qualification in a modern language other than their own ?
Because in some Member States that is not yet a requirement .
We certainly need to do more work on IT , but that is being addressed in other reports . I will not deal with that .
The single market requires a much more mobile workforce than we currently have .
Mobility in Europe is less than half that of the United States .
We must make our workforce more mobile , and that means more resources at a European level for careers advice and for work experience .
I am quite sure that the careers services across Europe do not have enough resources to alert students to the opportunities in the single market of Europe .
I would say , however , that it is not just the Commission that can do things .
Let me suggest one way in which this Parliament could help .
We support , of course , educational exchanges of Erasmus , Socrates and so on in the European Educational Institute in Florence , but not enough students get the opportunity to experience Europe .
I have long thought that the EUR 100m we spend every year on the use of this building for one week a month is a terrible waste of resources .
I suggest that we give some thought to turning this building into a European university .
That would be good for the students of Europe , the City of Strasbourg , France , this Parliament and Europe .
Mr President , at the risk of going back over some of the ground already covered by Mr Alavanos , I would like to contribute to the debate , in particular by using my speech to describe certain aspects of the scenario in which we are currently placed and which I feel e-Learning will influence by placing the spotlight on two fundamental elements . Moreover , I see these elements as the principal merits of the two Commission documents : the communication and the action plan .
A correct interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity : the e-Learning action plan has succeeded in finding a niche in the sensitive debate on the use made by the States of their national education systems , demonstrating that the term ' European educational area ' is a realistic , positive concept in which we must have confidence without fear of undermining the cultural identities of our countries .
Moreover , the subject of new technologies is certainly one which we can develop further to enhance these common elements .
The second positive element lies , in my opinion , in the fact that the e-Learning action plan favours a positive and - I would add - social approach to certain typical effects of globalisation .
In this sense , I must say , the action plan goes some way towards allaying some of Mr Alavanos ' concerns , for there is no doubt that it provides for opportunities for access to the knowledge-based society as a way of avoiding imbalance , and , I would add , it gives new meaning to the concept of cooperation between public and private institutions .
In fact , to some extent it enhances and focuses on the distinguishing feature of e-Learning , which is that a nation 's education systems and teaching methodologies will always be more important than any other system , even systems of government , and they must therefore receive the benefit of the greatest possible input from all the players in the establishment of a welfare community .
In any case , before turning to any specific aspects , I am anxious to thank the Commission , particularly Commissioner Reding and her collaborators , for their willingness to help , and the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities for their extremely valuable contributions in recent months .
I have to say that , of the more specific issues covered by my report , that which receives the greatest focus is teacher training .
I would like , as far as is possible , to illustrate the importance of this subject with an example .
When Dante makes his journey through hell and purgatory , he is accompanied by a guide : Virgil .
Virgil is a person with the highest moral attributes who , however , at the time , also has at his disposal all the best that the technology of classical culture can provide .
For example , he uses the technology and technique of metaphor , and he does so in order to bring Dante to greater knowledge , to a greater and better understanding of the meaning of the world in which he lives .
Well then , if we do not now place European teachers in a position to make proper , realistic use of new technologies , we will be turning them into pseudo-Virgils , that is Virgils who will not be capable of guiding Dante - the Dante who is each of their pupils - along the path which will lead him to purification and knowledge , because they do not have access to the new metaphors , the new structures , the new digital technologies that can provide an educational system which is , at last , free from the constraints of a culture which is not infrequently disjointed and disordered .
It is in this sense that the issue of teacher training is absolutely top priority , and the endeavours perceptible on some of the pages of the action plan are certainly to be increased and recompensed .
They are to be increased and recompensed because it is the responsibility of all of us to realise that the effect of the e-Learning action will not just be reform of parts of our education system but genuine reform of the way we think .
We will have to find a way to explain why this progression is necessary within the Union 's education systems and how very necessary it is .
In order to do this , I feel that the endeavours we make , including in terms of the budget and of clarifying the aims of the budget , will certainly have to be considerable .
I would like to end by thanking our fellow Members once again and entrusting to them the heart of our message , in particular , which is that , as I have stressed , the new technologies are a tool , they are a means - not the end - but a means that is absolutely essential right now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I am standing in today for Mr Gargani , who is staying in Italy for reasons you will understand .
In this major debate on education we have added a question to the Commission and the Council - unfortunately the Council is unable to be present - because we believe that now , when everyone is suddenly talking about a European educational area , the European Parliament that has always talked about it and fought for it , but which has always been blocked by the Council of Ministers , cannot simply look on while it , the elected representative of the citizens , is bypassed in matters which are very important and which we have been advocating for a long time .
I think it was indecent - perhaps that is too strong a word - improper to ask Parliament on 8 February for an opinion on the future objectives of general vocational training systems that was presented to the Council just four weeks later .
Things cannot be allowed to continue that way !
That is why we called for this debate and why we are asking to be properly included in the discussion in future .
We are all of the opinion that this report on general vocational training in the European Union is a major step forward after the Lisbon Council because it sets concrete objectives and defines the future role of general vocational training .
This is an issue that affects all Europe ' s citizens .
I repeat once again , this is something we have said all along .
As Socrates rapporteur , I fought for this together with my colleagues , ultimately without success .
If success is coming at this late stage , I am grateful .
We must , however , always bear in mind that this is an area of policy that we cannot carry through without the support of the Member States .
It involves matters that can be tackled only in the context of subsidiarity .
We can give examples , we can make a synopsis of how things look in one country or another .
Perhaps the Member States can learn from each other .
There is no need to keep reinventing the wheel .
We cannot , however , do very much more in these fields .
We should like to stress that the open method of coordination that the European Council called into being at its Lisbon meeting and in whose context this report was prepared must not be allowed to prevent the institutions provided for in the Treaties from fulfilling their roles .
In our opinion , the general consideration of the future role of general vocational training in the context of the open method of coordination must have regard not only for the contributions of the Member States , but also , and , above all , for the contributions of the European Parliament and the Commission , while safeguarding the principle of subsidiarity .
We reiterate that the conclusions drawn by the Stockholm European Council and the strategic objectives that were formulated can form the basis for a working programme for the coming decade .
These things cost money , however .
I should like to remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that we cannot always confine ourselves to fine words , making grand final communiques and calling on the Commission to act .
At the end of the day , we all stand there and say : I hear the words , but I have no faith in them because the money for all the things we want to do is not there .
So I hope that the Heads of Government , having realised that education is tremendously important in the European Union , far more important than many still think , will spend more money on it .
I should like to point out to the Commission and the Council that we insist that , in the spirit of inter-institutional cooperation between Council , Parliament and Commission , the European Parliament must be involved in producing the follow-up report and in all the measures arising out of it as part of the long-term working programme .
I am sure that the Commissioner will do that .
I only hope that this will be passed on to the Council and that it will likewise follow in Mrs Reding ' s footsteps .
I also hope that we can work together on the things laid down in this working programme .
. ( NL ) Mr President , Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I expect I am stating the obvious when I say that education and training are becoming increasingly important in a modern knowledge economy , if we in Europe are to continue to compete with industrialised parts of the world .
I shall limit myself to the recommendations contained in my written opinion .
Firstly : in education more attention should undoubtedly be paid to training in information technology both for pupils and for teachers .
Students deprived of such a preparation run the risk of exclusion from the development of the new economy .
We still lag far behind the United States as regards the use of information potential in education and business .
Since no less than a quarter of newly created positions in the last decade are related to the information society , we must realise that students require thorough preparation .
We must therefore also aim for optimum use of government investment in the use of technology .
Secondly : attention has been repeatedly drawn to the need to bring students closer to business in order to train tomorrow ' s entrepreneurs .
Thirdly : the setting up of many more second-chance schools has become necessary , as the current number is far too low .
Two pilot projects are planned for Spain , France and Germany - the large countries - but the Commission says nothing about the other countries .
In view of the size of the large countries , five projects would be desirable while for smaller countries , at least two projects should be planned .
By increasing the number of pilot projects , it might be possible to make the second-chance schools a more effective tool for strengthening economic and social cohesion and combating social exclusion more successfully .
Finally knowledge of languages , one of the principal European aims .
Our rapporteur , whom I thank for his report , believes that even knowledge of two languages would be a success .
In my opinion , I stated that I should like to go a step further .
In order to promote integration and the opportunities for students in the labour market , in my view knowledge of three languages should be regarded as a minimum .
Why ?
Because quite a few Member States have more than one official language .
Belgium has three .
Learning the official languages of the countries of which the students are citizens is obviously essential for their integration into the work process but an extra language in addition to the official languages is highly desirable .
If we look at the most recent survey of knowledge of languages carried out by Eurostat , we see that less than half , only 45 % , of citizens of the European Union can conduct a conversation in any but their native language .
So there is a great deal of work ahead of us , but that is equally true of the rest of the issues raised in this instructive debate .
Mr President , the importance of lifelong learning in creating a learning society is fundamental to meet the challenges of economic and social change and sustainable development that we face today .
In the light of recent job losses across Europe , retraining and education will be even more important in helping to adapt the skills of workers to enable them to find new jobs .
For this to be effective sufficient resources have to be made available .
Lifelong learning has a much wider significance than that : it is also important for personal fulfilment and as a means of developing responsible citizenship , encouraging people to play a full part in their community .
So it can help break the cycle of poverty and unemployment .
Through informal and non-credited learning it can also be a very effective way of involving both adults and young people in the most disadvantaged areas , who are those most threatened by social exclusion and poverty but who often have very negative attitudes towards formal education and so are least likely to benefit from it .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's White Paper " Teaching and Learning - Towards the learning society " missed the opportunity to produce a comprehensive report , including examples of good practice , which would have been of great value to all those working in the field .
It does not contain enough information on how effective or cost-effective various actions were and there is little information on what was done to target specific groups such as women , elderly workers , immigrants , families in disadvantaged areas , the long-term unemployed and disabled people .
So whilst there are universities , colleges and community groups as well as regional and local governments across the EU carrying out excellent and pioneering work in this field , this report does not really reflect that .
Therefore I agree with the rapporteur that even as an interim report , on what was after all an ambitious White Paper , this is a disappointing summary of progress on this most important issue .
I hope future reports will be more positive and can be useful tools in themselves for those working in education .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Budgets has attached the greatest importance to this matter , the e-Learning initiative , because of the great contribution it can make to European citizens enjoying , through appropriate training , better living and working conditions in the new information society .
I would remind you that , under the broad economic guidelines for 2002 , adopted on 3 April , which are an important political instrument in budgetary matters , specific consideration is given to the e-Learning initiative as an important stage in the process of achieving the strategic objective established by the Lisbon European Council . This objective was to create a knowledge-based economy capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
In this context , I would ask the Commission to look into the possibility of laying down a more suitable legal framework , which will genuinely complement the action of Member States in this field . This is also the approach adopted in the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , annexed to the Mauro report .
I would state once again that an initiative as important as this justifies the creation of a specific programme with its own legal basis . It therefore seems insufficient to use existing programmes , such as Leonardo , Socrates , Culture 2000 , research programmes and Structural Funds , as sources of funding for the new initiative , which should stand on its own in terms of funding too .
At the same time , we take the greatest interest in the way in which existing preparatory action is implemented in this field in this year ' s budget , that is the budget for 2001 .
Lastly , I wish to congratulate Mr Mauro on his excellent work .
draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities . ( DE ) Mr President , in the matter of e-Learning I think we must above all realise that we are entering an entirely new world , that we are exploring new things and should not therefore keep to well-trodden paths .
The Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities has once again found that women are still largely excluded from the Web .
Internet activities and everything that goes with the New Economy are still not the brave new world so far as women are concerned , as , incidentally , was also noted recently at a major international conference in Hamburg .
Eighteen countries contributed their experience .
There is a digital discrepancy .
The ratio of women to men on the Internet is in the region of one to four .
It is true that access is improving , but among people beginning their studies there are still only around 20 % women compared to 80 % men .
When it comes to the formation of Internet-related companies , the proportion of women is still vanishingly small .
We are therefore calling for new access to be created specifically for women , for special software to be developed for women , because they use the Internet differently and because women are still lagging a long way behind in qualifications .
If we want to act on the resolutions of the Lisbon Summit and create a knowledge-based society , we must pay particular attention to women .
We must , for example , abandon coeducation in some matters .
We must tread new paths here .
I think it is particularly important that we catch up with the Americans .
Here , too , we find that American women already have much greater access to the Internet .
In some fields they have actually overtaken men .
I think we still have a good chance of achieving something here with our action plan .
I therefore ask that , in formulating the action plan , particular attention be paid to developing a greater and more specific involvement of women .
Mr President , if I have understood you correctly , you are inviting me to reply to the oral question .
I shall reply later to the discussion on the reports .
I should like to thank Mr Gargani , who is represented today by Mrs Doris Pack , for his oral question concerning the specific future objectives of our education and training systems .
Above and beyond the question of who received what and when , or which report has been drawn up , Mrs Pack has said something of fundamental importance .
She said that the European Parliament was the originator of every campaign to ensure that education is something other than a regional and national element and to ensure not only that the European dimension of education should be a matter for discussion , but that its beneficial effects should be recognised .
We are almost there , Mrs Pack , because since Lisbon there has been a sort of silent revolution , an enormous step forward .
However , even though we have made this enormous step forward , we must not forget that many structures , especially national structures , have remained in the old world , which is not so old as that , since it dates from only a year or two ago . We still have difficulties , therefore , in achieving a balance between the old-fashioned concept of subsidiarity and the concept of a subsidiarity which is very well able to collaborate with European interests .
What I am doing , with your help , is performing a sort of balancing act , by trying to take a very big leap forward , while at the same time trying not to destroy the confidence of certain people who look askance , and with a critical eye , at any possible encroachments upon subsidiarity .
Having said that , I should like to give a clear reply to the question raised by Mr Gargani .
It is true that the European Council in Lisbon asked the Education Council , and not the Commission , to give general thought to the specific future objectives of our education systems and to submit a report to the European Council in spring 2001 .
It is the Commission ' s responsibility to ensure that the Council makes progress , even though the Commission itself was not specifically asked to do anything .
In the final analysis , however , it was the Commission which prepared the work of the Council .
Perhaps it was because of the initial difficulties that Parliament did not receive the documents in question in time to enable them to react .
It received the documents afterwards , immediately afterwards .
We have learned a lesson from this situation , which was not the fault of anyone in particular but is inherent in certain procedures .
This is why I think that in future we ought to operate slightly differently .
After all , ladies and gentlemen , we are aware of the time limits .
The Heads of State and Government took the decisions at the European Summit in Stockholm , on 23 and 24 March 2001 , on the basis of the text adopted by the Education Council on 12 February .
It will simply be a question of continuing with the work . In other words , nothing new will be incorporated into the structure .
There will be new material in the texts , I hope , but not in the structure , because now there will be follow-up action .
Each time , the Education Council will prepare for the summits .
The next Education Council , due to take place on 29 November 2001 , is already preparing for the Barcelona Summit .
Under the Spanish Presidency , and therefore in the very near future , before the Barcelona Summit , there will be another meeting of the Education Council .
This being the case , Mr President , I very much hope , with all my heart , that Parliament will undertake to prepare to meet these time limits .
You know very well that I have tried to inform and involve Parliament in our current thinking regarding the follow-up to this report , and I can honestly say that I shall pay attention to any thoughts which the European Parliament would like to share with me during the course of this year .
This is why I always insist that Parliament should be asked for initiatives on this subject , and believe me , at every Council I repeat to ministers how important the elected representatives of the people are in this area .
I hope that the collaboration based on the continuation of the relationships that are about to be established will operate in such a way as to ensure that full consideration can be given to the contribution of the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to make four points .
Firstly , I should like to say that the ambitious goal Socrates has pursued for years , the creation of a European educational area , is now almost reality - and I hope it will soon be embodied in the texts .
The Council , the Councils of Feira , Lisbon , Stockholm and now also of Nice , have stressed the importance and role of education and training in society and for the knowledge society .
I should like to underline that today education and training are , first of all , the European Union ' s most important political priorities ; secondly , they are a political challenge and an economic challenge , because we all know that without education and training we cannot offer young people training places .
Thirdly , they are an opportunity to further develop Europe ' s linguistic and cultural heritage and give it European added value .
The second point I want to address is that the Commission and Council really seem to be both maximalists and minimalists . Maximialists in the strategies and political ambitions they develop on paper .
On the other hand , however , the European Union and , above all , the Council , is a very great minimalist when it comes to actually giving these great projects financial resources .
Then it is always the Commission or Parliament or whoever that come in for criticism , but never the people who with great pomp and ceremony announce to the great councils how important training and education are .
If they would provide the money for it the next day , we would all , especially our citizens , be very grateful .
The European Union has , in fact , always been mean in the budgets for education .
I should like to remind you all of the dreadful Conciliation Committee marathon over the little bit extra we wanted for Socrates .
I hope that the revision of this Socrates programme that will probably take place within the next two years will also bring Socrates a little more money .
I am pleased , and Parliament can be pleased , that there is now an e-Learning initiative .
We have heard , as Mr Costa Neves has said , that Parliament , represented by the Committee on Budgets , is pressing for this not to be at the expense of any existing programme .
These programmes have their purpose !
They have the financial resources for that and nothing else !
I therefore believe that if we say that e-Learning is important , and we stress that it is , then there must also be a programme with the proper financial resources .
The third point is that I regret and deplore the fact that we were not sufficiently involved in the general matters ; I said so earlier on Mr Gargani ' s behalf .
We really must be responsible for the system ' s specific objectives , we must help to bring this about and inter-institutional cooperation must be ensured .
I assume I am reflecting what you said , Commissioner , you understood it that way and you will include it in future .
My fourth point is this : In view of the debate on enlargement and the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference , we need our work in this European Union to be genuinely visible , we need a European educational area that is visible to the citizen .
This means it must be really accessible to the citizen himself , and the citizen needs to be permanently involved in these programmes through the representation of his MEPs .
We need the directives , we need ambitious objectives , we need measures , we need action programmes , with their own funding , of course , and if we do all that in education , then we shall not need so many Commission and Parliament information campaigns any more because we shall have reached the citizen where he is .
I hope we can go this way together .
Mr President , first of all I commend all the reports before us which go some way to defining our common aspirations for the future of educational systems in the Union .
They also make clear some of the issues which we now face in developing such systems .
The first issue is the European educational area which hovers above all the reports rather like a question mark , and we undoubtedly have a variety of views on this : there is no doubt whatsoever , and this is without prejudice to the concept of subsidiarity , that we need to coordinate our education policies in the Union in pursuit of the Lisbon goals .
If we do not do this , we cannot attain them : it is as simple as that .
We need to have a coherent understanding of what constitutes good and what constitutes bad practice .
We need to have an understanding about teaching and learning models , how we want to employ them , and what values we want to impart through them .
We need to understand that this will involve considerable change , because of the new styles of education systems that we need today .
We need to learn from best practice .
We need therefore to have up-to-date hard and soft statistics to ensure that we can provide the most valuable benchmarks so that our systems match the very best .
These reports also point to the development of educational content .
At the risk of courting controversy I would remind you that Cisco Systems and Microsoft are already in our schools providing content .
We need to make sure that they are providing the sort of content that we want to see in our schools .
We need mobility .
It is not just the key to a successful European single market , it is the key to a successful Union in its social and political content as well as its economic content .
The mobility report has made considerable progress on this , but , how long has Bologna been around and yet failed to gain widespread application ?
How do we ensure equal access to mobility for all people when Member States do not have equal access to language skills ?
I would argue that for universal access to mobility we need to have universal access to language teaching and learning .
Here , as elsewhere , new technology is one of the keys to unlock all of these solutions .
We can install all the hardware and all the infrastructure we like all over Europe , but unless we have the educational systems to teach people skills in schools and in life-long learning , we will not be able to make the most of them .
Mr President , Mrs Reding , ladies and gentlemen , Europe is to become , in the words of the Lisbon and Stockholm declarations , the most dynamic and competitive knowledge economy .
The fact that today we are holding here this combined debate on the new technologies and mobility in education , shows that the European Union is really willing to work seriously towards this and in so doing we underline that importance .
The three reports on e-Learning by Messrs Mauro , Perry and Alavanos are excellent .
I should therefore like to thank them warmly for the work that they have done .
My group , the ELDR , attaches great importance to the e-Learning project for both pupils and teachers .
Better equipping of all teaching and training institutions , high-quality content are all components that contribute to a higher participation in the labour market .
Obviously the exchange of best practices can play an important part in this and we at the European level can provide a stimulus .
It goes without saying that we must not limit ourselves to mainstream educational institutions .
Lifelong learning , even after one has withdrawn from the active employment circuit and training opportunities in the new technologies outside mainstream institutions , must both be encouraged .
I have made that observation on more than one occasion .
The socially and physically deprived must be involved and everyone must be given the guarantee that their efforts will be rewarded with qualifications that are recognised everywhere in Europe .
This is important for the internal market .
I shall follow the plan of action closely myself and I insist that we are given regular thorough reports and analyses .
One final point I should like to raise is : in the report on the future objectives of education and educational systems , there are extensive references to the use of ICT .
However , it is careless of the Commission and the Council to have omitted to submit the report to Parliament .
Although it was agreed in Stockholm that in education and other fields the method of open coordination would be used , it testifies to a great lack of democracy and transparency if that implies that the Council sends the reports to Member States without Parliament having any say .
Surely the European Parliament , with its directly elected membership , is the obvious body to involve in open coordination .
I understand , however , Commissioner , that you have meanwhile repented .
I should , however , like to state clearly that my group feels that the European Parliament should have an input in the follow-up report and we must be very closely involved .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate our rapporteurs and thank them for the many ideas they have thrown up , on which we shall vote in concrete reports .
We live in a time of rapid change , but we cannot allow one half of mankind or perhaps a minority of human beings to keep up and others not .
So that the whole question of democratisation confronts us with great problems regarding the technology we are discussing .
The previous speaker spoke a little while ago about lifelong learning .
I read a plea for calling it instead ' learning as you live ' .
In fact I prefer that .
Because lifelong learning seems to be a mammoth task , while ' learning as you live ' stimulates our curiosity everyday anew .
For children it should be ' learning as you play ' .
Also through the playful use of the materials available to ensure development , access to information , learning how to learn .
In that connection I was struck by a complaint by one of those odd teacher figures at a school in Flanders who objects that he has now equipped his school with 200 computers and ensured that all those classes are accessible , but that there is no regulation governing the status of staff .
There is no such thing as a statutory framework for ICT coordinators .
It seemed an excellent idea to put this to you .
Because if we simply go hammering on about infrastructure and not about the right way of using it , do not ensure the user-friendliness of teaching material in the educational environment and do not actually make it available and keep it up to date day by day , then it will all come to nothing .
I remember the time when language labs were introduced into schools ; it was a great , fashionable surge and all self-respecting schools had such a language lab .
You should go and see what a shambles they have become , and you are bound to wonder for how long they were actively in use .
I therefore feel that we should be given the facts : what is the position now ?
It is said that in Flanders there is a computer for one pupil in every ten .
I wish that were true , I hope it is true , but what do we want to achieve , where do we want to be in five years ' time and in ten years ' time ?
I hope there will not be a gulf between people who can keep up and those who cannot .
Mr President , teaching and learning for a knowledge-based society , a citizens ' society , European added value and other similarly pompous expressions of dubious import are sprinkled liberally through the reports under discussion in a bid to conceal the real substance of the reactionary , anti-educational reforms of the education systems advocated in the White Paper .
Luckily , a wave of protest has risen up against this policy in numerous countries of the European Union .
In Greece , huge demonstrations by students , pupils and teachers against this reactionary policy to dumb down education have given rise to an explosive situation , rectors have resigned and universities have been occupied or even closed .
The trend towards mass education in the 60s , 70s and 80s has now been replaced by a new model in keeping with the latest demands of big business , which wants a constant supply of cheap , semi-skilled labour and a small , highly-qualified elite .
What is being advocated is a new type of vocational training dictated by the immediate demands of the capitalist market , while scientific knowledge and specialisms are being shifted into expensive post-graduate study which few can afford .
Knowledge is giving way to skills , i.e. reading , writing , arithmetic and elementary use of computers , together with skills which will allow young people to adapt easily to capitalist restructuring , while teaching them to be well-behaved workers and citizens .
Educational establishments are called on to become more responsive to fast changes on the job market .
Abandoning wider subjects and , in general terms , a wider education in favour of skills which will make them employable deprives children - especially children from working class homes - of the rudimentary knowledge they need in order to function as active , thinking citizens and , as factors of social progress .
Big business is trying to penetrate education , mainly in the aim of creating new profitable business activities , witness the reference to the famous link between schools and companies .
The reports under discussion , especially the Perry report , not only fail to oppose the guidelines in the White Paper , their sole criticism is of the delay in implementing them .
Mr President , the people of the European Union must fight and overturn this anti-educational policy , they must secure their basic right to a free , high-quality , universal state education which is sensitive both to the productive requirements of each country and to individual vocations and talents .
We , as members of the Communist Party of Greece , shall do whatever we can to foster this .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the Commission , the College of Commissioners and , especially , Mrs Reding , for the work they are doing to break down the barriers caused by restriction and the principle of subsidiarity , with a view to creating joint programmes which move beyond this very concrete world in which the education system is developing .
I believe that one of the most complex aspects of the history of Europe - where the same phenomenon is being repeated - is the tendency towards convergence and fragmentation , the tendency to come together and then move apart , to divide up into a thousand pieces .
We are living in an era in which there is once again a process of inward-looking nationalism which is opposed to globalisation - clearly a misunderstood concept - and this process tends to divide States and regions .
Culture and education are the main victims , since they become confined within their own borders .
However , certain programmes can only be carried out from above .
Furthermore , the principle of subsidiarity is being wrongly interpreted and , in my judgment , is largely being distorted by States and many regions which use it to increase their own power and - it must be said - to enable the State apparatus to exercise control over thought and the education system .
Of course the State must provide free education for all , but it must not exercise absolute control .
Let us imagine that aeroplanes could only fly as far as the provincial , regional or national borders .
Well , in education we are endeavouring to prevent our cultural knowledge from travelling beyond the border and the result is clearly a broken and fragmented project .
I therefore praise , applaud and believe in the idea that we must support the Commission ' s vision through ideas , articles and resources , since the Commission is the only supranational body able to act in this field .
I believe that one of our first debates should be on subsidiarity , because there is plenty of legal literature on subsidiarity and not just this current popular interpretation of it .
Furthermore , I believe that Europe is simply a common way of thinking or , at least , a capacity to communicate .
In this respect , I believe - and I would also like to praise the forum which has recently been initiated with companies - that we will not be able to implement this project without private initiative .
Since their powers are limited , the States cannot act beyond their own borders .
We are now witnessing exactly the same phenomenon in the regions : each region is creating its own intranet ( and they are all very proud ! ) , or rather their egonet .
The result is therefore a product which is the sum of many things , but the whole is never the sum of all the parts .
I therefore ask for a debate to be opened on the principle of subsidiarity , in order to analyse the extent to which this often limits the freedom of our citizens .
The companies are the only ones able , with the help of the Commission , to implement projects which fly like eagles above the mountain tops and have a global vision .
I believe that a European spirit of convergence , and not one of fragmentation , is our only hope of ensuring that this programme is completed and is not a source of endless frustration .
We must make sure that in two years ' time we are not talking about what we wanted to do but were not allowed to .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is no coincidence that we are now having a joint debate here on a number of extremely important reports .
It is not coincidental at all , because it all concerns the question : are we going to take a new initiative or not .
What is the issue ?
In Lisbon , we took a number of important decisions with a number of concrete objectives .
The question now whether or not we can realise those objectives ?
That is what today ' s debate is about .
Let me make two observations before I start , two things I find really regrettable .
Firstly , and that is understandable in a way , I note the absence of a debate on lifelong learning .
That will come later , Parliament will have its say on this , but I regret its absence because the concept of lifelong learning is , in fact , a very important concept that should be an overarching framework for the things we are discussing this evening .
I feel the lack of that debate .
I also often feel the lack of links to the concept of lifelong learning in a number of the reports .
This is understandable because of the timing .
The second point a great deal less understandable and I will return to it shortly .
Is it not strange that we should be debating education here and do not breathe a word about the Bologna Declaration on the eve of the Prague Summit .
We simply have nothing to say on the subject , have we ?
Let me return to a number of reports before us , very briefly .
Mr Perry rightly said that his report tends to be about the past and to a much lesser extent about the future and the present .
Rightly , but we can nevertheless learn a great deal from it .
Mr Perry is absolutely right when he says that the Commission has not achieved its objectives .
The objectives were not concrete , they were not quantifiable , there were no indicators and where is the European value added of that White Paper ?
Let us reflect on that for a moment .
Let us try to define what European value added is .
We are again on the eve of a debate on the future of Europe .
Certainly there is talk of the debate on ' demarcation of competence ' .
Definitely very actively in Belgium on the eve of the Laken Conference .
However , what is ' demarcation of competence ' ?
What is the debate when we are discussing education ?
It is about subsidiarity .
But then let us define that properly and for goodness ' sake don ' t let us beat about the bush , we do that all too often .
In the report of the Council on the future of education and training systems , there are number of interesting points , and a number of objectives , which I can support , but once again they are vague objectives , no indicators , no methods of measurement and then we are occasionally in danger of becoming bogged down in endless palaver , and we must absolutely not do so with the debate that we are now conducting , following the lead of Lisbon .
If we do not succeed in moving towards open European coordination with the European employment guidelines as an obvious example , I do not think we will make any progress .
In my previous life , I worked for the Flemish Minister for Employment .
Well , in that Ministry , people toiled to implement the European employment guidelines .
I wish that the education ministries in all the Member States would toil over a number of concrete objectives in order to convert them into policy , then we would have a true European educational area .
To return to Bologna .
It is terribly embarrassing .
I am scarcely , if ever , addressed as an MEP on European educational policy , except in respect of Bologna .
I have received piles of letters and e-mails .
Am I supposed to say , I am sorry , it was an intergovernmental method , the European Parliament has nothing to say about it ?
I would ask you urgently , Commissioner , to take joint responsibility with us for it , because the Bologna Declaration is not just about a number of concrete objectives , but also about the democratisation of education and lifelong learning .
If we are unable to make that link I believe we will be missing a chance .
Mr President , I welcome the paper on the e-Learning initiative and congratulate the rapporteur on its content . E-Learning is becoming increasingly important .
Until now perhaps less weight has been given to it in relation to education . It is , however , becoming increasingly apparent that our children 's future is indeed a digital future .
Therefore preparing for the use of information and communication technologies is becoming increasingly important .
The training of teachers in this field is a top priority . I fully support this .
But my concern is that once teachers return to their respective schools they return to find that very little ICT facilities are available for them .
More often than not they find that they cannot communicate the knowledge acquired through training courses back to the children and make use of ICT in their classes because of lack of resources .
Without the necessary tools to meet the aims of the e-Learning agenda , the goals of the Lisbon Summit will not be achieved .
Having no direct jurisdiction over education in the Member States , how will the Commission ensure that these goals are being met and that Member States ' governments will provide schools with the necessary equipment to realise these aims ?
Another problems is that technology is advancing at such a rate that it has become necessary to update computer equipment every few years .
This has been , and will be , an added problem for schools working within very tight budgets .
It is equally important to make training and education in the information society available to all individuals throughout their lives to realise job opportunities and for personal development as well .
This is important and reflects the trend and the decrease in heavy industries in favour of the service industries which rely heavily on digitally-literate personnel .
Let us reduce the gap between Europe and the United States .
Let us create an e-Europe which is accessible to all .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . I am glad we are discussing so many reports together because it brings out so clearly how all the questions raised are interrelated as they impinge upon education policy and our lives .
The various aspects of education policy cannot be separated any more than the subjects can be divided into different curricula with each defending his own the strongest .
I think this debate shows that very well .
I find myself in a pleasant situation today because my country , Austria , leads the field in Europe for schools networking in connection with e-Learning and the new media .
Sixty-one percent of schools - that is 3 860 schools - in my country are connected to the Internet , including secondary schools , of which there are about 1 000 .
One thousand and ninety already have their own Internet sites .
All universities are interconnected via the academic computer network and in that way also have access to the TEN 155 European high speed research network .
I am pleased about that , but at the same time it is not enough .
It is a correct and important trend that we have started , but more needs to be done and I am therefore very pleased that the Commission and the Swedish Presidency have started the European School Net , the e-scola initiative .
Only last week we saw how computers and the Internet are actually being used in teaching , to improve the quality of teaching and create new oportunities for learning with the objective of using the compiled teaching and learning materials and practical examples in the future and making them more widely available .
Commissioner , I thank you for your persistence in this matter .
We are on the right road together .
The destination is known , but we still have a long way to go .
This brings me to a number of points in the debate .
Firstly , the concept of subsidiarity .
I am an ardent champion of the subsidiarity principle and I come from a country with a very marked degree of federalism .
However , I also call on all Member States not to use the principle of subsidiarity as an excuse - as often happens - for failing to take necessary steps towards Europeanisation .
For me , subsidiarity in this context means being close to the citizen , serving their essential interests regionally and individually , fulfilling necessary common European tasks , so we can face global challenges and fulfill our responsibility towards the younger generation .
Secondly , education , as this example also shows , is not an end in itself , but education from school to lifelong learning to catering for the new stage in life that is old age is the prerequisite for achieving our goal of a knowledge-based economy that is number one in the world .
Education policy is therefore the key to the success of economic policy .
Education policy is the prerequisite for today ' s young people holding their own on tomorrow ' s labour market and for our fulfilling our role as Europe in worldwide competition .
I should therefore like to say to Mr Korakas , who thinks protests against these objectives are already beginning , that we as politicians must do all we can to tell people that this development is happening and we have to prepare ourselves for it .
Three points , therefore , to finish . First , as Mrs Martens wanted to say , it is not only about providing computers .
There is also the ethical question : How are we to use what computers make available to us ?
The ethical question of their benefit is , like their handling , an important task for educational policy .
We must also see to it that no new social time bombs are created between those who know how to use them and those who do not .
If education fails to take the correct social action , that may become the new class war .
I therefore also call for industry to sponsor schools so that all can have the computers they need .
The next point is lifelong learning .
Let us do our best to see to it that senior citizens are not forgotten when it comes to training , because only by so doing can we attain the European objectives , keep pace with world competition , make enlargement a success and avoid setting off a new social time bomb .
Mr President , Commissioner , we want the EU in ten years ' time to be the world ' s most competitive economy , with nobody being excluded .
We want to develop Europe in such a way that all people feel they are involved .
For that reason it is natural that education should play a prominent role in the Union ' s strategy .
Good social policy will not prevent exclusion if the issues of equality of education and its high quality are ignored .
Investing in education and its availability will mean that the human resources that exist will be made effective use of .
It will not then just be a matter of finding talented people and giving them the encouragement they require , necessary as that is : it is just as vital to ensure that everyone is provided with basic knowledge and skills .
At the same time , education should help young people and adults too to discover their strengths and to achieve success .
In February the EU Ministers for Education adopted a report on the concrete objectives of educational systems in the Member States .
The work is to continue .
A follow up report is to be presented at the European Council meeting in spring 2002 .
We in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport are pleased with this development .
The Committee has been stressing the importance of a European debate on education for a long time now .
We are , however , sorry that Parliament has been passed over in the preparatory work until now .
This is not so much a matter of prestige as one of existing resources being underused .
I am convinced that Parliament ' s involvement in setting targets for education will bring with it an important European angle on the issue .
Although education is covered by the principle of subsidiarity , not only does improved competitiveness need to be taken into greater consideration in the educational policy of different countries but also the point of view of individuals .
European educational policy must be developed in such a way that it supports the movement of Union citizens and their mutual interaction .
Mr President , it seems to me that we have overlooked the obvious in the procedures applied to the subject of the future objectives of education systems and to a previous subject , i.e. the quality of school education based on indicators .
What we have overlooked is the enormous interest of the Committee on Culture and Education in these matters , which will be crucial over the next decade and which are crucial to the future of Europe .
As you know , the European Parliament closely monitors and supports every single initiative and action on the part of the Commission , be it e-Learning , student mobility , language learning or the quality of education systems .
We feel that the open coordination method proposed in Lisbon will help to promote the numerous new ideas needed in Europe in order to improve education and flexibly promote best practices .
However , this method must go through the proper parliamentary channels if it is to secure greater agreement and transparency and avoid confirming the powerful objections of those who consider that the open coordination method breaks the rules .
Mr President , in Europe today , education has increased in importance beyond all recognition .
In particular , lifelong learning is becoming more important to people 's everyday lives , whether as regards access to opportunities to employment , or in using ATM machines to get cash , or having to go on-line to get banking and other services because local public services are being closed down in an era of competition and liberalisation .
That is why it is important at this juncture in the European Parliament that when we speak about education we make sure that it is all-inclusive .
Of course , we must pay due attention to people who are at present within the formal education system , and improving the Erasmus and the Escola programmes and other similar programmes is vitally important .
However , we must not forget that we are now in danger of creating a new class of technologically illiterate people , who will be denied access to this new , wonderful information highway and society which we are creating .
So , over the next ten years - as my colleague has said - the area we should focus on is ensuring that people now in middle age are given the tools of knowledge , information and education in order to be able to live in the altered world which will be coming about .
I offer my support to the reports which have been submitted .
I know that the Commissioner will be most innovative in bringing forward new ideas for e-Learning and for education .
Mr President , much has been said , and indeed , much has been well said .
I should have preferred to see a number of ministers sitting here listening to what Parliament had to say on subjects such as the European surplus , or observing the principle of subsidiarity while creating a European policy .
I believe it is very important that ministers should hear with their own ears what the elected representatives of the people have to say .
First of all I should like to thank Mr Perry for his report on the White Paper .
The White Paper dates from 1995 .
That is a long time ago .
The revolution , if there was one , Mr Perry , happened last year , over the past twelve to fifteen months , in other words , since Lisbon .
Since 1995 , the ideas put forward , mainly by the European Parliament - and here I agree with Mrs Pack that the initiator of all this policy was undoubtedly the European Parliament - have been put into practice , at least in part .
On the recognition of educational qualifications , I am well aware that much remains to be done , but the system of credits within universities has started to work .
As far as mobility is concerned , I know that in practice we have not made much progress yet , but a decision on mobility was taken at the Nice Summit .
We now have something definite to go on , which is much better than simply the grand ideas that we could discuss five , six or seven years ago .
As for language proficiency , things are moving in the Member States , thanks , amongst other things , to the European Year of Languages 2001 , as a result of which everyone is discussing the subject , local authorities , parents , and teachers themselves .
There is a change taking place beneath the surface .
We can therefore expect to see this change making itself felt in the everyday practice in our schools .
With regard to investment in education , this is an area in which I would let subsidiarity prevail , and I share the regrets of those Members who say that fine words should be followed up with budgetary resources .
Yet there is no doubt that either most of the ideas proposed in 1995 are now being put into practice , or else we now have the tools with which to push them forward .
So I am not as pessimistic as some Members of Parliament on this point , because I have seen , and I have felt , that the situation has been developing since the Lisbon Summit .
A fundamental change is taking place . Of course , it is too slow , but at least things are moving , and that in itself is a major step in the right direction .
On the subject of lifelong learning , 1996 certainly represented one of the first steps forward in this area .
I presented my memorandum on what Mrs Maes calls ' learning as you live ' .
It would be marvellous to be able to implement this idea , but it is not the Commission who will be putting lifelong learning into practice in the Member States and in the regions .
The Commission can encourage , it can push , it can come up with ideas , but when it comes to implementation on the ground , that is up to the Ministers for Education , not to mention the trades unions and the social partners .
A whole new system of informal training schemes will have to be created in most Member States .
Well , I can assure you , ladies and gentlemen , that in ten years ' time we shall still be talking about lifelong learning , and we shall probably have taken a few small steps forward , but we shall not have succeeded in finding a definitive solution to the problem .
As for information technologies , I shall come back to this subject in detail later , but here too an enormous amount has happened , from the highlighting of the problem to the recognition that practical action was needed .
Look at the Netdays Europe initiative , look at the E-schools .
Of course , at the moment there are only a thousand of them .
There really ought to be five thousand , ten thousand , a hundred thousand . I am well aware of this .
These thousand schools , however , represent experience on the ground .
I should like to thank not only the European Parliament , which is pushing things forward , but also all those people who are working ' at the coalface ' , with a great deal of idealism , often alone , with very meagre resources , putting their hearts into it because they believe in progress .
They are remarkable people , and I think we should say thank you to all those who , on the ground , are helping to put our ideas into practice .
The e-Learning action plan is also helping to change things .
Lastly , we are now in the middle of European Year of Languages 2001 .
I have already said this , but I will repeat it . We must learn the languages of our neighbours as well as our own mother tongue .
Those who are doing nothing about it are beginning to have a guilty conscience .
That , at least , is a start .
We must continue to nurture that guilty conscience .
Some Members have mentioned subsidiarity .
As far as I am concerned , the interpretation of subsidiarity is very clear .
I respect it , but I want to create a European added value , networking , the exchange of information , and the dissemination of good practice .
I should like to draw your attention , ladies and gentlemen , to the studies made of the quality of primary and secondary education .
This is a revolution !
Could you have imagined , in 1995 , that ministers would ever have agreed to let strangers come and check up on their quality levels in education ?
Never !
Yet this is now being done .
The system is still not perfect , but comparisons make it possible for ministers to identify their strengths and weaknesses , and they are making efforts to correct any shortcomings .
As regards financial provisions , the White Paper does not contain any .
In spite of this , we have drawn up an impressive number of pilot projects , which we have funded and which have often provided the basis for reforms on the ground .
In recent years the Commission has wanted to play , and has indeed played , the role of an incubator of ideas , a driving force .
In this respect I am thinking of the pilot projects on second-chance schools or the European Voluntary Service .
As far as second-chance schools are concerned , I had my doubts .
I went and had a look at them and I was most pleasantly surprised .
They are not intended to replace national education , but rather to solve social problems , and the results are excellent .
The staff is very committed , they believe in what they are doing , and what they are doing is rescuing young people .
It really is extraordinary .
The project was recently the subject of an assessment , Mr Perry , which will shortly be referred to Parliament .
This assessment confirms the great success of the pilot project and the thirteen schools .
For instance , the index measuring the failure rate is only 6 % , whereas in institutions or similar projects the failure rate is between 30 and 50 % .
So you can really see that progress has been made . In any case , I should like to see this system , which has proved its worth , being introduced in more Member States .
The objectives set out in the White Paper were incorporated into the Luxembourg Process , the Cardiff Process and the Social Agenda .
As you know , from now on education ministers will be taking part in debates on social issues , on the same footing as ministers for social affairs and ECOFIN .
This represents an enormous amount of progress . It has not had any noticeable effect yet , but the main thing is to be present and to make a contribution .
The views of the education ministers have been expressed in the demands they have addressed to the European Council .
So , ladies and gentlemen , it is up to us to define the new priorities , to launch multi-annual programmes , to open up new debates , and to issue new challenges .
I believe that we are on the right track , and we have every reason to be positive and optimistic .
However , this does not mean that we can assume that we have achieved everything already .
That is far from being the case .
Nevertheless , the machine is in motion and progress has been made .
In 1995 , all we had were grand ideas , but no practical action on the ground .
Now , we are making progress .
I should just like to say a word or two about Bologna .
At the first Education Council , which I attended , I found that Bologna was only the subject of an intergovernmental procedure .
I made sure that it was incorporated into the Community context by associating the Commission with the process , on a joint basis with the ministerial troika .
Under the Swedish Presidency , I recognise that the time has come for fresh progress , and I am convinced that the ministerial conference in Prague will enable us to make that progress .
I have already been in contact with the Belgian Presidency , because here too there has been some follow-up action , with a view to continuing in this direction .
Now we are waiting for the Prague ministerial conference , and then the Belgian Presidency will take over again .
Ladies and gentlemen , I can well imagine that the European Parliament will be preparing an own-initiative report , for example after the Prague conference .
It is not always necessary to wait for the Commission to draw up a report before you act .
Parliament has the right to take its own initiatives .
Use that power , so that we can hear your voice .
With regard to the e-Learning reports by Mr Alavanos and Mr Mauro , I should like to thank Parliament , its rapporteurs and its committees , many of whom were involved , for the support that they have given me on this issue right from the beginning .
Mr Alavanos and Mr Mauro have done a remarkable job , Mr Alavanos earlier , and now Mr Mauro .
This is of vital importance , because here too this process helped us considerably at crucial moments , in defining the concept of e-Learning immediately after the Lisbon Summit , and in formulating the e-Learning action plan , immediately after the last European Council .
I should like to respond to the three fundamental messages not only expressed by the rapporteurs but also discussed by the Members of this House .
The first is the principle of access for everyone .
You know that immediately after the Lisbon Summit the e-Learning plan gave rise to various initiatives in some Member States , aimed at installing computers in the classroom .
However , a computer in the classroom is not an end in itself .
A computer is only a machine , a tool .
It has to be possible to use that computer , and the fact that it exists does not mean that it is being used .
In my opinion , therefore , we must never separate the tool from the person who is using it .
In short , yes we must equip schools , but we must do more than that .
We must equip schools but we must also have electronic communication centres in our local authority areas , because it is not only those who go to school who have to participate in the information society .
There are also those who have left school .
Exchanging scientific information , enhancing the services provided by libraries , creating an accessible European educational network and specific services , these are all essential measures to combat social exclusion .
Yet social exclusion will continue to exist if , in order to lend more weight to the statistics , we merely install computers without providing teachers with appropriate training .
I have paid careful attention to the report on the position of women and the special training that they will need , in view of their quite different approach to the new technologies .
I believe that we need to take this into consideration .
We must also train our teachers .
We have discussed this issue a great deal in recent weeks .
Teachers are the key to the success of e-Learning .
Yet most of them are not equipped to use computers , and to ensure that those computers , and this software , this content , constitute an aid to learning .
It is essential to convince them that they can teach differently by using new technologies .
On this subject I should like to quote a phrase used by Mr Rocard , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , when he reiterated the argument that a radical reorganisation of education is called for in terms of physical space , time and substance .
We are faced with a new world , and there are not many of us who realise what that means .
I would like to say here and now that this new world will happen not only as a result of participation by the public services but also as a result of the world of industry becoming more responsible .
This is why , last week , I organised the first e-Learning summit in Brussels , in partnership with both the public and the private sectors .
That summit was wonderful , because it provided a platform for some amazing exchanges , and at the same time it demonstrated how the private sector is becoming more responsible , the businesses , and the know-how that exists in this area .
The ideal situation , of course , would be one in which there was symbiosis between the two .
Though policy decisions have to be taken by those who are responsible for policy-making , the implementation of those decisions could well be the result of interaction between the knowledge of the private sector and the educational knowledge of the public sector .
These two types of knowledge , working together , could be highly effective .
The idea has been suggested , and I hope that it will be followed by specific projects in this field .
This brings me to another subject .
Yes , Europe is showing the way , but these theories are not put into practice in some ivory tower in Brussels .
They are put into practice in our regions , our towns and our villages .
The method used should be the ' bottom-up ' method .
In other words , though policy decisions have to be taken somewhere , they have to be implemented , not from the top downwards , but rather at grass-roots level .
Any contribution towards getting specific local projects off the ground will be welcome .
So you see , ladies and gentlemen , we are standing on the threshold of a great adventure .
Things are moving on all sides , though admittedly not always in the right direction , but then we are learning lessons as well .
People sometimes ask me for something more specific , but there is already much that is specific at ground level , and this has been the case not only during the past year or so .
Specific projects implemented under our Socrates and Leonardo programmes have generated many of the features that we are now finding in our education systems .
Basically , these were programmes which you wanted , for which you , together with the Commission , sought and obtained serious funding , and which , despite all the administrative problems which you regularly bring to my attention , are positive elements .
So , dear colleagues , we have had the right idea for many years now .
We are travelling together in the right direction . We are taking giant steps forward , much more rapidly than anyone could have imagined two or three years ago .
There are a few small problems here and there .
Let us tackle them together , but tackle them in a spirit of optimism , because things really are improving .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The Presidency is pleased to note , Commissioner , that you repeatedly address MEPs as " dear colleagues " , which demonstrates the nostalgia you feel for your recent times as a Member of Parliament .
Although I was not here during the last legislature , I would like to point out that this nostalgia is reciprocated and that the MEPs also miss your magnificent contributions when you sat in this House .
Ladies and gentlemen , the joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Tuesday , at noon .
I am also pleased to inform you that , to conclude this debate , the Presidency has received a motion for a resolution B5-341 / 2001 , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , on which the vote will be held on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.

( The sitting was closed at 8.43 p.m. )
Mr President , on a point of order .
All our voting cards on these rows have been removed .
It may be a plot by the PPE-DE Group to win the next vote , but something has gone wrong .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy met in the Chamber last night .
I am sure that the voting cards will now be returned .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I was present yesterday .
I spoke in the plenary sitting , yet my name is not on the attendance register .
We will certainly rectify this .
( The Minutes were approved )
Broad economic guidelines for 2001
The next item is the report ( A5-0165 / 2001 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission 's recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community in 2001 [ COM ( 2001 ) 224 - C5-0169 / 2001 - 2001 / 2081 ( COS ) ] .
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the first of January 2002 will mark the start of a momentous chapter in the history of European integration , when twelve sovereign states exchange their national currencies for a common European currency .
From that moment on , the people of those twelve Member States will use the same notes and the same coins .
It seems appropriate to find a term to describe this new stage in the integration of national economies , a stage which is characterised by a common market and a common currency and which is surely unique in the economic history of the world .
We propose the use of the term ' European home market ' as a synonym for Euroland or the euro zone .
This European home market already has a common monetary policy .
Since European economic and monetary union came into being on 1 January 1999 , this policy has been in the hands of the European Central Bank .
Today , however , we are faced with the challenge of formulating appropriate common economic policies for the European home market .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs agreed by a clear majority that these economic policies should be based on the principle of a socially committed market economy .
The main instrument for the coordination of economic policies at European level is the procedure laid down in the Treaty for establishing the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines .
The European Parliament has hitherto played a subordinate role in this procedure .
I therefore believe it is absolutely essential to provide for a greater degree of participation by the European Parliament in future .
Another flaw in the procedure is its lack of flexibility .
Recommendations are made on the basis of predicted economic trends .
If , however , current economic data diverge from the forecast values , these recommendations lose some of their validity .
The Member States must therefore be given some leeway to respond quickly to unexpected changes in economic indicators .
The Guidelines are not legally binding , but it is certainly accurate to speak of the political binding force of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines .
Although there is no disputing that defects must be corrected in everyone ' s interest , a certain margin of discretion should exist here too .
I believe there is a need , for example , when assessing a Member State ' s economic policies , to consider the extent to which particular trends in that country will affect the euro zone as a whole .
Economic growth in the European Union has slowed down since last year .
The Commission has now revised its predicted growth rate of 3 % and has lowered its expectations to 2.8 % .
Other observers expect even lower growth rates .
On the basis of these forecasts , we consider a figure of between 2 and 2.5 % for this year to be entirely realistic .
In view of the general slowdown in the world economy , I believe it is crucial that the European Union should look to its own strengths .
How profoundly the bleak global economic climate will affect us is largely in our own hands .
Particularly in view of developments in the United States and Japan , responsibility for the world economy falls on the European Union , and we must shoulder that responsibility .
What is the present state of play in the European Union ?
As far as inflation is concerned , current forecasts indicate that prices are set to rise by more than 2 % in two consecutive years , thereby exceeding the bounds of price stability as defined by the European Central Bank itself .
External factors , however , such as the increase in oil prices , are playing an important part in this development .
In this difficult environment , the European Central Bank is doing an excellent job .
But it must continue to do everything in its power to avoid squandering the reserves of trust that have been vested in it .
That is why we welcome its steady-handed policy , which we encourage it to keep pursuing .
At this point , however , I must cast doubt on the consistency of last week ' s interest-rate cut with this approach .
In the domain of budgetary policy , most Member States have managed in the course of the past year to achieve the balanced budget prescribed in the Stability and Growth Pact .
This , however , has been done with the aid of the proceeds from the sale of licences for the operation of universal mobile telecommunications systems ( UMTS ) as well as low interest rates and the increased tax revenue generated by accelerated economic growth .
Some of the Member States , however , have not capitalised sufficiently on these favourable economic conditions to reduce their public deficits and their national debt .
In view of the changes in the ageing pattern of the European population and the strain these are likely to put on the pension system , it is crucial that sufficient financial room for manoeuvre be created .
Full use must be made , for example , of the potential for spending cuts in every area .
This should not undermine the role of public investment , but such investment must be made judiciously in pursuit of defined strategic aims and must not be made at the expense of priority private investment .
Looking to our own strengths also involves continuing the structural reforms of the Member States ' capital products and labour markets .
The Stockholm summit failed to reach agreement on a firm timetable for the liberalisation of the European gas and electricity markets .
I very much regret that .
Nevertheless , we should make every effort to secure the liberalisation of the remaining state monopolies .
This is essential if we are to achieve our avowed aim of making the European Union the most competitive and dynamic economic area in the world by the year 2010 .
At the same time , it is imperative to push ahead with the completion of the internal market .
I need cite only two major examples in this context : firstly , agreement must be reached at long last on the Community patent ; secondly , Community rules on public procurement should be applied to defence procurement too , wherever their application is warranted .
Particularly at a time when the European Union is taking steps to establish a common defence policy , the ring-fencing of national defence markets is inefficient , anachronistic and quite simply too expensive .
The introduction of the euro on 1 January will affect the entire population of the European home market .
If we want it to benefit the people of Europe , we need an economic policy that accords with the principles of social justice and market economics .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I could not fail to endorse Mr von Wogau ' s last sentence .
On the whole , however , I do not believe that his report is as balanced as he presented it here .
First of all , on behalf of my committee I must criticise the lack of opportunity we were given to cooperate on this report , to engage in proper parliamentary discussion and to draft an opinion .
Public acceptance of the euro and of European economic policy , Mr von Wogau , will not simply depend on the coining of a new term such as ' home market ' or the like .
It will take a bit more than that to convince people .
This point is emphasised in the opinion which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted by a large majority .
Let me cite some examples of the interaction and evidence of reliability that are needed .
Of course we need stability , but , as you well know , we also need more extensive investments in education and science .
We call for an increase in the activity rate , especially with regard to women , yet we do not provide sufficient childcare facilities throughout the Union .
We have naturally looked long and hard at demographic trends in all 15 Member States and now in the applicant countries too , yet our health services and our care services for the elderly still leave much to be desired .
Growth alone , as our committee noted very clearly , cannot guarantee the quality of jobs .
All of these improvements are necessary to ensure that our economic and monetary policies win the approval of the general public and of the working people of Europe .
I am pleased to see that some Member States - and I believe this is underestimated by the Commission and its Economic Policy Committee - are working to improve and intensify the participation of employees in economic life , as demonstrated by the legislative bills that have been introduced in France and Germany , for example .
It is also interesting that a number of Member States have already responded to the proposals that Parliament and the Commission have been making for some time - they are not being tabled for the first time today - such as the long-overdue opportunity for older employees to upgrade their qualifications rather than being more or less squeezed out of the labour market with the aid of statutory provisions as in past years .
Lastly , let me point out that our committee was scathingly critical of the Council ' s dilatory implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
The economic policy of the Union must clearly be consistent with the principles of its employment policy and the social agenda .
I wish to thank my fellow committee members for the flexible and constructive manner in which they dealt with the drafting of an opinion in such unusual circumstances .
Mr President , Mr von Wogau , with characteristic expertise , has produced a balanced report on guidelines for the Community ' s economic policy .
His consistent support of the doctrine of the social market economy as the most suitable common socio-economic model for the Community only deserves our thanks and our endorsement of the ideas he has put forward .
The social market economy , however , does not mean adhering to outdated structures or building resistance to change on the pretext of preserving social services and jobs .
Neither is this plea made in Mr von Wogau ' s report .
On the contrary , Community structures have to be continually questioned and modernised if we want to realise the solemn promise made at Lisbon of a Europe as the most competitive , knowledge-based area in the world .
The signs are bad , however , and in some respects getting worse .
I do not accept that staff should not be told about structural changes and job losses as early on as possible , but if there is any intention of evolving a directive from the Marks & Spencer case , one that would essentially slow down the conversion of companies , I am against it .
I am astonished at Germany ' s official negative attitude - one I have only read about in the newspapers , it is true - towards the directive on mergers and takeovers , and at its aim to provide companies with artificial tools that will prevent the merger of companies which are aspiring to greater efficiency .
Like Mr von Wogau , I am tired of speaking about the much too slow deregulation and opening up to competition of the energy sector , transport sector and the Post Office in many different Member States .
Nor , apparently , will the position regarding air transport become clear for years to come , and internal bolts have been drawn to prevent the advance of genuine , pan-European public procurement , which will tend to have a hampering effect on the real efficiency that results from genuine competition .
The UMTS auctions were an unfortunately good example of how governments are also managing to shoot Europe and themselves in the foot in the building of an eEurope .
Mr President , well-balanced public finances , control of inflation and the monitoring of employment indicators are certainly important , even essential , but it is just as essential to clean the skeletons out of many of the national cupboards and put an end to the continued furtive glances from electorates .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr von Wogau ' s report contains a very positive assessment of the prospects for the European economy , given the somewhat uncertain prospects for the global economy as a whole at present .
The rapporteur and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have taken the usual care in drafting this report and I should like to thank Mr von Wogau for his efforts .
The Commission recommendation for 2001 was drafted when the rest of the world was going through a particularly difficult patch .
We have seen a recurrence of monetary crisis in the developed countries , such as Argentina and Turkey .
We have seen the technological bubble in the new economy burst in the United States .
This has not been without a knock-on effect in Europe , in that numerous companies in the United States have cut back or shut up shop in Europe in an effort to reduce overheads .
Generally speaking , the problems in the global economy have seriously reduced the prospects for the European economy , to 2.8 % for 2001 and 2.9 % for 2002 , according to the Commission ' s latest figures .
The main questions for the European economy , for the European institutions and for the Member States remain the same , despite the change in the international environment .
The questions are whether economic policy innovations and methodology are sufficiently well designed to protect the economy of Europe from external disruption and give the European economy the chance to embark on the high road to sustained and stable economic development in the medium and long term .
There can be no doubt that permanently high rates of growth are vital ; they are the sine qua non if we are to reduce what are still unacceptably high rates of unemployment and boost European competitiveness .
The unemployment situation is not unrelated to the question of competitiveness ; they are connected because an economy without full employment cannot be called a competitive economy because it is wasting a large part of its potential .
How can we achieve a higher rate of growth ?
The report tells us that we can only rely on monetary stability , a prudent budget and logical wage demands which take account of price stability .
Most of the committee believes that mobilising the market will only increase investments in what are exclusively market tools .
That is why the report calls on the Member States to speed up the structural reforms of capital market , product and labour markets and expresses its regret that there is no timetable for liberalising the energy and gas markets in Europe .
I should like to add here that , if and when this liberalisation comes about , the Member States must heed the lessons learned from the upheavals in the United States .
Privatising major sectors is no easy task .
The report also calls for greater efforts to complete the internal market .
Of course greater effort is needed to complete the internal market , especially the internal market in financial services , because we certainly need a much more dynamic stock exchange in Europe .
However , none of this alone will trigger a high rate of growth in the European economy .
Structural reforms are needed ; we must not neglect public investment , which has been neglected in the past , and we must do this by stimulating public investment , because we are lagging way behind .
My job was to present Parliament with the report on the economic guidelines for 2001 .
I have warned that , although the crisis in the American economy could endanger us , we are now taking this crisis seriously and , if we are to avoid succumbing to upheavals in the international economy , it would be illogical to neglect any weapon ; most importantly , it would be illogical to neglect the weapon of public investment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as Mr von Wogau has pointed out in the presentation of his report - which has my Group ' s full support - we are at an historic moment , with the culmination of the process of introducing the euro so close , but we are also , as has been said , at a delicate moment for the European economy . The forecasts , which were rosier some months ago , have had to be revised downwards .
There is enormous resistance to setting the inflation rate at the target of 2 % and there is clear concern about the current economic situation .
This obviously leads to the question of what is the correct way to try to overcome this situation and ensure solid and sustained growth .
In this respect , Mr von Wogau ' s report contains many elements which should be taken into account , but I would like to highlight some of them which we have already stressed . There are some which we have in fact mentioned in various debates .
The first is the need for Member States to remain rigorous and resolute with regard to the commitments established in the respective stability programmes : we are worried that there may be flexibility - in the field of deficit and public debt - with regard to those issues intended to ensure that objectives are achieved and complied with .
We would also like to mention the need for better and greater coordination of economic policies - you know that we are not satisfied with the current level of coordination , and this Parliament has stressed this on many occasions - and we would like to stress the issue of structural reforms and the need for flexibility in certain markets which affect the productive structure of the European Union , such as the labour market , and , obviously , the process of liberalisation in certain sectors also considered to be key sectors .
Mr President , the Commission ' s recommendations to the Member States are loaded with all the usual European Union dogmas , with the emphasis on reducing national debt .
This basically equates to cuts in public and social spending .
Mr von Wogau ' s report takes the same approach .
There is a self-satisfied air about this that I find quite disconcerting , given the worsening economic situation , and a refusal to consider the conditions needed to promote sustainable development .
The declared ambition is to follow a programme of stability .
The European Central Bank ' s primary goal is to ensure price stability .
The European Central Bank still refuses to lower interest rates , because it is obsessed with the threat of inflation , which is still on the horizon , and the President of the Bundesbank recently reminded us that the European Central Bank is not responsible for either growth or employment .
The report reiterates the European Union ' s goal to be more competitive and more dynamic , which is a worthy objective , but the proposals on the resources needed to implement this remain within the realms of dogma . These include adjusting pension systems to take account of budgetary restrictions , fully exploiting the potential for spending cuts in all areas , although the euphemism given to the public is ' creating an appropriate environment to foster investment in terms of the labour market ' , without forgetting , of course - and this is the perpetual icing on the cake - liberalisation in the outstanding sectors .
There is no mention of our obligations towards Community level services of general interest .
Basically , we are continuing to use the same old strategies , namely the anti-inflationist credo , the number one priority . We all know the consequences of this approach .
The report shows no hesitation in stressing the progress made in reducing levels of unemployment in some Member States , and highlights the need to continue reform of the labour market .
It would be worthwhile assessing the nature of these newly created jobs , which are most often insecure .
How can you possibly strive for improvements in unemployment whilst totally disregarding the strategy of the large and generally profitable European companies , which keep a close eye on financial criteria and make many of their employees redundant on the pretext of maintaining competitiveness ?
Although this stretches the credibility of the European social model , we are coming up against obvious reluctance to take the necessary measures to protect employees .
There is no mention of the social policy that is essential to consolidating growth . No mention of businesses ' social responsibilities .
Once again , this sort of economic policy does not tally with the desire to achieve sustainable development , which would require a dynamic of public investment and organising a market with strong industrial ambitions .
The necessary capital does exist .
There is an urgent need to control the reality of the financial market and that is why my group , in the process of discussing this report , is revisiting the European Union ' s economic policies and proposes to introduce a tax on speculative buying in order to control them , to reduce their volatility and most importantly to raise resources to invest in society and the environment .
This report , and the situation of the European Union in general , show once again that it would be beneficial to make the EU ' s political , economic and social decisions part of a genuine democratic process , which could be established in each country , after wide-ranging consultation with civil society in Europe .
Mr President , according to the von Wogau report , the introduction of the common currency marks a new step in integration .
A step which is costing money while the benefits are yet to become apparent .
Like the euro coin , the new step has two sides .
On the one hand , economies which are ahead in the economic trend are in need of an increase in interest so as to dampen down inflation .
This is now impossible .
On the other hand , countries which are lagging behind need a boost with a lower rate in interest .
That too proves to be impossible .
Whichever way you look at it , it marks the loss of one of the instruments required for a healthy economy .
Greater coordination is not the answer .
Something else is needed to balance the loss of national monetary instruments : structural reforms - familiar to us all , yet a rarity - such as a more flexible labour market and the further breakdown of state monopolies .
These could restore the value of the euro , more so than an unexpected change in interest rates .
The most recent fall in interest rates of the European Central Bank came a day before it was known that , at 5.3 % , Dutch inflation had reached its highest level in almost 20 years .
That illustrates the seriousness of the problem .
Those reforms should make Europe more innovation-friendly .
However , many subsidies and other incentive schemes only distort the market and are often harmful to the environment .
If we are to launch these reforms with a vengeance , I fear the worst for Europe ' s competitiveness .
My final point concerns the environment .
Despite the favourable economic climate , little has been done about the strategy for sustainability .
Economic growth , a fall in employment and environmental integration must be better coordinated .
Since the economy has grown more rapidly than expected , more ambition in this field should be a matter of course .
Let us therefore declare this a cornerstone in our policy .
The European Parliament will be given its opportunity at the end of May , and the European Council in Gothenburg in June .
Indeed , a new step in integration can only live up to its name if the integration of the environment and economy actually gets off the ground .
Ladies and gentlemen , this report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs will not go down in Parliament ' s history for its clarity or significance , both in terms of its form and its content .
Let us quickly look at its form .
In Article 5 , you mention , and I quote , ' the political priority to improve the quality and sustainability of public finances ' .
Would public finances thus be unsustainable , because they are short-lived ?
In Article 10 of your resolution , you stress , and I quote , ' the importance ... of public investment , which must , however , be targeted and based on strategic objectives , ' - that is true - but ' which must not drive out private investment , which has priority ' .
What sort of contradictory statement is this ? One that is designed to please everyone and achieve nothing !
As for the report ' s content , you demonstrate a commitment to the social market economy , a subject close to the heart of the CDU party .
This is not the view France takes .
Judging from the relatively poor performance of the German economy over the last 40 years , why should we adopt this approach ? Why should France , for example , abandon the industrial policy which has transformed it into the leading European country in its strategic sectors ?
This has all been achieved without using any monetary tricks , as used by the deutschmark , which was overvalued by 15 % when the euro was introduced , or when East Germany was estimated to be worth USD 350 billion , whereas at reunification , it was only worth USD 100 billion at the very most . This has all been achieved without drowning ourselves in everything European , which is what eventually happened to the aerospace company that was taken over by Aérospatiale-Matra - one of the world ' s former leading companies in aeronautics and space engineering - despite the fact that Matra is half the size , and these two companies were then both swallowed up by EADS .
This is certainly great news for France , which having once had a majority stake , is now a minority partner once again !
Should we thank the frenzied Mr Chirac for this outcome , or Mr Jospin , the pacifist , or Minister Jean-Claude Gayssot , who did at least try to clear up the mess made by the other two ?
What use , therefore , is this report , which does not criticise any of the euro zone countries directly and which does not even mention the de facto devaluation of the European currency , the collapse of which continues to be a cause for concern ?
Mr President , in the debate on his report on the broad guidelines for economic policy in 2001 , Mr von Wogau advocates the idea that , once the euro coins and notes have entered into circulation next year , the 12 countries that have joined the single currency would form a high-level integration zone that would be called the ' home market . '
This home market would be managed in accordance with the principles of the social market economy which , as noted in the explanatory statement , were successfully applied in Germany after the war .
I firmly believe that trying to reconcile social justice with the market is a concern shared by all the countries of Europe .
All countries should , however , be free to follow the path that is most suited to their character , enhanced by mutual coordination , but the instrument of Brussels should not be used to impose a single formula upon them .
I also believe that there is a huge misunderstanding surrounding the concept of the home market .
There is a risk of this expression implying that the European economies are managed by a single political authority .
This is not the case today , however , and as for the future , the Treaty of Maastricht makes no such stipulation either .
According to the Maastricht model , the single currency , which is managed by the European Central Bank , coexists with many national political authorities .
If some countries see matters in a different light , it would be better if they stated this clearly to the public in their own countries before the end of the year and to arrange the necessary referendum .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , in my contribution to this debate I should like to clarify a few points which , I believe , are in need of clarification .
First of all , Karl von Wogau ' s report is not a school report card on the progress of the Member States ' economic policies .
This report by Karl von Wogau is a report on the economic guidelines for the future and an analysis of the status quo .
I am therefore very grateful that Karl von Wogau chose the term ' home market ' in connection with the introduction of euro notes and coins , because the single currency is the greatest integration project of the present-day European Union .
The introduction of euro notes and coins will be a clearly visible reminder of our European home , a reminder that will be given to all the people of the euro zone whenever they handle the single currency .
It is also positive that this concept of a home market will also remind the public so tangibly of the political integration project that underlies the introduction of the euro , since this could provide an extremely powerful impetus for the political pursuit of economic progress , employment and European integration .
A second point is that I fail to understand how , in this day and age , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs can still try to present capital and growth as the enemies of employment , which came across to some extent in Mrs Weiler ' s speech .
This is why it was necessary once again to put the concept of a socially committed market economy at the heart of this report .
I should like to extend the concept into that of a socially and environmentally committed market economy .
What do we mean by that ?
We mean that we are opposed to the treatment of growth and employment as two completely separate issues .
That is why we have pledged ourselves to the Stability Pact and to growth and employment .
A socially committed market economy encourages social responsibility , ecological sustainability and an education policy rooted in the principle of lifelong learning .
Let me finish with an appeal to the Council . The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines require us all to work together .
Since the report says that the EU market in financial services must become an integrated , efficient market , and since we are forever stressing the important role played by pensions and by accelerated procedures , I have to say to the Council that the Ecofin Council , at its last meeting , certainly paid further lip service to the principles that are involved here but , when it came to company pensions and the Lamfalussy report , betrayed those selfsame principles .
The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines can be implemented with the active support of the Council .
Now is the time for it to act .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have a few comments to make about the report by our fellow Member , Karl von Wogau .
I believe that when discussing the coordination of economic policies , the debate that we are holding today and the vote that we will take on this report are still our main cornerstones , on which any comments should be based .
From this point of view , I cannot resist the pleasure of repeating a warning .
These broad economic guidelines are still our primary analytical and working tools for arranging the coordination of economic policies .
We can only regret the fact that once these broad guidelines have been adopted , they will no longer be part of the national debate .
I urge all our colleagues in the Member States to take these broad guidelines into account when they draw up national budgetary and fiscal guidelines , because otherwise there will be no genuine coordination of economic policies .
We shall soon have the opportunity to come back to this subject , when we discuss the communication by the Commissioner .
I have three comments to make on the main thrust of the proposal submitted to us today by our fellow Member , Karl von Wogau .
The first comment is to express my pleasure at what the report says on enhancing this tool and on the prospect of a convergence of the fiscal and budgetary policies of the Member States , particularly and primarily of those belonging to the euro zone .
I have taken note of the consideration given here to the importance of economic stature , which should be taken into consideration when considering sanctions against a Member State .
I imagine that this will take us back to the debate that we had last year on the situation in Ireland .
I believe that the decision taken on Ireland is not exceptional .
This decision was expected , it was legitimate and it was fortunate .
Even so , if we have to consider the importance of economic stature in various situations , we will then have to look at how Mr Berlusconi will implement his economic policy and whether this is compatible with the broad guidelines that we are finalising today .
Mr President , I would like to make one comment , if I may , on the reform of the labour markets .
If this involves carrying out structural reforms , by amending the Directive establishing a European Works Council , on the information and consultation of workers , we can only support this .
Lastly , with regard to liberalisation , I think that experience both within and beyond Europe suggests that we should be extremely careful in maintaining access to public services , in parallel with these changes .
Mr President , joining together the words ' social ' and ' market ' , as you are doing , is not enough to improve the economy .
The workers , the working majority of the population , do not base their judgments on your words , but on the difficulties in their own lives and they understand all too well that what you are calling the ' the social market economy ' is making 15 million men and women redundant in the European Union , which is actually one of the richest regions of the world .
Your social market economy , in other words , means wide-spread job insecurity and an increase in the number of workers who , even here in France , are paid FRF 4 000 or 5 000 per month and much less in other European countries , whereas shareholders , who do nothing , take their share of the dividends from the massive profits made by these companies .
So the market economy that you are glorifying in your report is a stupid , unjust and inhuman economy , which works by concentrating wealth amongst a small minority and by making the majority ' s living conditions worse .
You are daring to assert that competition provides considerable protection against the abuse of power .
However , it is by bringing about competitiveness and competition that the boards of directors of large companies such as Danone , Michelin , GEC-Alsthom , Péchiney , Marks & Spencer and many others can perpetrate this particularly horrendous abuse of power that involves laying off some of their workers , completely closing down factories , which sometimes means that an entire town will become deserted , just so that their shareholders are guaranteed some extra dividends .
You claim that you want to overcome , and I quote , ' the democratic deficit in European economic policy ' , but the first step you must take in order to overcome this deficit would be to deprive large employers of their divine right to get rid of all the people who work to improve their existence and you would do this by banning employers from making collective redundancies and forcing them to deduct from profits and from dividends , stored up by shareholders , whatever is necessary to safeguard all the jobs that are at risk .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , I would like to start by replying to the previous speaker , for I too am dissatisfied with the term ' social market economy ' . There is no need for the word ' social ' .
In my view , the market economy , with its rules , is not only the climate in which the fundamental economic right of people - the freedom of contract and trade - is guaranteed , it is also the economic environment which is most conducive to the generation of wealth and employment .
Turning now to Mr von Wogau 's report , I would like to make a few specific points : I have a positive comment to make on point 12 , for example , which takes quite an encouraging view of the work of the European Central Bank .
I would like to expand on this .
Without going into a detailed analysis of the choices made regarding interest rates or monetary policy , I feel that this is one occasion when it must be stressed that the attempt by the governments and also by many political groupings present in this Parliament to force the European Central Bank and President Duisenberg to work towards goals , which are not the most suitable for supporting economic growth , must be opposed .
There are such wide gaps between the various European economies in terms of productivity and efficiency that , in my opinion , this is the area that we need to concentrate on if we want to secure a competitive future for the economies of the leading countries , for we will certainly not achieve this by taking the deceptive shortcut of lowering interest rates .
A second point on which I would like to focus relates to point 8 , which concerns the need to adapt pension systems to changes in demographic conditions .
I believe that , in this matter , the European Parliament must call strongly , first and foremost upon the Member States but also upon the Commission , in so far as it is able , to adopt a more responsible approach .
Their responsibility is to achieve , through radical reforms and as soon as possible , a pension system that is financially sustainable and fair towards future generations .
Currently , in a large number of countries - such as Italy , for example - the pension contributions of workers , particularly young workers , are being used irresponsibly to finance the pensions of people who are 54 or 55 years old , who may well be doing two jobs , an illegal job or an undeclared job .
In my opinion , this must be a priority for Europe , a priority of economic efficiency but , first and foremost , a priority of fairness towards all generations .
There are countries , such as Italy , in which obligatory pension contributions exceed 30 % of income , although the people paying these contributions will receive much lower pensions .
With regard to another issue , the labour market , we must be firmer in our demands on the European countries .
It has been said in this Chamber that there is a risk of causing job insecurity , but I believe that precisely the flexibility and substantial use of flexibility tools in the labour market , together with a re-evaluation of the rules governing permanent employment , re-establish a balance between atypical employment , precarious employment and permanent employment . This is necessary because it is the only way to achieve an increasingly balanced labour market .
Lastly , I would like to make a point on a subject which is just as problematic - I would not go as far as to say critical but certainly problematic - the prospect of political economic policy coordination mechanisms aimed at bringing about convergence of fiscal and budgetary policies .
In my opinion , we need to focus on the fact that convergence of fiscal and budgetary policies has to be one of the European Union 's objectives .
I feel that having different contrasting models , different solutions to observe , doing , so to speak , a little benchmarking - and the case of Ireland is , in my opinion , a negative precedent - is a positive , not a negative thing for the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic growth of the Union is evidently threatening to grind to a halt .
Lip service is paid time and again to the principle of supporting small and medium-sized businesses , but the fact is that we give them far too little support , even though they are the engine of our economy and the guarantors of European jobs .
If we really want to help them , we must do all we can to ensure that changes are made to the economic conditions in which they operate .
This means that our administrative systems and regulations must be modernised and simplified .
Deep cuts must be made in non-wage labour costs , which are vastly excessive .
These measures must be consolidated by means of an extension of the Maastricht criteria on budget deficits and debt levels to include a cap on administrative expenditure .
No Member State ' s administrative expenditure may on any account exceed 8 % of its GDP .
If this savings potential were realised , the absolutely crucial process of tax reform could be financed , and the engine of our economy , the small and medium-sized businesses , could be primed up to remain in perpetual motion .
Mr President , the von Wogau report understandably makes no mention of the Commission 's criticism levelled at the UK 's Labour Government .
Chancellor Brown , no doubt with the general election of 7 June in mind , decided to promise considerable increases in public spending , particularly on health and education , threatening , without tax rises , to breach the stability and growth pact agreements and to raise the proportions spent by the public sector beyond the desirable current 38 % level of GDP .
Mr Berlusconi 's new government and promised economic package may also be problematic for the Commission , but it is particularly rich for the British Chancellor to reject this criticism from the Commission as interfering in sovereign British fiscal affairs , while at the same time making active plans for a referendum to join the euro , subject to his arbitrary five economic tests , which make no mention of the constitutional issues behind EMU , which are dear to British Conservatives .
Once the UK is in the euro zone , we will have even less fiscal autonomy , and I do not know what politically - as opposed to legally - binding guidelines really mean in practice , as we are forced to harmonise our taxes upwards to avoid so-called unfair tax competition and avoid distortion in Mr von Wogau 's proposed European home market .
That is a name that I , as a UK Member , object to , as it suggests that the three states remaining outside the euro , of which my country is one , are not at home in Europe 's single market ; so I would strongly suggest that euroland or euro zone is much the preferred label and I wish the zone every success for the future .
Although I personally have a problem with the term ' social market economy ' , as we in Britain associate it with social democracy , the description in the report rightly encapsulates the vision of a dynamic , deregulated , competitive , free-market economy that is sensitive to the needs of the environment and the labour markets , which I clearly welcome .
However , I am not so sure whether the comments regarding the European Central Bank 's first two years are exactly correct .
It has not been a great success , and they are still muddling through and remain somewhat opaque in their decision-making process .
This was clearly demonstrated by the quarter percent interest rate reduction last week which came across as panicky and a knee-jerk reaction to the downturn in the American economy and seemed to fly in the face of their own monetary and inflation targets as well as many speeches by Mr Duisenberg .

On another matter , I too call on the EU to implement rapidly the suggested liberalisation of the energy , post , airport and railway sectors .
I personally also support the single sky initiative .
Mr von Wogau was right : Europe will not become a fortress and overall , in spite of all the problems in the world , its prospects look relatively rosy in these uncertain times .
Mr President , I too believe that a socially committed market economy with sound environmental credentials is a good model on which to base the economic policy of the European Union , provided it can continue what the Lisbon process set in motion , namely the integration of economic , employment , social and financial policies , thereby paving the way for the development of a genuinely sustainable strategy and for the implementation at long last of a balanced and appropriate policy mix in the European Union .
Sadly , the broad economic policy guidelines still contain too little in the way of qualitative and quantitative targets that could inspire us to think beyond the narrow confines of tax cuts and spending cuts .
I believe that a new debate on the quality of public finances in all Member States , which the Commission has gratifyingly initiated , can enable us to move more freely along the road to a form of investment-led growth that will create employment .
That is essential too .
In my opinion , the broad economic policy guidelines must focus more sharply than hitherto on investment-led growth and on motivating people to enhance their employability .
At the moment we are confronted by a certain degree of pessimism in the European Union .
I do not believe that a sustained slide towards recession is threatening , but every possible step must be taken to ensure that the recent developments in the United States do not become such a risk to the European economy that the European Union is powerless to contain it .
I should like to emphasise that the broad economic policy guidelines , the aims of our economic policy , do not apply to the euro zone alone but to the entire single European market , the home market of the European Union , and that is how it should stay , because what we do not want to let ourselves be split in two but rather to go on growing closer together .
We in Europe , however , must not slide into another recession for want of initiative , into a slump that destroys what we have achieved , namely the lowest level of unemployment for ten years .
Let me therefore re-emphasise that , compared with other regions of the world , we invest too little in research and development and in education and training , and even in the realm of infrastructural investments , which this House has so often commended and demanded , we are still lagging behind .
Besides monetary stability and sound budgetary policies , it is also imperative that we find innovative ways of achieving social stability and a stable employment situation .
This is what the Lisbon process requires of us .
I regret that we have not seen even more new ideas emerging during the Swedish Presidency of the Council .
But I also bitterly regret that we do not have more transparency and democracy .
The participation of the European Parliament in the macroeconomic dialogue , in the formulation and adoption of the broad economic policy guidelines and in the preparation of other processes connected with Lisbon and Stockholm is indispensable .
If need be , we must use the next intergovernmental conference in 2004 to lend weight to our demands .
Mr President , in discussing the broad economic policy guidelines I am particularly mindful of my own country 's run-in with the Commission in recent months , a situation handled badly in my opinion by both the Commission and our own Minister for Finance .
As we face a referendum on Nice on 7 June next , popular opinion in Ireland is one of amazement at the response to the economic miracle that has been performed .
It has allowed one of the poorest , underdeveloped and most peripheral regions of the EU to catch up and surpass many of the strong economies and , to quote , ' realise our economic and social potential and ensure the welfare of our people ' as our Taoiseach said at the time we were voting on whether to join the then EEC or not in 1972 .
It is not what the Commission did but how it did it that I question : decisions behind closed doors , badly communicated and with no parliamentary input .
Please let us learn from that .
I know and appreciate why Commissioner Solbes was concerned about what was considered an inflationary budget and at 5.6 % this remains a serious concern .
But the bald choice was between maintaining our social partnership and some semblance of wage stability through tax cuts at a time of exchequer plenty ; and wage stability is the most important part of the Irish stability programme .
In a word , in a country that is in a catch-up position , the classic economic model , a one-size-fits-all economic model , is a bad fit .
Economic forecasting is not an exact science . Nor is it within sole EU control .
We are part of a global economy . It is subject also to the forces of nature , to animal and plant diseases .
Witness the havoc BSE and foot and mouth disease have caused , even in Ireland where we have had only one case of foot and mouth disease .
The successful efforts to ring-fence the disease are forecasted to take over 2 % of our growth this year .
In the matter of economic forecasting I am increasingly concerned about the behaviour of the ECB which appears to be reduced to reading the tea-leaves in the bottom of the cup .
Is the ECB part of the problem or the solution ?
I fully support the recent reduction in interest rates to support growth , but questions have to be raised about the way the ECB decides policy and communicates it to the financial markets .
In the context of statements from senior officials in recent weeks , the ECB has left itself open to accusations that it bowed to pressure from the US , or worse panicked , in the face of contradictory economic models .
The way the recent reduction , only the second since the ECB was established in 1998 , was handled , has seriously damaged its credibility .
Not for the first time I find myself questioning the competence of senior officials of the ECB , even when I agree with what they are doing .
Too much megaphone diplomacy , too little consideration or understanding of the impact on the markets of what they say .
Too much post hoc justification of the fact and about-turns in policy .
We expect and demand better .
Perhaps the recommendation procedure should be directed towards them , Commissioner , or are they subject to any checks and balances ?
Perhaps we need after all to revisit the debate on vaccination for foot in mouth policy .
Thank you Commissioner Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Electrical and electronic equipment
The next item is the joint debate on two reports by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection :
( A5-0146 / 2001 ) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment [ COM ( 2000 ) 347 - C5-0415 / 2000 - 2000 / 0159 ( COD ) ] ,
( A5-0148 / 2001 ) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment [ COM ( 2000 ) 347 - C5-0414 / 2000 - 2000 / 0158 ( COD ) ] .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , over the past few months I have very frequently been asked why we actually need a directive .
Is it the creation of a workaholic official of the EU or of a lonely Member of Parliament who is keen to have a directive on this subject , or is it not perhaps the consumption patterns of the European population , who in recent years have displayed extraordinary devotion to the purchase of electronic equipment ?
The reason is precisely the latter !
We generate six million tonnes of electronic waste products in Europe every year .
The volume of electronic waste is growing at a rate of more than 3 to 4 % ; indeed , I believe it has now reached the 5 % mark .
In about ten years ' time , we expect this electronic scrap heap to have doubled in size .
Electronic scrap is spirited around in Europe and left in fields , in meadows , in woodland , in ditches or wherever .
It is not only an environmental hazard but also a waste of raw materials , because we all know that computers contain valuable components , which really ought to be recovered and ultimately be subject to systematic reuse and recycling targets .
This is why I believe it is only right and proper that this directive should see the light of day .
Another reason why this is especially important is that we have already taken the first steps in this direction with the end-of-life vehicle Directive , which differs from the proposed directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment in that the recovery of electrical and electronic waste involves hundreds and thousands of manufacturers , whereas the salvaging of vehicle components concerns only 50 or 60 manufacturers .
For this reason , it is very important that we reach consensus on this directive in the House and with the Commission too , because this directive will have repercussions .
And if it has repercussions , it must also have a guiding influence .
Environmental policy must not be an end in itself ; it must have an aim - not only an environmental aim but an aim for companies too , because companies are part of our society , a fact which is just occasionally forgotten in my committee .
We are operating in several categories ; after all , we have ten different waste streams , each with its own distinct recycling target .
But let me begin with a few words about the points in my draft which the committee endorsed , for example on the date of the entry into force of this directive , which must not be delayed until 2005 or 2006 .
My children would ask me why I travel to Brussels to work on a directive if the results of that work are not due to be presented until the year 2006 or whenever .
We said that the Member States would have to be true to their proclaimed principles and put the directive into force 30 months after the completion of the parliamentary process .
After a further 30 months , companies should be working in accordance with the directive .
I believe this is the right approach , and I think it likely that the Commission will go along with this line .
The Commission was somewhat lax on the question of targets . How many kilograms do we want to collect every year ?
We are calling for a fundamental ban on the disposal of electrical and electronic items as unsorted waste .
Some participants in this discussion , particularly those from the world of industry , claim that it is a senseless proposal .
I maintain the exact opposite .
We must reach a point at which it is prohibited to bin an electric shaver , because the general refuse bin is not where it belongs .
Although this is stating the obvious , many people have not yet grasped the message .
The law of diminishing unit costs also dictates that we must no longer have waste equipment scattered around our continent in future .
We must concentrate it in order to reduce the cost of recycling .
This is why we have introduced a ban on the disposal of electrical and electronic waste as general refuse and a binding annual target of six kilograms per head of population rather than subscribing to the non-binding target proposed by the Commission .
I believe that this is a warranted step in the right direction .
We have also devised a preferential arrangement for the retail trade .
We all fully agree that a commercial outlet , if it sells an electrical appliance or an item of electronic hardware , must take it back .
But we also know - or at least those who have been town councillors will know - that our shops are located in tightly confined premises in the centres of our towns and cities and do not have the capacity to build even a small shed for the storage of old television sets , not to mention the fact that such a facility would most probably have to be made explosion-proof too .
We are proposing that end users should be able to surrender their old equipment absolutely free of charge .
However , it need not automatically go back to the place of purchase .
Although the retail trade is responsible , the consumer is free to take the used item straight to a general collection point .
I believe that this is a good alternative . It is designed to protect traders , because if we impose stringent building requirements on them , they will very quickly move to greenfield sites .
But that is precisely what we want to avoid , because we want to maintain the appeal of our town and city centres .
This is an important point which , unfortunately , is far too often overlooked .
We believe that the responsibility of manufacturers , like the transposition of the directive into national law , should not be subject to a five-year transitional period but should take effect only 30 months after the entry into force of the directive , together with an arrangement whereby producers are allowed , on a voluntary basis , to show users the cost of collecting , treating and disposing of historical waste in an environmentally compatible way .
The specialists know what historical waste is .
The term refers to those items of equipment that are already in circulation , some of them unbranded or ' orphan ' products , the origins of which are unknown . They may have come from bankrupted companies or from retail giants which put them on the market just before Christmas to make life difficult for smaller traders .
Ladies and gentlemen , the processing of this historical waste must be collectively financed .
There is no alternative .
Anyone who thinks that the processing of historical waste could be individually financed is dreaming .
I do believe , however , that it is right to make provision for individual financing in the case of new equipment .
There can , of course , be exceptions in some domains where this is not possible .
But I should very much like to reward those who make an effort and develop a product that can subsequently be recycled for the good of the environment .
These are the regulatory instruments at our disposal .
It is all about rewarding , not penalising .
And at this point , I should like to make a plea to the Council , whose representative is sitting in front of me here : please take this idea on board and urge the Council to support an arrangement which favours individual financing .
There are also , of course , a few points which my honourable friends and colleagues on the committee did not accept or to which I am opposed .
As far as the recycling target is concerned , I believe the committee has been somewhat over-ambitious .
Let me say to my honourable colleague that raising a target from 40 % to 50 % in Parliament is an easy game to play .
It is just about the easiest thing on earth .
But how are the actual waste flows to be organised , how is the market to be persuaded of their benefits , and how are companies to have access to these waste flows in a market economy ? These are the really crucial questions .
For this reason , the Commission ' s proposed target is surely a reasonable starting point .
My own view is that we should keep the Commission ' s target rather than opting for the excessively high target proposed by a majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
There is a dispute about lighting equipment .
The main protagonist is discussing the matter at this very moment with other protagonists .
I believe that lights should be covered by this directive , but they should not be subject to a recycling target .
The fact is that we do not have a single document explaining how dismantled and dissected lamps can be recycled in such a way that their components can be reused .
I should not like to set a directive in motion without being able to assess its impact .
After three years , when we have some experience , we should then set a target for lights .
In my opinion , the Commission has made a good proposal , which we shall be happy to adopt .
One of the points at issue in the House is the question of the time at which the manufacturer ' s responsibility begins .
The Commission has proposed - and the Council takes a similar view - that manufacturers must take back their products from the collection point and meet the cost of that operation .
I support this initiative .
One reason I support the initiative is because there are some Members of this House who take the view that we should ultimately compel manufacturers to come and collect used toothbrushes from our bathrooms .
I have three children , and those children certainly have enough moral responsibility to take their equipment - computers , radios or whatever - to a prescribed place at the end of its lifetime and to dispose of it properly there .
I do not believe we should be pursuing a policy that always assigns responsibility to a third party and never to ourselves as consumers .
The end users are to be able to hand in old equipment free of charge to their retailer and even have it collected in cases where they are buying a replacement .
But they have a responsibility if they only intend to dispose of the waste item .
They must take it to the collection centre in their town or city .
You may call me old-fashioned , but I believe there is a certain educational aspect in all of this .
I recall our impassioned debates in this House about the throw-away mentality .
Those who were most vociferous then are either no longer here or are no longer prepared to stand up and speak out .
The throw-away mentality is an important factor which must also be taken into account when financing is discussed here .
We have heard a host of interesting proposals on this subject .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is a heterogeneous committee , but it renders a valuable contribution in helping to ensure that this Parliament of ours , which is not a ' normal ' parliament , plays an increasingly large and important role as a ' normal ' parliament .
For this I should like to express my sincere thanks to all my fellow committee members and to all others who have been involved in our work .
Mr President , waste from electronic and electrical equipment is now one of the fastest growing waste streams in the European Union .
It is estimated that this waste stream , which constitutes 4 % of municipal waste today , will increase by at least 3-5 % every year .
Electronic and electrical equipment is one of the largest known sources of heavy metals and organic pollutants in the waste stream .
Without proper pre-treatment , the highly toxic components can contaminate soil and groundwater , as well as pollute the air .
This directive can therefore be seen as one of the basic instruments for an integrated product policy , where the whole life cycle of a product will be taken into consideration and eco-design will be promoted .
The need for business to adapt to a changing agenda , taking more account of environmental concerns , is widely accepted ; it is also accepted that countries and industries which innovate more quickly will end up being more competitive than those which delay .
The guiding principle behind the directives is the Extended Producers Responsibility .
The objective of this is that by making producers financially responsible for their products when they become waste , an upstream effect is created , which leads to design for the environment , considering the durability , reparability or upgrading , disassembly and recycling of the product .
In addition , through the eco-design , the reuse of resources and separate collection , hazardous substances contained in the waste stream are prevented from entering the environment in an uncontrolled way .
The directive also applies the principle of the internalisation of external costs .
The costs of disposal , - which up to now have been borne by local authorities , usually as part of waste disposal -are to be internalised and provision made for the reuse , recycling and de-manufacture of this equipment .
The ultimate aim is waste prevention .
The principle of manufacturer responsibility for end-of-life electrical and electronic products is not disputed .
Producers must be responsible for the products they bring to market . However , they can only be responsible for their individual products .
We have had some debate about collective and individual systems , which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has gone into in detail .
We in the Committee on Industry have tabled some amendments with regard to the availability of spare parts and also to distance-selling and labelling , which we would ask the Commission to take into consideration .
We are also very concerned with the health and safety of workers dealing with recovery of WEEE and this needs to be more carefully considered than previously when transposing the directive .
With regard to the restriction of hazardous substances , some members of industry say that we should focus on large equipment and not small equipment . But the concentration of hazardous substances in small equipment is up to four times higher than in large equipment .
Furthermore , small equipment definitely needs to be separately collected to prevent it from ending up in municipal waste , where hazardous chemicals are not controlled .
In principle , the proposal to substitute lead , mercury , cadmium , etc. is welcomed .
However , the Committee on Industry has asked for a structured review process , and I believe the Commission should look very closely at this .
All stakeholders should have the opportunity to submit data as the basis for an early review , including environmental and consumers ' associations , because it is in all our interests that this directive works effectively .
I would ask the Commission to take this very much on board .
The Committee on Industry has also asked for an exemption for lead in high-temperature melting solders and lead in glass and electronic components .
This is because of the technical difficulties in providing alternatives .
I have discussed this in committee with the Commission and , once again , we have to look closely at the technical possibilities here .
Mr President , in order to construct a Europe which respects the environment , it is a political and legislative priority to ensure that the business community is fully involved in the task of environmental protection .
In this context , the directives we are discussing today are essential legislative instruments which contribute to preserving our environment by persuading businesses in the sector to internalise the cost of certain environmental impacts and to adopt a committed position without abandoning their market objectives .
Mr Florenz ' s work is commendable and I must congratulate him on it , since he has managed to create some proposals for directives which find a balance between the interests of consumers , the environment and businesses in the sector , interests which are very difficult to combine .
I would like to mention the Member States ' obligation to achieve a recovery rate of six kilos per inhabitant , since I believe we should take account of the existing differences between the Member States .
It is clear that Germany , for example , does not produce the same amount of residue as other countries , such as Greece , Portugal or Spain .
Furthermore , the lifespan of each piece of equipment is significantly different between Member States , which exacerbates that problem .
I would like to repeat that it is appropriate to apply an implementation co-efficient to the recovery obligation in order thereby to balance and harmonise the obligation , depending on the Member State in question .
I would also like to highlight the importance of Article 7 , which deals with financial responsibility .
For the sake of greater fairness , individual financial responsibility seems logical , but I very much agree with the solution contained in the report of leaning towards individual responsibility without closing the door to the application of collective responsibility in certain cases .
With regard to the exceptions for lead solder , I believe that it should be maintained , because I believe that the use of substitutes could create a greater environmental problem or jeopardise consumer safety .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteur , a number of people will emphasise the importance of this Directive , and they will continue to do so in future .
People do not ask me why we are voting on this Directive ; many people ask me to do this as quickly and effectively as possible .
I myself come from a country where a number of rules on this subject matter are already in place .
I should explicitly like to thank the rapporteur for the sterling work he has done and for the excellent improvements he has made to the Commission proposal .
The key issue in this connection , which he himself has highlighted , is the obligation to collect all electrical and electronic appliances and to establish higher and more stringent collection objectives before 2006 .
The principal goal of this Directive is enshrined in Article 1 .
First prevention , then re-use , then recycling and , lastly , energy recovery .
It is this hierarchy which is not being respected in the Commission proposal , for prevention is being shifted to another directive and re-use of whole appliances is not being recognised .
The rapporteur has also relegated a number of aspects to energy recovery instead of recycling .
The best way to prevent waste is to change the eco-design of these products .
That is why the instrument of individual producer responsibility , financial responsibility , is so crucial .
The re-use of whole appliances is important too , not only in terms of the environment , but also from a social point of view .
Indeed , it creates more employment opportunities for semi- and unskilled workers , and the products become more accessible at lower prices .
Needless to say , this Directive must also guarantee that waste is not exported to third countries , except with a view to re-use , and only if it can be ensured that the same high objectives and standards will be respected in those third countries .
Banning hazardous substances is the best preventive measure which we can take .
Moreover , this is also important in terms of the health of workers .
In fact , the Directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment forms part of the prevention objective stated in Article 1 of the Directive on discarded electrical and electronic equipment .
That is why I was so keen on combining the two Directives .
We have also been familiar with the problem of heavy metals for a long time .
Alternatives are available for most of them , whilst the Commission provides for exceptions for a number of them .
I do not believe it is up to Parliament promptly to provide for exceptions over the space of a couple of days .
There is also the disadvantage that decisions of this kind are sometimes too much inspired by lobbies .
Let the Commission go about its business and produce an amended version of the exceptions to heavy metals in two years ' time .
Finally , I should definitely like to mention the discussion on brominated flame retardants .
It has become a discussion between believers , such as myself , convinced of the harmful effects on the environment and health , and non-believers .
What I find important is that , for many , this discussion has led to a greater appreciation of the harmfulness of these products .
A ban in 2006 is impossible .
The amendment tabled by my group asks for producers to demonstrate by 2003 that these products are harmless , and I hope that this can be achieved .
Mr President , more than thirty years ago an organisation called ' Friends of the Earth ' was born in my country .
I seem to remember a publicity stunt that featured an enormous mound of bottles which were no longer going to be returned for refilling but were simply going to be dumped in a landfill site .
I was twelve or thirteen at the time and that publicity and the photographs on television woke many of us up to the concerns we still have for the environment and drew our attention to the waste of resources attached to so much of our way of living and our manufacturing processes .
I am sorry that so many years later my own country is one of those which is trailing behind the countries of the rapporteur and the Commissioner in improving its recycling rate .
So I am pleased that we have this European legislation , and indeed the whole waste strategy of the Commission , which is forcing individual countries like my own that are recalcitrant and bow too easily to industry pressure on their own doorstep to recognise and put into practice the principles of sustainability .
These countries are very happy to talk about these principles on a wider stage but are reluctant to put them into practice on their own doorstep .
The principle here that the producer should accept responsibility for the whole life of the product and ensure that the problems caused by that production are not passed on to future generations is one which we should embrace very strongly .
So I welcome this legislation and consider it important that industry in my country and perhaps countries elsewhere should recognise that if it does not seize the opportunity to modernise its processes and live up to the high environmental standards then it will lose out on market opportunities across Europe .
Two dilemmas have been pointed out concerning lead and brominated flame retardants .
I put this one question to the Commissioner about the issue of low-cost , low-energy light bulbs : Is it better to have them recycled but to put up the cost , or is it better to keep down the cost , encourage their use and perhaps tackle the other serious environmental problem of global warming a little bit more rapidly than we might otherwise be able to do ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Florenz warmly on his report .
He has got the message , which is individual financial responsibility for the manufacturers of new television sets and refrigerators .
Costs must not be passed on to consumers .
Only if manufacturers themselves are saddled with the extra costs for re-use and recycling will they gain the financial incentive to design their electrical and electronic products in such a way as to ensure that they can be re-used more easily and in a more environmentally-friendly manner .
Parliament unanimously supports this principle of individual financial responsibility .
This is how we can make the market economy more ecological .
That is why I urge the Swedish Presidency to include this principle in the common position ; if not , a conciliation procedure will become inevitable .
I should once again like to congratulate Mr Florenz .
If there were more Christian-Democrats like him , we would see black-green coalitions emerge in Europe .
I only have one point of criticism , namely brominated flame retardants .
The Commission , along with the majority in Parliament , only want to ban 2 of the 70 brominated flame retardants .
These two are disappearing from the market anyway , but all 70 should be banned .
They are toxic and non-biodegradable .
In human milk , the quantity of these hazardous substances is doubled every five years , and that has been the case for the past 25 years .
The incidence of these substances in people working in the recycling industry is 70 times higher .
There are safe alternatives , namely aluminium hydroxides and phosphate esters .
Japanese firms , such as Sony , have already decided to stop using brominated flame retardants .
Politicians now need to follow suit .
Mr President the two proposals we are now discussing are an important step in reducing the quantities of waste from electronic products .
Instead of household equipment and computer parts ending up being dumped , as often happens at present , we are laying the foundations for all EU Member States being able to collect them separately and recycle them .
The basic idea of the recycling proposal is that the polluter must pay .
It is not good enough that the cost of collecting and recycling products should not be a burden upon the consumer .
The cost must be a part of the product ' s overall cost and price .
It is therefore important that the collection and recycling cost should be an integral part of the product ' s price and not a separate , visible charge .
Only when the cost is integrated is the actual environmental cost integrated into the price .
It is also important that every company should have to pay the costs of its products .
Such a system does not prevent practical cooperation in connection with collection and recycling .
Individual financial responsibility on the part of companies is both fairer and more efficient than collective financial responsibility .
An individual system for new waste benefits those manufacturers that use the best materials and construct those products that are simplest to recycle .
This will favour more environmentally-friendly products and provide a major impetus for product development .
The rapporteur has made efforts to try at an early stage to get the various political groups to compromise on quite a few important areas .
That is something we really appreciate , and we also believe that , as the work continues , it puts Parliament in a stronger position in relation to the Council of Ministers .
We obviously support the objectives of an increase in both the proportion of collected products and the proportion of the collected products which it will be possible to recycle .
When it comes to the second proposal for a directive , concerning a restriction upon the use of hazardous substances in electronic equipment , we believe that the committee ' s proposals could have gone further .
That applies especially to the possibility of banning various flame retardants .
Recently , there have been quite a few alarming reports about the way in which these substances accumulate and about the dangerous effects on health to which they can give rise .
We also think that it needs to be possible right now for individual countries to make tougher demands upon this type of product .
The Commission has recently objected to the fact that the Swedish Government wanted to impose tougher environmental requirements regarding hazardous substances in connection with the purchase of 400 000 computers .
We think it is completely unacceptable that the Commission and the EU ' s purchasing regulations should at present , in this way , be preventing countries from imposing tougher environmental requirements and , by so doing , supporting product development in this area .
Mr President , at present , 90 % of electronic waste in the EU is being dumped or incinerated without pre-treatment .
This means that 36 tonnes of mercury , 16 tonnes of cadmium and countless dioxins and furans end up in the environment in an uncontrolled manner .
In addition , appliances which contain a lot of glass , such as television sets , produce a negative energy yield during incineration .
Moreover , hazardous substances evaporate or leak when electronic waste is dumped .
I therefore welcome the two European Directives that address these problems .
I am also pleased that ambitious percentage levels are being established for recycling .
However , in this connection , we should bear in mind that recycling is only more environmentally friendly if the waste is pre-treated .
Furthermore , the success of the Directive stands or falls with the extent to which electronic waste is collected .
Partly because the quantity of waste is ever increasing , we need to establish a percentage level here too as quickly as possible .
The return of electronic waste free of charge will be a good incentive .
The principle underlying producer responsibility is of key importance .
Indeed , it allows to some extent for re-use and recycling at the end of the life-cycle to be taken into consideration during the manufacture of electronic equipment .
Needless to say , I could not agree more with the rapporteur on the point that full re-use should remain possible .
However , the risk of electronic waste being dumped in countries outside the European Union under the pretext of re-use is not hypothetical .
That is why the Member States need to ensure that only usable electrical and electronic equipment which will actually be re-used is exported to countries outside the EU , as I have proposed in one of my amendments .
Another amendment concerns the exceptions deleted by the rapporteur from Annex 1 to the Directive restricting hazardous substances .
These exceptions need to be retained , since they not only concern the medical sector , but are also indispensable and irreplaceable for scientific research in the chemical and physics sectors .
Mr President , I should like to echo the congratulations already expressed by many of my fellow MEPs to Mr Florenz .
The Directive that is before us today is an important Directive .
Why ?
Because Europe is facing every larger waste streams of discarded electrical and electronic equipment .
That means , therefore , that a sound , environmentally-friendly solution is very much what is needed to recycle and process this waste .
I endorse the way in which Mr Florenz has combined all these interests and all these sectors in groups in his report .
Allow me to dwell on the Directive for a moment .
First of all , it is in the consumer ' s interest to be able to return electronic and electrical waste free of charge .
Manufacturers thus need to finance the collection from the collection point , as well as the processing , recovery and removal of the waste .
I back the opinion that manufacturers need to take care of this individually as much as possible .
Indeed , individual responsibility is also an incentive for manufacturers to design products which are better suited to recycling , and I also share the view that historical waste cannot be left for the individual manufacturer to deal with .
This was evident in the Netherlands too .
Historical waste must be financed collectively .
I support voluntary collection , processing and removal , with due consideration for the environment . This sends out the message to consumers , at the time when they buy new products , that the producers actually took their responsibilities seriously .
A collective system has been in place in the Netherlands since 1999 , with a visible contribution being made towards disposal , and it works very well .
I support the increase in collection from 4 to 6 kg , for if I were not to do so , it would mean that a great deal of electrical waste would end up on the scrap heap .
Finally , I hope that the amendments concerning lighting equipment can also be adopted .
Mr President , I too want to join the chorus of people offering congratulations but perhaps also extend the congratulations to our own shadow rapporteur , Mrs Van Brempt , who has done some truly excellent and demanding work .
I think we have arrived at quite a good conclusion , even though there are naturally certain points regarding which further requirements could be made .
What is most important , however , is that we establish producer responsibility , something I perhaps see as the biggest environmental gain from this work .
I also see it as a success for all the progressive and environmentally aware companies which are , in fact , already working in this way at present .
They are being given the opportunity to continue to develop their ecodesigns and to manufacture their products in ways that are more in accordance with environmental considerations than the ways used by many other companies .
Both Mr de Roo and Mr Sjöstedt have spoken about hazardous substances , but I nonetheless wanted to mention brominated flame retardants .
It is rather annoying that we have not succeeded in making further progress on that issue .
It is scientifically proven that these substances are dangerous , and there is scientific evidence of the health aspects .
Flame retardants and their residues can be found in mother ' s milk in places as far away as Greenland , among the Inuit , where the levels are more often than not much higher than those recommended by the WHO .
It is odd that we are so hesitant and so afraid of doing anything about the problem that we confine ourselves to dealing with just two flame retardants .
We know that the substances are hazardous .
We know that they affect children ' s concentration .
We also know that people can experience other types of disorder , such as weight loss , as a result of ingesting these substances and in spite of never having asked to have them in their bodies .
The directive on hazardous substances is based on Article 95 , and the directive on waste consisting wholly or partly of electrical or electronic products is based on Article 175 .
That is something I cannot understand .
When we discussed a similar directive on end-of-life vehicles , most people saw that directive as a model for future work on the subject , but memories are clearly quite short .
I think that this fits in extremely badly with what we are to be discussing this afternoon , that is to say sustainable development .
In this area , it is again the internal market which is setting the framework for what we are to achieve in the environmental sphere , and countries are punished for taking the lead .
I think that that is wrong .
Mr President , we have before us an important directive and a sound report .
If all Member States were to develop a system such as we are defining here , I think that would be a huge step forward .
Member States that have devised systems which are now working should be able to retain those systems , in my view .
I am pleased that that is possible .
I think it is important in the region that I come from , too .
I therefore consider that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has produced a sound compromise , thanks to the constructive obstinacy on the part of our rapporteur , as well as a number of other people .
I regret - indeed , not everyone can be 100 % satisfied with a compromise - that the visible removal contribution has to go .
We are asking consumers to behave in a responsible manner , and that is why they need to receive backing .
I have tabled an amendment concerning re-use , which I think is an excellent idea , except if there are new products which , on environmental balance , score more points .
I therefore hope that I can count on the support of this Chamber for this amendment .
In addition , recycling centres , which I also welcome with open arms , and which receive subsidies for their work - with good reason - should not only be allowed to cherry-pick , but should also ensure that recycling establishments do not only get the dregs .
I assume that I can count on the support of this Chamber for that too .
Mr President , I would like to join all those who have thanked the rapporteur here .
He could actually be called Mr Producer Responsibility , as this was the second historical directive , the second historical achievement , in which the producer ' s responsibility will be significantly incorporated in the European Union ' s environment and product legislation .
In this way we are also moving towards a new phase in environmental policy , which is one of already taking account of the demands of the environment at the product design stage .
I have found that , as a result of this directive , large companies are now discussing how , for example , GSM telephones could be lighter - although they are certainly light already - how they could be easier to dismantle , and how all the harmful substances could be removed and then responsibly sent off as treatable waste .
I would like to return to these harmful , hazardous substances .
Our group would have liked to see rather more determined action to try to get rid of especially hazardous chemical substances .
I will mention one example . Much has been said about product safety , which is a very important issue , and fire safety particularly so .
There has been discussion on whether halogenated flame retardants should be banned in future .
In our opinion , it is quite obvious that they are toxic , as they have , for example , led to a situation where mother ' s milk contains double the amount of these halogenated chromium compounds every five years .
There are alternatives to them , and we would like to see them banned more quickly and companies in this way being encouraged to start using harmless alternatives without , however , compromises being made with regard to product safety .
Mr President , I too would like to heartily congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Florenz .
We have here a well-balanced , excellent report on a subject which , together with the directive on scrap cars and vans drafted earlier by Mr Florenz , will from now on serve as a model for other similar legislation .
For that reason , the decisions we now have to take are particularly important .
I am particularly pleased that the committee adopted my amendments , which clarify the meaning of producer responsibility .
This will have an immense impact on the quantity and quality of electrical and electronic waste being generated , greater than any other possible decision Parliament could make with regard to scrap and waste .
It will create incentives for more ecologically friendly design and innovations before products have even come onto the market , and will therefore lessen the environmental burden of products for their entire life cycle .
This is an enormous change with regard to earlier ways of thinking , in which the focus was on the repair and prevention of environmental damage only at the stage of a product ' s life when it was in fact merely waste .
In exactly the same way , we should examine Annex II on requirements for the treatment of waste .
If the directive requires printed circuit boards to always be removed , for example , it will not create incentives for the development of materials used in printed circuit boards . Under the directive , they will have to be removed in any case .
Instead , by mentioning a substance that is contained in a component that has to be removed , we will create incentives for developing components that do not have these hazardous substances in them .
Only this sort of approach will act as any real incentive in eco-design .
This is the intention behind Amendment No 77 .
In a similar manner , we must create incentives for the development of alternative waste treatment methods , so that the environmental burden resulting from them is as light as possible .
The amendment I tabled with this in mind had already been adopted in the Annex by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , but the corresponding amendment to the Article is contained in Amendment No 76 submitted for the plenary sitting .
Mr President , the European Union is making legislation that clearly shows the rest of the world that the conflict between concern for the environment and economic matters is not unavoidable but can be settled through considered legislation .
Only this can provide a real chance for sustainable development , in which the EU can be a global pioneer .
Mr President , I would also like to join the ranks of those who are saying thank you to Mr Florenz and the other speakers .
I think they have done a really good piece of work .
As regards the ban on hazardous substances , I am pleased that it is now being proposed that we bring forward this ban .
I personally would have liked to see us have all flame retardants included from the start , but I think this is an issue that we must try to continue working on .
With regard to dealing with waste , I think there are three crucial points .
The first is that we must have the waste arising in these contexts separated from other unsorted waste as soon as possible .
This requires a strategy plan in the individual countries , and it also very much requires us to have effective labelling so that we can identify the products in question .
The second central point is naturally producer responsibility , and I can only agree with what many of the speakers have said concerning this point .
It is important that we find a solution to this issue in relation to the entire life cycle of the product and that we also have provisions adopted concerning the financing of producer responsibility .
As far as possible , the financing should take place on an individual basis , so that it can be used in the development of cleaner technology as a competitive parameter .
I believe this may become one of the most important points of all .
I would like to end by asking the Commissioner a question .
I come , of course , from a country that has already implemented somewhat more restrictive rules in relation to hazardous substances .
Since we are talking here about an internal market directive on hazardous substances , I would like to ask whether a country such as Denmark will be forced to rescind its more restrictive rules until the restrictive rules also enter into force in 2008 or 2006 , depending on the year finally decided on for this phasing out of hazardous substances .
It will naturally be very unfortunate for us if we are forced to return to poorer rules for a period , only to have the bans reintroduced at a later point in time .
Mr President , allow me to begin by thanking Karl-Heinz Florenz .
The fact is that he has studied , analysed and discussed no fewer than 334 densely printed pages - 70 pages on hazardous substances and 264 pages on end-of-life equipment .
This is clearly a subject of great complexity , but it is also a very important one , because it affects all the people of the European Union .
Our concern is to press ahead with waste separation and to ensure that electrical and electronic equipment is disposed of separately from household waste .
This is a very important issue .
We know that we currently have about two billion such items in Europe and that some 210 million of them are disposed of every year .
This , when all is said and done , represents six million tonnes and generates costs of approximately EUR 40 billion .
When such an amount is involved , we are duty-bound to consider who should meet the cost and in particular how that cost can be most efficiently and effectively controlled in accordance with market principles ; we must ensure that the chosen strategy is the cheapest one for taxpayers and consumers and the best one for the environment .
We know that there is a huge volume of historical waste .
Sixty-six per cent of all these electrical appliances and items of electronic hardware are more than ten years old , while about half of them come from households .
This is why compulsory collection targets are so very important .
It is also the reason why we have been so firmly committed to the six-kilogram target .
We want recycling to be conducted in a truly systematic manner and on a scale which ultimately makes sound economic and budgetary sense .
What is important to me about bans on particular substances is that we must only replace such substances with demonstrably better , sustainable and , most importantly , scientifically tested alternatives .
This is an area in which the Commission must act , on the one hand to prevent damage and on the other hand to choose the best option in ecological terms .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Florenz and our shadow rapporteur , Mrs Van Brempt .
In this debate , I would like to outline three aspects which I believe to be of the utmost importance , namely prevention , the role of the Member States and fire safety .
The aim of the directive is to prevent environmental problems .
It seeks to promote eco-design .
Producer responsibility is the key word in this connection .
Producers can do a great deal , such as providing sustainable products and ensuring that appliances can easily be repaired , for example within the space of half an hour .
They could use special colours in the case of hazardous components , so that these stand out upon disposal at all times .
Also , in order to make the consumer more aware of the waste issue , I would call for the introduction of a histogram that illustrates the extent to which waste can be recycled .
There has been a great deal of discussion about the role of the Member States .
This proposal outlines the salient points concerning the collection of discarded appliances and the funding of recycling .
With a view to subsidiarity , Europe should not want to lay down , to the last detail , how the basic principles should be transposed .
It is a different matter in the case of product standards and the use of hazardous substances .
Here , it is important for us to retain the internal market .
In my view , it would be unacceptable if we were to encourage all Member States to go ahead and set their own standards .
The internal market forms an important basis of European cooperation .
It is our task to ensure that products traded on the internal market all meet the highest standards in terms of the environment and safety .
Finally , I should like to spend a moment on an important issue , namely that of fire safety .
It is our duty to ensure that public safety is guaranteed .
Even if this involves hazardous substances , unfortunately .
However , we need to reduce the harmful environmental effects of flame retardants to a minimum .
If clean alternatives are available , we should use them .
From an environmental point of view , I therefore call for a ban on a few brominated flame retardants .
We must pull out all the stops , where possible , to develop and use environmentally-friendly alternatives .
Mr President , may I also add my thanks to Karl-Heinz Florenz , who has presented a very good report .
What we are working towards is the environmentally-friendly disposal of old electrical appliances and , if possible , material recycling .
Parliament attaches the utmost importance to the polluter-pays principle , which comes across very clearly in this report .
I do believe , however - and here too , the Florenz report strikes the right tone - that great care must always be taken to establish precisely how these principles can be applied in each specific sector of the economy .
Even the collection of appliances or small components requires the use of energy and can in itself be harmful to the environment .
It is therefore important that we provide for derogations in the case of components which contain no hazardous substances , such as light bulbs , that we always look at the whole ecological balance and then consider whether it is appropriate to collect these things separately and use them for recycling or whether such action is perhaps not justified on environmental grounds .
For this reason I believe that Amendment No 65 takes us in the right direction .
We must apply the polluter-pays principle correctly .
I see a problem in this respect at one or two points because , in the case of historical waste in particular , we are not talking about the polluter-pays principle when we say that all those who are operating in the market at the present time have to foot the bill for those who were perhaps manufacturing some product twenty years ago .
Great care must be taken here , since not every segment of this market is transparent .
We became aware of this in the committee .
To illustrate the problem , let me mention that I devoted myself particularly to household light fittings , since large numbers of them are produced in my constituency .
The manufacturers say , with some justification , that it is surely not consistent with the polluter-pays principle to expect present-day manufacturers to pay for the recovery of a chandelier which has been hanging in someone ' s lounge and which was produced twenty years ago by some manufacturer or other who is no longer in business .
It is not the polluter who has to pay - quite the reverse .
If consideration is also given to the fact that such products include many grey-market imports from companies which do not adhere to the high European environmental standards - companies in China , for example - it becomes clear that the polluter-pays principle would be turned on its head if we penalised companies for conducting their business properly and being properly registered .
For these reasons I ask you to support Amendments Nos 65 and 88 .
Mr President , Commissioner , besides the subjects that have been amply discussed , I believe we should take a closer look at two , perhaps three , of the other points that Karl-Heinz Florenz has raised .
Firstly , I believe that the directive is not solely intended to ensure that products are designed in such a way that they can be easily recycled and to introduce recycling quotas .
Greater attention should also be paid to two other factors , namely consumers and consumer responsibility , because , when it comes to electronics and electronic waste , consumers have not yet developed the habit of using authorised recycling centres to dispose of their old equipment .
Things are somewhat different with cars .
Cars are taken to the scrap-yard .
This , however , does not necessarily happen to electric toothbrushes or shavers .
I believe we must step up our efforts in this domain .
I consider it only right that the Member States should clearly emphasise the consumer ' s responsibility for collecting these waste products separately and even spell out the potential penalties for non-compliance .
A second aspect to be considered is that we are doing something entirely new here .
This legislation will create waste and material streams that have never existed before .
We therefore do not know at all how things will be recycled , which material streams will be created and what will happen to them .
Amendment No 56 , admittedly , is only a short motion , but it serves to promote a system of monitoring which will not only indicate the targets that the Member States have set - what has to be achieved - but will also provide precise information on what is actually happening with regard to the targets and on the consequences of our proposed legislation in the real material world .
We should therefore observe developments closely and take stock after a certain time in order to determine whether the material streams that have developed really do match our objectives .
Mr President , the WEEE directive increases producer responsibility for current and historic domestic waste , electrical and electronic equipment from mobile phones , toasters and PCs to washing machines .
This waste is growing at up to 5 % per year due to technological innovation and market expansion and contains a percentage of dangerous substances that are currently finding their way into municipal landfills , obviously posing clear environmental hazards .
Hence , the need for the second proposed directive to reduce the risk of impact on human health and the environment of the production , use , treatment and disposal of WEEE .
The directives deal with producer responsibility , separate collection , better treatment , reuse , recycling , costs , targets , labelling , alternatives to dangerous substances such as lead , mercury , PBB , etc . , while allowing some exceptions .
But let us be sure , with the proper application of the much-toted precautionary principle , that the alternatives are in fact safer from a toxicity and hazard point of view , in every respect including the ability to flame retard .
Have we an acceptable substitute for lead solder , for example ?
While I endorse both directives , I have tabled an amendment to Article 15 ( 4 ) of the WEEE directive inserting a new subparagraph based on a similar clause in Article 52 of the relatively recent EC Directive 99 / 31 on the landfill of waste .
I consider this to be as good a basis as any for taking account of the genuine and practical difficulties of certain Member States in meeting the ambitious collection and recovery targets proposed in Articles 44 and 62 respectively of the WEEE directive .
Important proposals such as these have to take into balanced account the significant variations in recycling infrastructure , economies of scale , demographics and geographical circumstances in certain Member States .
It is unrealistic and unfair to require Member States with acknowledged deficiencies in recycling infrastructure and reprocessing capacity - for whatever reason - and which lack reliable data on WEEE arisings to achieve the same ambitious targets within specified short time frames as other Member States which already have all or most of the requisite infrastructure in place .
It should be borne in mind that the proposed targets are based on the state-of-the-art recycling pilot study conducted in Eindhoven in the Netherlands , which has the requisite infrastructure and population density .
Ireland , Greece , Portugal , not to mention the accession countries , will have definite problems with the current proposals unless amended .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Florenz for his work in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the excellent cooperation he has established between all the groups and with the Commission .
We are tackling the specific problem of electrical and electronic waste for the following reasons . We have heard them before , but I repeat that this is the fastest growing part of the waste stream - indeed , it is growing three times faster than other waste streams .
Each of us produces on average about 14 kgs per year of such waste .
By the year 2010 , when this directive will be fully operational , electrical and electronic waste will account for over 8 % of the entire municipal waste stream .
Ninety per cent of this electrical and electronic waste is currently landfilled or incinerated with no pre-treatment .
This means wasted resources , both in terms of the costs of disposal and the poor use of natural resources .
Electrical and electronic equipment is a major source of certain hazardous substances in the waste stream .
Just one example illustrates this : 40 % of the lead in landfills and 50 % of the lead in incineration comes from this type of equipment .
Lastly , since Member States are already acting in this area , there is a strong case for Community coordination .
The main aim of the proposals for directives is to prevent electrical and electronic equipment from being landfilled or incinerated .
To achieve this objective , the directive sets out a range of requirements .
Member States are required to set up separate collection schemes from households ; consumers have the right to dispose of their waste free of charge and producers are responsible for taking the waste from central collection points and ensuring that it is properly treated through recovery and re-use .
In addition , the directive requires the substitution of certain hazardous substances , such as lead and mercury , by 2008 .
Let me answer some of your questions .
I shall begin with the question by Mr Davies .
I understood him to mean that if these light bulbs were exempted , it would mean that they would be slightly cheaper .
However , there is really no contradiction in collecting these light bulbs .
It is very important to include them in this kind of system .
It will still be cheaper to produce an environmentally-friendly light bulb .
We have not set up specific recycling targets for light bulbs , only for fluorescent lamps .
I think the producers of these lamps would like to be included in this scheme .
We are all concerned about brominated flame retardants .
The Commission considers that there is sufficient evidence to ban the use of two categories of brominated flame retardants , PBB and PBDE - that is against the background of the risk assessments being carried out on them .
We have enough evidence to be able to ban them .
We agree that a mechanism to ban new substances should be set up .
It is of course important , and in line with the Chemicals Strategy , that we allow such a development and add on new substances .
We admit that today we do not have enough risk assessments and evidence to make a complete list of all the existing flame retardants , including the risks of taking them out of some substances where they prevent fire , etc .
The review should cover all potential hazardous substances .
I turn to Mr Lund 's question on Denmark .
Remember that the aim of these directives is to establish a high common level of protection .
These products are marketed throughout the European Union , and that is why it is necessary to have a high level of protection in the whole of the EU .
At the same time we know that Sweden , Denmark and other countries which have effective legislation have not been forced to abandon their legislation .
This is what Sweden and Denmark feared , but it did not happen .
It has to be looked at on a case-by-case basis .
This will also have to be done for these substances .
We want to establish a high level of protection for the whole of the European Union .
Several Members have mentioned the ' visible fee ' .
The Commission thinks that this amendment is unnecessary .
A ' visible fee ' is possible as long as it does not create trade distortions .
Nowhere is it said that producers cannot inform consumers of the costs of waste management .
I think these were the most important questions raised .
Now we are confronted with a total number of 136 amendments : 100 on the proposal on electronic waste and 36 on the proposal on hazardous substances .
On the first proposal , overall , the Commission can accept 36 amendments in full , 11 in part and 22 in principle .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 10 , 15 , 16 , 18 to 25 , 27 to 29 , 36 , 39 , 42 , 43 , 45 , 47 to 50 , 51 , 52 , 54 , 56 , 59 to 61 , 64 , 66 to 68 .
Twenty-two amendments can be accepted in principle : 2 , 8 , 9 , 30 , 32 , 38 , 41 , 44 , 53 , 55 , 57 , 58 , 62 , 63 , 75 , 77 , 83 to 86 , 95 and 100 .
In particular , as regards Amendments Nos 9 and 35 , the Commission can accept that Member States take measures with a view to achieving a separate collection rate of 6 kg per person per year .
Concerning Amendment No 44 , it is important to leave freedom to Member States on how to organise the collection , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle .
Amendment No 52 may give rise to practical difficulties , but can also be accepted in principle .
Eleven amendments can be accepted in part : No 6 ( second part , in principle ) , No 11 ( second part , except the terms in brackets ) , No 13 ( the text will have to be shortened and simplified ) , No 17 ( second and third parts , in principle ) , No 26 ( except the term ' consumables ' ) , No 35 ( first paragraph , second paragraph in principle , fourth paragraph , seventh paragraph in principle , eighth paragraph , ninth paragraph in principle ) , No 37 ( except paragraph 5 ) , No 46 ( second and third parts , in principle ) , No 70 ( except the part referring to printed circuit boards ; the entry on capacitors can be accepted in principle ) Nos 71 and 80 ( the reference to Regulation 2037 / 2000 can be accepted ) .
On the second proposal , overall the Commission can accept five amendments in full , two in part and twelve in principle .
The amendments acceptable in full are Nos 1 , 9 , 12 , 13 and 17 .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 10 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 26 and 35 in principle .
As regards Amendments Nos 4 and 10 , the Commission agrees that the scope of the directive on restrictions on substances may be broadened on the basis of a proposal from the Commission .
However , this should be done in accordance with certain principles , not least those set out in the Chemicals Strategy .
The Commission can accept to advance the date of phase-out from 2008 to 2006 .
Amendment No 11 can be accepted in the part which refers to consumer safety and Amendment No 23 ( inclusion of category 10 in the scope ) .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Wallström .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Priority substances in water policy
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0135 / 2001 ) by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal and the amended proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing the list of priority substances in the field of water policy . [ COM ( 2000 ) 47 - COM ( 2001 ) 17 - C5 ­ 0079 / 2001 - C5 ­ 0021 / 2000 - 2000 / 0035 ( COD ) ] .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal is based on the common position adopted by the Council for a water framework directive .
The common position made no provision either for identification of ' priority hazardous substances ' or for the gradual elimination of pollution of waters by hazardous substances .
We must emphasise once again that the European Parliament deserves credit for ensuring that the OSPAR strategy will be integrated into the water framework directive .
Parliament insisted on integration being treated as a key issue in the conciliation procedure .
The aim is to eliminate water pollution gradually , by continuously reducing discharges , emissions , leakage and spillage of priority hazardous substances with the target of complete elimination within 20 years .
Under the water directive , the criteria for the identification of such substances focus firstly on their inherent characteristics and secondly on the definitions contained in the existing international , UN , OSPAR and other lists .
Of the 32 substances to which the priority classification has been assigned , the proposal lists eleven as priority hazardous substances , a further eleven as priority substances under review and the remaining ten as regular priority substances .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy proposes that the Commission undertake the categorisation of the eleven substances on the ' under review ' list in the course of the coming year .
In this way the Environment Committee seeks to ensure that the Commission does not defer its decision as to whether these eleven substances are priority hazardous substances or only priority substances until the year 2004 , when , under Article 16 of the water framework directive , the lists of priority substances are due for revision .
Through this proposal , the Environment Committee also wants to ensure that Article 16 is actually applied and that the decision on the categorisation of the substances on the ' under review ' list is not shelved in deference to industrial or other interests .
I believe it is crucially important that we the European Parliament should exert due pressure on the Commission .
One thing we must always bear in mind is that this report only serves to pave the way for the necessary measures and that the framework directive lays down a 20-year time frame for the achievement of the environmental targets in the realm of water protection .
The Environment Committee also wants to see changes in the COMMPS procedure .
This should be continually developed and improved .
In future it should no longer be confined to particular substances .
For example , it has not hitherto covered those substances for which no data are available at Community level from national monitoring programmes .
This applies to 60 % of the pesticides that are available today .
Parliament wishes to rectify these serious deficiencies as well as other shortcomings of the present COMMPS procedure , so as to ensure that all substances will be covered in the future .
Many of the current deficiencies are due to the fact that our policymakers have no data on certain chemicals .
If we wish to protect our waters effectively against hazardous chemicals , we also need a change of policy on the acquisition of data regarding chemical substances .
The Commission , in fact , has already set this in motion .
So you will see that we are striving to reach a solution which the House as well as the Council and Commission will support .
The central issue in this discussion will be the results of the categorisation of the substances on the ' under review ' list .
The Committee wishes this categorisation to be effected as soon as possible , as I have already stated .
The Commission and the Council see a feasibility problem .
That is why I , as rapporteur , have tabled Amendment No 27 , in a further attempt to provide the basis for a solution .
The proposal is that the measures should not be jeopardised by this ' under review ' list that the Commission is introducing .
This , I believe , is our common objective .
This proposal must not be pushed towards the rear of the catalogue of implementable measures , a move which would prevent us from achieving the environmental aims we have to achieve in order to protect our water resources .
With regard to the talks that have taken place between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , I hope we have now found a sound compromise , which will enable us to conclude this matter at first reading .
In other words , it is now up to the Council and the Commission to decide whether they will abide by the outcome of the parliamentary vote , thereby enabling us to start as quickly as possible to introduce real measures for the protection of water resources .
Mr President , the members of the Committee on Agriculture recognise the great importance that we attach to the control of substances which are used in farming to protect plants and encourage growth , particularly the effects that these have on our water supplies .
We are , however , disappointed that the Committee on the Environment did not accept our amendments that substances in natural nutrients used in agriculture should not be classified either as priority or hazardous priority substances .
The Committee on the Environment also did not accept our Amendment No 3 which was to review the procedure for priority hazardous substances .
The plant protection products Directive 91 / 414 already has an established procedure to evaluate those substances and decide whether or not they should be used in the Community .
I would submit that the decisions under that Directive ought to be completed under its agreed timetable before an informed decision can be taken under these new proposals .
There is no valid reason , given that we are looking at a potential phase-out period of twenty years , for trying to shorten the timetable , and this was the substance of the Committee on Agriculture 's proposal .
We wanted to allow sufficient time to have a thorough investigation and make sure there was an avoidance of errors .
The original Commission proposal was barely in line .
Amendment No 20 by the committee and Amendment No 27 by Mrs Breyer run counter to proper investigation and should be opposed .
Mrs Breyer ought to have mentioned when she was talking about Amendment No 27 that she was speaking about an amendment tabled by herself on behalf of her group and not on behalf of the Committee on the Environment .
Mr President , I would like to focus on four amendments made to the original proposal submitted by the European Parliament , which had the unanimous support of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The first of these amendments , Amendment No 3 , relates to one of the major innovations in the Commission ' s proposal , namely the management of European water resources using river basins and watercourses that irrigate the European Union ' s territory .
On this point , Parliament insists that the Commission take into account the fact that many watercourses and even rivers , such as the Tagus in southern Europe , the Rhine , for instance , in central Europe or the Oder , for example , in northern Europe , are border rivers which are the responsibility of one or more Member States but also of riparian States which are not Member States and , in particular , candidate countries .
Parliament believes that it is crucial that these non-Member riparian States should be involved in the management process now rather than waiting until they join the EU , which is very likely but will inevitably not happen for some time .
A second amendment , Amendment No 8 , calls upon the Commission to promote the synchronisation of research and of the conclusions drawn within the framework of the two major mechanisms for combating water pollution that have already been implemented .
The first mechanism is the OSPAR Convention , which focuses on maritime waters but also covers a considerable area of internal waters .
The second mechanism , known as the COMMPS procedure , focuses , on the other hand , on internal waters but also covers a substantial area of maritime waters .
In these circumstances , it is easy to understand that the situation could well become chaotic if the Commission does not provide the requested synchronisation .
Lastly , the third amendment , Amendment No 11 , expresses the desire that the Commission , whilst following the COMMPS procedure as a general rule , should not exclude the possibility of the Commission using methods of assessing the harmfulness of certain substances which have already been developed or used in other anti-pollution measures .
For instance , measures which have already proven to be effective in systems developed for combating air pollution must be used or adapted for combating water pollution .
I would like to make a final comment , which is to stress the extraordinarily far-reaching importance of the texts submitted for vote by Parliament .
One of the reasons why Europe has shown exemplary development across the board , one of the reasons for this balanced development and for the high quality farming industry which has always accompanied Europe ' s economic development is precisely the fact that Europe has always had inexhaustible - in that they are infinitely renewable - resources of the precious liquid which keeps us alive .
Both the quality and the quantity of water resources are now at risk from senseless and rapidly increasing amounts of pollution , which has been virtually uncontrollable over the last few centuries .
All Member States and all regions must take action in this area .
Mr President , as a result of our work today , the Water Framework Directive , which entered into force in December 2000 , will be fleshed out with the listing of 32 specific substances in Annex X. The Group of the European Peoples ' Party is in agreement with the proposal from the Commission .
All the amendments supported by our group help to bring the text of the annex into line with that of the Water Framework Directive .
The rapid adoption of this list is a matter of priority for our group , because only then will the Commission be able to get down to its main task of formulating proposals for the treatment of every single one of these 32 substances .
This can then mean banning substances and phasing them out or permitting their continued use , subject to certain conditions .
The aim , however , is always the same , namely either not to let these substances enter water at all in future or only to let them enter water in weak concentrations .
The concept of water in the context of the directive covers all water - groundwater , surface water , rivers and lakes , right down to the smallest stream and even perhaps the smallest puddle , and , of course , the sea .
It goes without saying that this wide range of aquatic environments will require widely differing sets of rules .
After all , we are not starting from scratch here in Europe , because many of these 32 substances are already covered by the Directive on plant-protection products , the Biocides Directive and the Directive on existing substances .
Moreover , when the entire body of EU legislation on chemical substances is realigned , we shall be compelled to subject all these substances to thorough scrutiny once again .
For this reason we should take great care to ensure that there is no duplication of effort , and hence unnecessary expense .
We can spend the money more fruitfully elsewhere for the benefit of the environment .
Our aim here is to determine the impact of these substances on our water resources .
We have learned that the Swedish Presidency is keen to have this matter concluded swiftly .
We intend to support its pursuit of that goal .
Our group will not stand in its way .
Anyone who is seriously committed to the protection of our European waters should adopt the same position .
Mrs Breyer has already stressed a point that I should like to re-emphasise , namely that Parliament has achieved a resounding success in the creation of the Water Framework Directive and that its fruits are already being harvested today .
After all , its classification of eleven substances out of the 32 as priority hazardous substances has ensured that their discharge into water resources will be stopped within the foreseeable future .
But I also wish to thank the Commission for its painstaking work and for the comprehensive information which it has provided and which has been of great assistance to me in my role as shadow rapporteur .
My thanks are also due to our rapporteur , Mrs Breyer , for all her efforts .
Mr President , I must first of all welcome this report .
It has taken some time to get it to the plenary session .
Mrs Breyer has been persistent , though , and she has worked very hard on it .
So I think we can now give it our general support and endorse entirely the principles of what is being proposed here today .
This priority list of thirty-two proposed substances , ranked according to their known dangerous properties , is the right way to start trying to deal with the problem of water pollution .
However , we also need to consider the possibility of adding to this list or simply changing it using the COMMPS procedure or using other additional information we might obtain in the coming years .
We do have to consider this list very carefully before action , but that is not an excuse for no action or slow action .
It is still bizarre to me that nickel is included on this list and that our approach to families of chemicals has unfairly targeted fluoranthene alongside the other PAHs .
So , clearly further work is needed on this initial list .
The timetable for action is not really ambitious .
2020 ?
I really think that perhaps we can go a little faster than that .
The idea of getting close to zero emissions of these substances is a fairly vague objective and I think some of the European Parliament 's amendments today help to clarify this issue .
But I do not doubt for one minute that this is the way ahead , that these are the steps we have got to take to protect an increasingly important resource , the quality of which is vital to future generations .
This is a blessing they do not have in other parts of the world .
In Europe we should count our blessings and care for our blessings ; our water resources are one of those very important blessings .
Mr President , as we look at the world 's environmental problems , some of them , such as the loss of habitats and biodiversity , seem to leave us powerless of achieving any solution .
But it is not all gloom and doom , and within Europe , we are capable of banning the use of chemicals which are toxic , persistent and bio-accumulative and using science to develop safer alternatives , and this directive is good news for that reason .
The Water Framework Directive was my first experience of the dynamics of the conciliation process between Parliament and the Council with the assistance of the Commission , and I think that Parliament can claim credit for introducing the category of priority hazardous substances which this Directive now puts into practice , but it is indeed a first step on a long road .
I know the Commissioner has herself many times referred to the sheer number of chemicals still being developed and being put on the market , and suspicion is attached to many substances , not identified as yet , and the process of identification and elimination needs to progress rapidly .
Can I refer in concluding to the institutional relationship ?
The Presidency has indicated to group spokesmen that it would like to fast-track this process and see a rapid resolution , and I think that is welcomed by all parties .
We would obviously like to see action sooner rather than later , but hastily arranged meetings with no time for proper discussion and coordination between parties are not the best way of making laws or securing agreement so I hope we succeed and are able to achieve a vote today which the Council can endorse within a matter of weeks rather than years ; but if we do , I suspect that it will be more a matter of luck than design , and I hope we can bear this in mind if we are able to work together with the other institutions of the European Union and achieve progress more effectively and rapidly in future years .
Mr President , in an opinion by the Council ' s Legal Service on the Water Framework Directive , the reduction of emissions down to nearly zero is not deemed to be legally binding .
If we take the background emissions into account , this will indeed be impossible .
In addition , in the case of natural gas extraction , for example , a small amount of mercury always ends up in the water .
Therefore , if mercury is earmarked as a priority hazardous substance , it will be impossible to extract any natural gas in future .
It appears preferable to me to have a list of hazardous priority substances , the emission levels of which are reduced by 95 % to 99 % , than to have just one substance whose emission levels are reduced by 100 % .
If the objective of reducing emission levels by 100 % is upheld , it will in fact be impossible to identify priority hazardous substances .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I have already criticised the method used for drafting a list of priority substances in water .
The advantage of this method is speed , but this is counteracted by the fact that a great deal of information was missing at the assessment stage .
Particularly with regard to metals , the outcome of the method applied can be called into question .
Nickel is on the list because , in January 1990 , it was marked as carcinogenic if it is inhaled in powder form .
However , this was never proven with regard to nickel in water .
It would be preferable to await the outcome of an extensive study into nickel in water , currently being carried out in Denmark .
Furthermore , there are more indications that other metals should be placed on the list of priority substances , such as copper and arsenic .
I appreciate how difficult it is to assess metals effectively , since the conditions which affect metals to a large extent , such as hardness and acidity , can vary greatly in the European Union .
Maybe we should therefore opt for a regional , rather than a European , approach as far as metals are concerned .
Mr President , it is my strong belief - and it has already been expressed by a number of fellow MEPs - that the Water Framework Directive is one of the most crucial pieces of environmental legislation which Parliament has adopted in the last few years .
However , in order to meet the objective of sound water quality , the Framework Directive is not sufficient , and there is , therefore , a Commission proposal before us to draft a list of priority substances .
Allow me to begin by saying that I welcome the Commission proposal and Mrs Breyer ' s report with open arms .
The list will be a good , first step on the road to the excellent quality of our water .
I therefore share Mrs Breyer ' s view that , if we want to live up to the obligation under the Directive , we may not , or cannot , make concessions on socio-economic grounds .
Neither can we , or should we , allow ourselves to be guided by the fact that certain hazardous substances naturally occur in European water .
I should like to make some observations with regard to three substances .
I do so as a Dutch person , someone who also wants to be mindful of the fact that our surface water , from the Maas , for example , has to be turned into drinking water at the same time .
There are three substances which I would highlight and would like to see included amongst the priority substances to be assessed : namely dyron , isoprothyron and symosyne .
In fact , a recent study of European drinking water and water treatment plants has shown that , due to pollution of drinking water sources by pesticides , the concentration levels of these substances in our water are far too high in Europe , and that puts enormous pressure on the supply of drinking water .
In my country , it is often the case that wells or springs , or the storage facility in the Biesbosch , have to be closed down .
I hope that the Commission is willing to adopt the amendments that we have tabled in this respect , and I also make an urgent appeal to the Council to do the same .
Mr President , Commissioner , when the Commission tabled this proposal , I thought this must mean the implementation of Article 16 of the Water Framework Directive , the definition of priority hazardous substances .
Let us push this through as quickly as possible , I thought , so that it can be implemented without delay .
However , when I examined the proposal more closely , I discovered that there was a third category . Alongside priority hazardous substances and regular hazardous substances , we also have the ' three-star ' category .
The Commission evidently has reason to believe that these may be priority hazardous substances but is not sure whether they should be classified as such at this stage .
The introduction of a ' three-star ' category , Commissioner , is surely inconsistent with the Water Framework Directive .
I therefore believe that we must press for the removal of this ' three-star ' category as soon as possible .
Either they are priority hazardous substances and must be phased out or they are not .
We cannot accept this intermediate category .
It covers substances for which there are real indications of serious risk , as in the cases of lead , lead compounds and some herbicides and pesticides .
The Commission clearly has certain grounds for assuming , Commissioner , that these may belong to the category of priority hazardous substances .
For that reason , the Commission must eliminate this ' three-star ' category as soon as possible .
It is my view that this must be done before the normal review date .
Now whether this means that it must be eliminated by 1 July 2002 , as specified in the decision we adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , or whether the Commission must table a draft containing supplementary provisions as soon as possible is a question that may be left open for the moment .
The crux of the matter is that the ' three-star ' category must disappear before the review .
For this reason , may I ask the Commissioner directly whether she can guarantee that the Commission will deliver a final decision on the ' three-star ' category as soon as possible , in other words during its present term of office , so that the Council and Parliament can affix their legislative seal of approval ?
Mr President , the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision which we are debating must be understood within the broader framework of the Directive on water , since its immediate objective is to limit and reduce the pollution of the European aquatic ecosystem , by classifying 32 substances on the list of priority substances , of which only 11 are included in the legal category of hazardous priority substances .
In my opinion , the list of hazardous priority substances appearing in the annex of the Commission ' s proposal should not be altered , and it is necessary to keep it as the Commission drew it up .
In order to achieve a consensus with regard to classification , cooperation between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council is , of course , essential .
In my opinion , only on the basis of the work carried out by the Commission in this field will we be able to create a system of classification which applies clear and comprehensible criteria for the identification of substances .
We are all agreed on the desire to eradicate water pollution as soon as possible and to this end we must implement a double strategy : in the international field , the ratification of international commitments , especially the OSPAR and COMMPS conventions , although we do not consider it appropriate to expressly mention these agreements in the text of the proposal ; at the level of the Member States , to guarantee that the Commission be provided with the necessary means for it to have exact knowledge of the situation of our water masses , so that it can monitor , in a detailed and constant way , the comparable situation between Member States in terms of the development of the quality of our waters .
Furthermore , it is important to encourage the future Member States of the Union to combat pollution by taking on board the European objectives , especially those countries which share river basins with the European Union .
Finally , I would like to highlight the exceptional circumstances of certain substances , such as Cadmium and Mercury , whose complete eradication is not possible at the moment , as indicated in Amendment No 2 of the report of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Mr President , we have finite resources to expend on environmental improvement , even in the developed West .
Money must be targeted where it will have the most beneficial environmental impact .
Therefore I welcome this attempt to prioritise substances .
Testing techniques are becoming more sensitive .
Minuscule levels of contamination can be detected .
It is therefore unrealistic to talk about elimination or cessation or even ' close to zero ' .
What does ' close to zero ' mean , one , two , who knows ?
Threshold levels must be set with regard to human health , not using abstract concepts .
Secondly , the United Kingdom has a specific problem regarding the categorisation of fluoranthene , which is one of the family of polyaromatic hydrocarbons in the top category .
We have one hundred thousand kilometres of cast-iron water-pipes lined with coal-tar , which contains some fluoranthene .
No-one is suggesting that the levels present are a risk to health , but these pipes will have to be re-lined unless fluoranthene can be moved into the ' under review ' part of the list , along with the other PAHs like naphthalene and anthrocene all of which , incidentally , the COMMPS procedure has found to be less toxic than fluoranthene .
It would be a waste of resources to have to replace or reline all these water-pipes on the basis of this priority list when the resources could be better deployed in areas of real concern .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the field of water policy , the final agreement of June 2000 lays down that the Commission should identify , within the class of hazardous substances , certain priority hazardous substances , whose emission , dumping or loss must cease or be gradually reduced within a time limit of 20 years .
The European Commission has amended its proposal so that , by means of a group of experts , the priority hazardous substances should firstly be identified , and secondly a revision clause should introduced which would apply to some of them and , thirdly , the terminology and final text should be adapted .
Of the 32 priority substances identified , 11 are proposed as priority hazardous substances , 11 more as priority substances under investigation - all of this within 4 years of the entry into force of the framework directive .
There is no data on the toxicity , persistence or bioaccumulation of the remaining 10 substances .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , whose three amendments should be supported , points out that natural nutrients should not be classed as priority hazardous substances and , on the issue of plant protection products , there is already an established procedure : Directive 91 / 414 , which should be respected , as well as the decision that it must be adapted at the same time , not before and not later .
Lastly , the different definitions should be reorganised , such as the hydrographical district or the management of those districts , since that would prevent the various regulations from having differing effects on the same territories and problems , which could happen on applying the DMA , the COMMPS and the OSPAR agreements .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has responded very quickly , and I should also like to thank Mr Adams , who has performed sterling work in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
My thanks are also due to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
As we know , the legislation on chemical substances , the Water Framework Directive and the Directive on plant-protection products already refer to certain dangerous substances , defining and categorising them .
The present proposal for a resolution and the list deriving from it must ultimately be brought into line with these existing directives .
Because of its far-reaching economic and legal consequences for agriculture , and for all other sectors of the economy too , the Commission should therefore ensure that the necessary process of identifying these priority hazardous substances is based on hard scientific facts .
It is imperative to act on a sound scientific basis rather than on the basis of suspicion .
The Water Framework Directive has given us a time frame that extends to the year 2004 .
We now have a broad consensus on this issue throughout the EU .
We need not be carried away by our emotions .
Zero emissions is not a realistic aim .
We need clarity , built on sound scientific foundations , if we are to take the right action .
Water , ladies and gentlemen , is one of our most important and most sensitive assets .
Let us not forget that .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Wallström .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
VOTE
Mr President , an error has crept into the printed Swedish version of Amendment No 5 .
In the phrase meaning , ' shall provide the experts with all the assistance necessary ' , the word for ' provide ' has disappeared .
In the English version , the wording is correct .
It would therefore be valuable if the English text were to form the basis for this vote .
We will ensure that all language versions are brought into line with the English version .
Mr President , I can confirm , as Mr Byrne indicated yesterday evening , that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 to 5 .
We note that there is an oral amendment to Amendment No 6 .
The Commission could not accept the original text of that amendment .
However , the Commission can accept this amendment as orally amended in preference to Amendment No 5 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is actually very simple , and the Commissioner alluded to this a moment ago .
I had tabled an amendment on behalf of my group , whereby I also wanted the information on official controls to be received by the European Parliament .
I should like to expand on that by an oral amendment . Not only do I want the information to reach the competent authorities and the European Parliament , as stated in my amendment , I also want the Member States to have this information .
If we adopt this oral amendment , the Commission will be willing to adopt the entire amendment , and I believe I can deliver a positive opinion of vote on this .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0115 / 2001 ) by Mr Robert Evans , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council Recommendation on mobility within the Community for students , persons undergoing training , young volunteers , teachers and trainers ( 13258 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0029 / 2001 - 2000 / 0021 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , the Commission accepts the six amendments , subject to a minor reformulation , which makes a reference to the Nice Council foreseen in Amendment No 3 , recital 4a , Amendment No 1 .
Mr President , with your permission I should like to move a technical oral amendment , which the Commissioner has just referred to , so that Amendment No 1 reads at the end , " The action plan for mobility adopted by the Council on 14 December 2000 and also approved at the Nice European Council " , and Amendment No 3 deletes " agreed at the Nice Summit " , because I have just referred to it in Amendment No 1 .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendments )
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0146 / 2001 ) by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( COM ( 2000 ) 347 - C5-0415 / 2000 - 2000 / 0159 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0148 / 2001 ) by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( COM ( 2000 ) 347 - C5-0414 / 2000 - 2000 / 0158 ( COD ) )
Amendment No 44 :
. ( DE ) Mr President , I beg to move that two separate votes be taken on Amendment No 44 , because the first part of Amendment No 44 derives from a compromise , while the second part stems from an individual decision .
For that reason I wish to propose a split vote on the first and second motions in this amendment .
You put me in some difficulty , Mr Florenz .
The Rules are very clear about the timing of requests for split votes .
We have turned down other requests for split votes .
Because you are the rapporteur it makes it difficult , but I cannot accept the request .
It should have been in by 9 a.m. today .
So we have to vote as it stands .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0135 / 2001 ) by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the list of priority substances in the field of water policy ( COM ( 2001 ) 17 - C5-0021 / 2001 - 2000 / 0035 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0299 / 2000 ) by Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on ' Designing tomorrow 's education : promoting innovation with new technologies ' ( COM ( 2000 ) 23 - C5-0147 / 2000 - 2000 / 2090 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0302 / 2000 ) by Mr Perry , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission Implementation of the White Paper " Teaching and learning - Towards the learning society " ( COM ( 1999 ) 750 - C5-0145 / 2000 - 2000 / 2088 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0152 / 2001 ) by Mr Mauro , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission communications on the initiative and the action plan for 2001-2004 entitled ' e-Learning - Designing tomorrow ' s education ' ( COM ( 2000 ) 318 - C5-0741 / 2000 and COM ( 2001 ) 172 - C5-0151 / 2001 - 2000 / 2337 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0165 / 2001 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission 's recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community in 2001 ( COM ( 2001 ) 224 - C5-0169 / 2001 - 2001 / 2081 ( COS ) )
Amendment No 7 :
Our amendment relates to the issue of knowing whether or not we approve the European Central Bank ' s policy .
Last week , this policy changed between the time when the report by Mr von Wogau was written and the time when our amendments were written .
Clearly , we disapproved of the policy the European Central Bank issued the week before last and not the policy that was issued last week .
I would like Mr von Wogau to clarify whether he supports the policy issued this week or the policy issued the week before .
.
( DE ) Mr President , may I say to Mr Lipietz that I continue to hold the position on which the vote was taken with regard to these two parts .
I am not absolutely sure , however , whether last week ' s interest-rate cut was entirely consistent with this policy .
I have to express my personal doubts on that .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Kessler and Perry report ( A5-0088 / 2001 )
.
( IT ) I would like to thank Mr Perry , Mrs Kessler , the other members of the Committee on Petitions , the Legal Service and the entire Secretariat , whose work has contributed to the preparation of the valuable document on the future of the institution of the petition .
The institution of the petition is still the only legal instrument which places the citizens in a direct relationship with the European institutions , and it is therefore the only means of bringing about the Europe of the citizens , who want to recognise the validity of something which is in the process of being created that will serve to further improve the quality of their lives .
Relations between the citizens are founded on law , and , therefore , the definition of an institutional forum which safeguards the corpus of European law becomes important in terms of giving due value to the diversities which are the European Union 's assets .
The Committee on Petitions has the privilege not only of receiving the citizens ' complaints and hearing them directly , if the citizens are present in person , but also of being the epitome of the Parliamentary representativeness which is the very essence of democracy .
It is my opinion that , during this legislature , we must guarantee the European citizens who assail Parliament with their questions a Parliamentary initiative which not only has moral value but is also effective for the purposes of correct interpretation of Community law by all parts of the institutions , whether central or peripheral .
Without prejudice to the specific , essential competence of the jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice , the European Parliament must , in future , fully discharge its role of political legislator , developing effective legislative instruments through proposals to be incorporated into the Treaties as well as other avenues .
A further measure could be the involvement of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , in order to progress to the practical implementation of this new instrument which will protect the citizens and their rights more effectively .
- The right of the ordinary citizen to petition the European Parliament is one that was felt to be important enough to be part of the Treaties and I believe that it merits such standing .
It is an extremely effective way for anyone to make direct contact with the heart of the European institutions on matters which may not be of political importance but which are of consequence to European citizens and residents .
Some may question the benefit of petitioning Parliament , but the recent success of David Petrie , who had received support from the Petitions Committee and the European Parliament as a whole for his petition , in the Italian courts in gaining equal recognition for non-Italian lecturers highlight what a petition can bring about .
My co-rapporteur and I have kept this very much in mind in our report .
We have pushed for this right to be made easier to access and exercise , not only by exploiting new technologies and media but by reform of the procedures which govern petitions once they are received by Parliament and passed on to other institutions .
The current system for petitioning allows petitions to be submitted electronically , but only as an initial form .
Follow-up is done via post , and this can obviously create delays in the preliminary stage of proceedings , well before it comes before the committee .
Alternatives such as electronic signatures and electronic correspondence need to be investigated if Parliament wants to keep up with the increasing number of petitions that are submitted .
Clearer rules for treatment of petitions once they have been deemed admissible are also urgently required .
The Petitions Committee can currently ask the Commission for information on a particular subject , but has very little say over the time the Commission or any other institution can take to provide an answer to the committee 's questions , or even whether MEPs can have access to those answers once received .
For example , we in the Petitions Committee are currently considering petitions on the Lloyd 's organisation , but are denied the opportunity to view the response given by the UK government to the Commission 's questionnaire on the matter .
If the European institutions and Member State governments are serious about transparency in their working methods , then their treatment of petitions needs review .
It does not help to see the very behaviour alleged in a petition replicated in its treatment .
Member States in particular need to pay more serious attention to citizens claiming their European rights .
The right to petitions should aim to strengthen the concept of European citizenship , protecting the four freedoms of those in the Union and ensuring that European legislation is properly and efficiently implemented .
As we move into the 21st century , with a Union of possible 28 members and an increasing body of legislation at a European level , the role and process of the petition needs to change in order to maintain its importance and usefulness .
Maaten report ( A5-0162 / 2001 )
Mr President , conciliation has led to a number of adjustments being made to the report which can be deemed positive , such as the reduction in the permitted tar content and the setting of ceilings for nicotine and carbon monoxide content levels .
However , it is to be deplored that this Directive has no legal basis .
In addition , attention should be drawn to the contradiction that , while restraints are being imposed on the sale of a lawfully permitted product , tobacco growing is still being heavily subsidised .
The objective of this Directive , namely to protect human health , cannot be achieved by taking excessively protective measures , the effect of which on the consumer has not been proven in any way .
As a body that is responsible for policy , we should not content ourselves with simply papering over the cracks .
Mr President , I have not had much sleep over the last few nights because of the Italian elections and because I was trying to follow the results , but I did , however , manage to dream that I was in a Western .
The two cowboys facing each other were Mr Maaten and Mr Blokland .
Like heroes such as John Wayne or Pecos Bill , they had challenged each other to a duel .
At midday - of course - they drew their guns , but , just as they were about to fire , the scene was interrupted by someone telling Mr Maaten to take his cigarette out of his mouth before firing .
Mr Maaten took his cigarette out of his mouth and said : ' You are right , for I am tabling a document which seeks to make European citizens smoke less ' .
That convinced me to vote for the Maaten report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am firmly convinced of the importance of provisions designed to eliminate the use of misleading descriptors in the labelling of tobacco products .
It must be clear to consumers that they are intentionally exposing themselves to a health risk .
Palliative descriptors such as ' low-tar ' or ' light ' merely salve people ' s consciences and obscure the fact that these products are not the least bit healthier than any others .
Sadly , however , the Union ' s policy is ambivalent .
On the one hand , it takes a resolute stand for the protection of public health by means of measures such as the present directive , while on the other hand it spends a billion euros on subsidising tobacco-growing in the Community .
The Union must set itself the aim of pursuing a rational policy .
However , it is surely well-nigh impossible to explain away this particular contradiction to the European public .
A reservation is made in respect of the legal basis of this report .
However , I am voting in favour of the report , since the content is reasonable .
Bowis , Bushill-Matthews , Callanan , Chichester , Dover , Elles , Evans , Jonathan , Goodwill , Harbour , Helmer , Jackson , Parish , Perry , Provan , Sturdy and Tannock ( PPE-DE ) , in writing .
We support the intention of the Common Position to secure progressively lower levels of smoking across the EU , and welcome the ban on misleading labelling .
In particular we welcome the commitment to review the subsidy to EU tobacco growers : we urge that this review , prompted by Conservative MEPs , will lead to this subsidy being phased out very rapidly .
We are however against the decision to ban the manufacture of high tar cigarettes for export outside the EU .
It is not for the EU to try to dictate health policy across the globe ; the only consequence of such a ban will be to export the jobs of those involved , notably 1000 jobs in Southampton , 500 jobs in Darlington and 200 in Nottingham , while achieving nothing on the issue of health .
As a footnote , we would like to see a real example being set by EU institutions by calling for a smoking ban to be enforced throughout their buildings .
With regard to cigarette smoking in general , I believe it is very important that the EU brings forward legislation that prohibits any tobacco product being marketed and targeted towards minors .
It is clearly the case that if a person chooses to smoke at a younger age , then it is more difficult to kick the habit of cigarette smoking at a later age .
We all know the damage that cigarette smoking does to people ' s health each year within the European Union .
That is why it is so important that warnings are displayed on cigarette packs outlining the public health consequences for a person ' s health as a result of cigarette smoking .
That is why I support key provisions in this directive today concerning the manufacture , presentation and sale of tobacco products , including the following : -
Thirty percent of the front of each cigarette pack and 40 % of the back of each cigarette pack will in the future display public health warnings .
Misleading terms such as ' Light ' or ' Mild ' , which in one way or another seek to give the impression that one cigarette does less damage than another , will also be banned .
The European Union will also impose legal obligations on manufacturers to list all the ingredients included in particular cigarettes .
However , this is only part of a broader package of legislation which the European Union is going to bring forward in the field of cigarette smoking .
However , once again the European Union is going to have to be aggressive in the legislation that it brings forward to promote a no-smoking campaign among adults .
I strongly support the implementation of broader educational programmes designed to prevent young people from taking up smoking .
Under the Amsterdam Treaty , the European Parliament does have the power of co-decision in the field of consumer protection and public health matters .
I am fully confident that the European Parliament will invoke our powers under this Treaty to ensure a rigorous implementation of regulatory proposals to reduce cigarette smoking in Europe in the short to medium term .
( PPE-DE ) , in writing . ( DE ) I cannot support the draft directive in its present form .
Article 3 lays down the concentration ceilings .
Since these ceilings are supposed to apply to all cigarettes manufactured in the EU , the products destined for export will also become subject to these ceilings on or before 1 January 2007 .
This directive is engaging in overkill .
The Union should not regulate the manufacture of products for export to countries outside the EU to such an extent .
In the federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate alone , the tobacco industry achieves an annual turnover of some DEM 1.5 million .
In the largest city in my region 1 250 people are directly employed by a tobacco company .
Its suppliers in the region , such as printers and packaging manufacturers , are all small and medium-sized businesses .
Were the directive to enter into force and the ceilings also to apply to cigarettes intended for export , thousands of jobs would be lost in that structurally fragile region alone .
Whilst cigarette manufacturers are certainly required to inform and warn consumers , it must nevertheless remain possible to go on exporting products with higher concentrations to countries where higher ceilings apply .
The serious restriction of export activity that results from this new directive will be severely detrimental to the European economy .
. ( DE ) Smokers incontestably run a greater risk of contracting lung cancer than non-smokers .
This is a well-known fact , of which all smokers are only too well aware .
The fight against cancer is one of the main challenges facing today ' s society .
I myself am actively involved , both inside and outside Parliament , in the struggle against breast cancer .
However , as I have already emphasised in my comments on the report at the first and second readings , the prohibition methods prescribed in the joint text entail the imposition of unreasonable obligations on the European tobacco industry with no thought for the jobs they will cost and no prospect of their paying dividends by inducing more people in the EU to give up smoking .
The proposal that EU-manufactured cigarettes be subject to the same tar , nicotine and carbon monoxide ceilings whether they are intended for domestic consumption or export is downright perverse .
It is certainly a noble intention to want to take responsibility for the health of smokers in non-EU countries .
But if this sense of mission leads to the tobacco industry relocating its manufacturing plants to the countries for which its cigarettes are intended , all we shall have achieved will be the loss of European jobs .
In my little country alone , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , such a measure would result in the relocation of 12 % of our cigarette-production capacity .
That surely cannot be allowed to happen .
For the fight against lung cancer , I am in favour of a targeted information campaign with adequate budgetary funding ; it would be directed primarily at young people , making them aware of the danger that smoking poses to their health .
But I am opposed to all the excessively radical measures contained in the joint text and cannot therefore endorse the report in its present form .
. ( DE ) Mr President , I am firmly convinced of the importance of provisions designed to eliminate the use of misleading descriptors in the labelling of tobacco products .
It must be clear to consumers that they are intentionally exposing themselves to a health risk .
Palliative descriptors such as ' low-tar ' or ' light ' merely salve people ' s consciences and obscure the fact that these products are not the least bit healthier than any others .
Sadly , however , the Union ' s policy is ambivalent .
On the one hand , it takes a resolute stand for the protection of public health by means of measures such as the present directive , while on the other hand it spends a billion euros on subsidising tobacco-growing in the Community .
The Union must set itself the aim of pursuing a rational policy .
However , it is surely well-nigh impossible to explain away this particular contradiction to the European public .
I fully support the compromise agreement on a draft directive on the manufacture , presentation and sale of tobacco products .
This tough new anti-smoking legislation covers all tobacco products and lays down maximum levels of tar , carbon monoxide and nicotine .
I strongly back these new laws which will transform the way cigarettes are sold across Europe and alter the public perception of smoking .
I wholeheartedly welcome the use of picture warnings on packets , graphically illustrating the harmful effects of long-term smoking on health , as they do in Canada .
A picture is worth a thousand words .
If shock tactics like that help get the message across and save lives , then I 'm all in favour .
Overall , this ground-breaking legislation will raise public awareness about the health risks from smoking and finally shatter the myth that one type of cigarette is less damaging to health than another .
The tobacco giants hired some of the best lobbyists money could buy to fight this legislation every step of the way , but the European Parliament was not for turning .
After the industry managed to overturn Europe 's ban on tobacco advertising on a legal technicality , we were more determined than ever to make sure that this latest legislation finally reached the statute book to spell out the dangers of smoking and save thousands of lives .
. ( DE ) For the following reasons I have voted against the outcome of the conciliation procedure on the tobacco directive :
According to the joint text , the export to non-EU countries of cigarettes with more than ten milligrams of condensate , more than one milligram of nicotine and more than 10 milligrams of carbon monoxide is to be prohibited .
The result would be a massive fall in exports of cigarettes from the EU and hence the loss of tens of thousands of jobs in the EU .
Such a ban will serve no purpose at all , because the cigarettes will then be produced outside the EU .
But jobs in our countries will be lost .
The EU has no authority to impose such a ban .
This is not about transactions in the single internal market .
The anti-tobacco zealots should not act as if the export of tobacco products were something akin to handing out potassium cyanide .
The EU is acting inconsistently here , given that it subsidises both the growing and the export of tobacco to the tune of one billion euros .
By imposing an export ban , the EU is setting itself up as a global health freak .
This is an arrogant and disparaging way to treat the customs and practices of other countries .
The right approach would be to forge ahead with the work that has been started within the World Health Organization on uniform standards for tobacco products .
Unilateral action by the EU will prove fruitless .
Paulsen report ( A5-0136 / 2001 )
Mr President , when I was trying to decide how to vote on this recommendation on animal nutrition , I could not fail to seek enlightenment from two of the animals I have at home : my two cats .
You know that I have two pet cats at home - called Lulù and Frifri - whom I feed regularly .
I did not know how to talk to them and whether they would reply , but I have to say that chance came to my aid .
In fact , in order to give them a nicer meal , I had bought tins of a different type of cat food to that which I usually buy , and put them down for the cats to eat .
Well , Mr President , I swear to you that - even though they were hungry - neither of Mr Fatuzzo 's pussy cats ate any of the meat from the two tins : neither Lulù nor Frifri .
This was their way of telling me : ' You see , what we eat is important !
It is right for inspections to be carried out on feedingstuffs and so you must vote for the motion ' .
And that is what I have done .
Evans report ( A5-0115 / 2001 )
Mr President , I dropped off to sleep for a moment during the vote just now , and I dreamt of Mr Fatuzzo the scientist .
That is right : instead of launching himself into politics in support of pensioners , Mr Fatuzzo had become a nuclear scientist , for , you know , I used to love maths and physics .
So I asked him : ' Have you enjoyed your life as a scientist ? '
' Ah , ' he said , ' I came to the United States of America : they pay me a lot of money , I have invented lots of things and I have received the Nobel Prize ' .
' I truly envy you , Mr Fatuzzo the Nobel Prize-winner , ' I replied .
' I , on the other hand , am a simple Member of the European Parliament .
But tell me , how did you become a Nobel Prize-winner ? '
He replied : ' By not staying in Italy , where I was unable to study the way I wanted to , but by going to the United States .
If I had been able to move around within Europe , I would have stayed in Europe rather than emigrating to the United States .
Therefore , you must vote for the mobility of researchers in Europe ! '
The text that we have discussed and voted upon calls on the Member States to foster the mobility of people undertaking a course of study , a period of training , voluntary work or work as a teacher or trainer in another Member State , whether under a Community programme or not .
The European Parliament naturally welcomed this type of proposal .
Parliament believed , however , that some amendments were necessary in order to improve the quality of the text , and , above all , to extend the scope of the proposal to include researchers , something I consider to be extremely important .
Some amendments along these lines were tabled and adopted at first reading .
Unfortunately , however , the European Commission rejected those relating to researchers for legal reasons .
As rapporteur for the Sixth Research and Development Framework Programme , I can naturally only deplore this move .
I hope that the conference on the mobility of researchers and scientists , which is due to be held under the Belgian Presidency , will enable us to make progress in this area .
The creation of a European area of research involves collaboration by researchers and scientists from all corners of the globe so that advances can be made in research , which is in the interests of all citizens .
That is why it is crucial to combat the various obstacles to their mobility .
Since this can only be done within the framework of this proposal , another solution will have to be found .
I am committed to working towards this .
Furthermore , like the rapporteur , I would like to pay tribute to the hard work of the French Presidency on reaching the most ambitious common position possible which could command general assent .
The amendments that have been adopted , therefore , cover some essential aspects of mobility and seek to improve or eliminate administrative , financial or social difficulties .
With regard to the practical measures that Member States will be taking , linguistic and cultural initiatives are proposed , for example , in order to prepare those who will be travelling abroad for their new lifestyle , improved access to information on mobility and practical difficulties that may be encountered and financial aid in the form of grants , benefits or loans .
Nationals of candidate countries and third countries , who are legally resident in the EU , will also be able to benefit from the provisions of the recommendation .
I am pleased that the report has stressed that all types of qualifications gained in other Member States need to be recognised .
All too often , Member States have a negative attitude to this and create unacceptable problems in an area in which individuals should enjoy free movement , thus preventing people who travel from making the most of their experience .
Mr Evans also drew attention to the fact that , since Parliament ' s first reading , the Council agreed an Action Plan on Mobility - a ' toolbox ' of 40 measures , which complements the recommendation .
Some amendments were then tabled at second reading to take account of this development .
I sincerely hope that these measures will soon become reality .
Madam President , I strongly support this excellent report by my Labour colleague , Robert Evans .
It offers yet further proof of Labour 's commitment to create a Europe for our citizens .
The aim of the programme is to allow people to take advantage of moving across Europe by extending mobility within the EU for students , young volunteers and teachers .
This offers educational opportunities and encourages people to take on active role in society across Europe .
It is a crucial development following last year 's Action Plan of concrete measures identifying obstacles to mobility .
It is also an important measure for the efficient functioning of the European single market .
The Labour Government is determined to make the single market work for British people , not just for business .
By introducing greater steps towards student and volunteer mobility , people will feel more confident to work and travel not just across Britain but also right across Europe .
Such a scheme can inspire civic values , is highly educational and an excellent advertisement for the European Union among its most important citizens , the young .
This is vital when we remember that , in Britain at least , turnout among young people at the last European elections was among the lowest in the EU .
Practical experience of Europe , not media prattle on Europe , is a far more reliable and inspiring source of knowledge on Europe for young people .
Florenz report ( A5-0146 / 2001 )
Mr President , this report rightly seeks to limit the use of hazardous substances , including lead , in electrical and electronic equipment .
However , I would like to inform Mr Florenz that , where lead is concerned - as the Italian proverb says - it is better to have leaden feet , that is to go slowly .
I am saying this because , apart from anything else , many politicians and ministers in Europe have their pockets full of lead : so much so that they are unable to stand up from their chairs !
Well then , metaphors aside , I feel we should not be in a hurry to eliminate all the harmful substances from electrical and electronic equipment either if there are no less harmful alternatives with which to replace them .
I therefore support this report , with the proviso , however , that the ban on these substances is introduced gradually .
Florenz report ( A5-0148 / 2001 )
Mr President , by imposing recycling standards on waste electrical and electronic equipment , the European Parliament is boosting efforts to make this industry more ecologically sound .
It is essentially the environment that has won through in the battle between the supporters of an innovative industry in electrical and electronic goods and the conventional manufacturers who slammed on the brakes so they could delay the date on which they would be responsible for recycling waste .
Although we can congratulate the rapporteur on having chosen to deal with these products , we regret that the Commission has not taken the opportunity to deal with electrical and electronic waste and chemical substances associated with it .
With regard to this second report , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance deeply regrets that , out of 70 substances , only two are to be banned , when breast milk is sometimes contaminated with chemical substances from these products , such as brominated products , to levels which exceed WHO standards .
Despite this harsh comment , the primary innovation of this report is that it places individual responsibility on the manufacturers , as they will become financially responsible for their products , both products that are already on the market and future products .
The environmental considerations contained in the report are gaining ground , and there is growing political awareness of the danger of increasing amounts of industrial waste , particularly electrical and electronic waste .
Ultimately , now that this has to happen , everyone will benefit at the end of the day : manufacturers , consumers and the environment .
The report by Mr Florenz on waste electrical and electronic equipment has therefore benefited from some substantial environmental gestures , which confirm that industry in Europe must work with the aim of creating an environmentally-minded culture , for citizens and for politicians .
Mr President , the night of the announcement of the results of the Italian elections , I could not keep awake between one announcement and the next and so I went to sleep several times .
After my dream about Mr Maaten , which I related to you just now , having just read the Florenz report - in preparation for the debate - I dropped off again and saw Mr Florenz himself , bustling about in person on a platform , disposing of some of the electrical and electronic waste referred to in his document .
He was exhausted and covered in sweat .
' I have been sorting waste for reuse for three days and three nights now , ' he said in my dream .
' Don 't worry , ' I said to him , ' I will vote for your report because I am convinced that it is right to reuse electrical and electronic waste .
But now you must come with me to the Pensioners ' Party , where we can dance and travel and where there are lots of widows with whom we can have a much more enjoyable time than you are having here ! '
. ( FR ) In Strasbourg , the European Parliament debated the report tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on waste electrical and electronic equipment .
The proposed directive specifies that the responsibility for electrical and electronic waste , which is approximately 16 kg per capita in each of the 15 EU Member States , an amount which , according to forecasts , is set to double over the next 12 years , lies either with the manufacturer or the original importer .
Luxembourg , due to the specific nature of its position , has hardly any producers in the true sense but , in the main , has importers .
Product distribution is often organised in such a way that a general importer is responsible for the area of Belgium and Luxembourg .
This importer is usually based in Belgium and not in Luxembourg .
If Belgium has to place responsibility upon a single general importer , Luxembourg will have to place responsibility upon the countless businesses which receive product deliveries from this general importer .
Furthermore , parallel imports of products outside these established distribution channels are reaching a much higher level in Luxembourg than in other countries .
It follows that , in Luxembourg , commercial enterprises upon whom responsibility is placed are generally small businesses and are , in any case , smaller than their equivalents in other countries .
This characteristic , specific to Luxembourg , means that particular attention must be paid to simplifying the administration involved in managing recycling and recovery funding systems that are to be implemented .
In some areas , it is preferable , therefore , that the directive should give enough freedom to Member States for them to be able to implement appropriate solutions .
Companies , especially in built-up areas , do not usually have the facilities to store vast amounts of waste .
The requirement for businesses to collect waste must , therefore , not be mandatory - it should remain voluntary .
If companies cannot collect waste , other systems , such as recycling sites , for example , must be made available to consumers .
The cost of collecting waste , if it were mandatory , would be too high for many businesses .
The directive also deals with the financing of electrical and electronic products which will already be on the market before the directive comes into force , the manufacturers of some of which no longer exist .
Some appliances , such as refrigerators or televisions for example , have an average life cycle of 20 years .
The directive must give Member States a choice of the means to implement in order to finance recycling of these appliances .
It will , therefore , be possible to agree with the Member State some incentives for consumers , such as free collection of waste that is currently stored on their premises .
These incentives have been provided in countries which already have free collection systems .
( Speech cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We Moderates consider this directive to be urgently needed for protecting the environment .
Moreover , the directive ' s basic principles of producer responsibility for future products and of opportunities for consumers to choose environmentally sound products are important .
The wording of Article 7 is somewhat unclear .
We have interpreted it as follows : the financing referred to in Paragraph 2 applies to scrapping in quite general terms .
It gives the Member States the opportunity , over a ten-year period , to opt for collective financing , for example taxes , as an alternative .
This also needs to cover what is referred to as historical waste .
After this period of time , derogations will only be possible if they have been approved by the Commission .
With the above interpretation , we voted in favour of the report .
I support these measures which introduce tough new recycling rules allowing consumers and retailers to take back waste electric and electronic goods free of charge and encouraging manufacturers to take responsibility .
The aim of these rules is to encourage consumers getting rid of old , worn out electrical and electronic goods to return these items through new local public collection points or retailer take-back schemes , rather than to throw away their old hairdryers , fridges and TVs .
We live in a throw away society , with worn out computers , kettles , fridges and freezers flooding into the waste stream at an unprecedented pace .
Consumers across Europe must play their part in stemming the tide of waste from electronic goods .
All this means is a small change in people 's daily habits .
Taking old radios and hoovers back for recycling will be like going to the bottle bank or collecting old newspapers , rather than dumping them in the bin .
For manufacturers , it means financing recycling schemes with public collection points , retailer take-back schemes and treatment , recovery and disposal systems .
Responsibility does not begin and end with the production of electronic goods , but electronics manufacturers should undertake responsibility for the after-life of their products .
Such a scheme is an important step towards greening up the European Union .
Yet again , this is proof of Europe 's commitment towards creating a healthier , safer environment for our citizens .
Breyer report ( A5-0135 / 2001 )
Superior stabat lupus longeque inferior agnus .
I am sure you are familiar with this Latin fable , Mr President : ' A Wolf was drinking at a spring on a hillside .
On looking up he saw a Lamb just beginning to drink lower down ... '
Why have I quoted this Latin fable ?
Because I consider it quite right that we should not throw hazardous substances into rivers .
In the same way that the water flowed downstream from the wolf to the lamb , the European rivers flow from faraway places into the Mediterranean Sea and into our other seas . Therefore , It is right , as this report requests , to involve the candidate countries so that they do not pollute upstream the springs and the rivers crossing Europe .
Alavanos report ( A5-0299 / 2000 )
Mr President , this report is deals with promoting innovation with new technologies .
As I have already said before on several occasions , I am highly in favour of computers and the Internet and all those newfangled gadgets that young people like so much .
I regret having had to spend many Easter and Christmas breaks retyping all the electronic files which I had accidentally deleted by pressing the wrong key .
This has made me a little hostile towards new technologies .
However , my daughter , Elisabetta , has convinced me that they are very useful , for she has employed them in her political life as well .
I therefore support this report , although I do hope that children will be brought up to be good , responsible people and not just good users of computers .
. ( FR ) If this report contained nothing other than statements of good intentions , asserting the need for new technologies to be widely used , particularly in the education system , we could have voted in favour , although good intentions still do not guarantee a policy .
However , the intention behind these statements " to provide companies with the financial and technical help required " came through in several paragraphs .
Since we do not wish to support grants to private businesses , even those that are not made openly , we abstained from voting on this report .
New technology in European education should not create a fresh divide between the national languages and a privileged language of communication .
Europe boasts a collection of relatively small and predominantly monolingual regions .
This is not America , where migrants who all live in one and the same community yet speak different languages by origin , need to adopt the official language in order to be able to communicate with one other .
In Europe , language differences within one region often reflect differences between rich and poor , powerful and powerless , winners and losers .
For centuries , large multicultural states have attempted to impose a different language on their inhabitants .
That was the language of the country ' s capital , which was also used outside the capital by businesspeople , officials and the military .
Whilst the privileged adopted the language protected by the government , workers and farmers continued to speak their own national languages .
That is mainly how linguistic conflict started and large states disintegrated .
Even today , it is still a requirement for education and government to be in the citizen ' s own language in all the regions where the language border does not coincide with the country ' s border , or with the internal borders of autonomous regions .
If we do not want a young generation to be divided artificially between the privileged and the underprivileged , we need to defend the equality of languages .
Perry report ( A5-0302 / 2000 )
Mr President , the conclusions of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on page 21 of Mr Perry 's report , which also deals with the White Paper on the use of electronic equipment , tell us that it " ... would be ... appreciated if employers showed greater willingness to take on older employees " who , throughout their lives , have acquired the new skills that the modern world offers us every day .
Clearly , I support this conclusion .
I fervently hope that this report will mean that elderly people who have studied and improved their skills will be able to find employment more easily .
Mauro report ( A5-0152 / 2001 )
Mr President , as you know , Mr Mauro is Italian like me , and , like me , he also belongs to the European People 's Party .
I was therefore very willing to go and listen to one of his meetings on this report .
At one point , he said : ' Can you see this glass here in front of me ? '
' Yes , ' we all thought , ' we can see it . '
' This glass , ' continued Mr Mauro , ' is used for drinking water .
However , I could smash it over Mr Fatuzzo 's head and that would be an improper use . '
This is exactly what he said - my head is still sore from the memory - and he explained why .
Because new techniques , computers and the Internet , can be used improperly , just as - and here he illustrated the point - the glass could be used improperly .
Truly , however , I would beg him not to break a computer over my head because that would be the end of my explanations of vote .
Education falls within the competence of the Member States and we reject any attempt to change this established fact .
To call this division of responsibilities into question is to support the increasing array of liberal-market choices appearing in education issues .
The reports therefore clearly take this approach , with , in particular , the shift from ' contents ' towards ' skills ' .
In other words , qualifications gained as part of a degree are being overshadowed in favour of ' flexible ' skill sets , for which companies alone are responsible .
This approach backs up the logic of liberal counter-reforms that are taking hold in many countries .
In the same way , from this viewpoint , ' life-long learning ' goes hand in hand with drastic cutbacks in initial training and playing down the role of public training institutions - in favour of ' virtual ' , distance learning that is increasingly market-oriented .
On the other hand , information and ICT technologies must support the right to common , public education for all , which is of a high level and good quality .
Financial investment in this area will not achieve this if all the funds ploughed into education for the last 15 years are also drastically reduced .
We cannot , therefore , vote in favour of these reports .
The issue of new technologies and their application in education naturally generates considerable interest and is extremely important .
As we all know , however , just giving every school a computer is not going to solve the problem .
It is essential not just to enable schools to use appropriate technological infrastructures , both in terms of programmes and equipment , but the utmost attention must also be paid to teacher training . We must also create conditions that enable each and every student to have access to these technologies and to know how to use them .
It is nevertheless important to emphasise that this Commission communication is very loosely defined and , in practice , is dependent on other , existing programmes , which have their own objectives . This initiative , therefore , does little more than propose to monitor the progress made in each Member State , rather than envisaging actions that could actually change the present situation and influence the future direction of widespread Internet use .
For a country such as Portugal , unless there is a substantial reduction in the cost of access to the new technologies , and unless the standard of living of the most deprived families improves considerably , it will be hard to ensure that a high percentage of children and young people have equal opportunity of access to the new technologies .
von Wogau report ( A5-0165 / 2001 )
The debate that has just been held on the broad economic guidelines for 2001 was dominated by great uncertainty , which is , after all , not surprising since the aim of the exercise was virtually unattainable .
The aim was to define common economic guidelines at European level , whereas every country has different requirements .
This uncertainty was further increased on 10 May 2001 , when the European Central Bank lowered the key interest rate by a quarter of a point .
Even though Christian Noyer , the Vice-President of the ECB , told Parliament ' s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 2 May that he was optimistic about price stability in the euro zone , even though Wim Duisenberg , the President of the ECB , has just presented a report saying he too was confident about the prospects for growth , even though all these factors combined lulled us into thinking that interest rates were stable , by lowering interest rates , the ECB has just contradicted to some extent the explanations given the day before .
The main effects of this move would have been a drop in the euro ' s value - a further drop - and a strong hike in the stock markets , without any major advantages for growth .
The ECB lives in a permanently paradoxical situation , from which it is not about to escape .
It is impossible to adopt a single measure that would suit the situation of all the Member States .
For example , Mr Blokland has just explained to us that the latest drop in interest rates was greeted with some confusion in the Netherlands , where inflation is now at its lowest level in 20 years , and where everyone expected rates would , in actual fact , have to be increased .
The same holds true for other countries in the euro zone .
In these circumstances , any step taken by the ECB highlights the differences , which are immediately translated by the international operators as obstacles to the viability of a common monetary policy , without taking all the other variables into account .
Thanks to the euro , we feel as if we are constantly on the verge of losing public confidence .
Mr President , point 8 of the conclusions of Mr von Wogau 's report calls upon the European States to adapt their pension systems to Europe 's economy .
On this point , which is the centre of my political life , I would like to stress the fact that we need to find a balance between State budgetary restrictions and giving all citizens a dignified life , not just pensioners and the elderly but young people as well .
I oppose all the measures which give a minimal monthly cheque to the elderly - although this is a good thing which is right - because we should also be giving such a cheque to young people who do not have the means to support themselves and live , and we should be giving one to those who have paid contributions too .
In short , there needs to be a proper balance between money and the social life to which we all have the right .
. ( FR ) We voted against the report on the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States and the Community in 2001 , since these guidelines are entirely geared to the interests and wishes of major employers and are not in the interests of workers .
Even with the amendments , such as those which express environmental concerns or the amendment which proposes introducing a Tobin-style tax on the movement of capital , the text still glorifies the pro-employer , anti-worker policies conducted in the Member States and is approving of the way that the economy is currently run .
We abstained on the last amendment so that our votes will not be confused with those from the most staunch supporters of the capitalist system , who have voted against the report because they do not even accept capital being taxed by the tiny amount represented by the Tobin tax .
To claim , however , that movement of speculative capital will be controlled by this tax or that it will reduce the volatility of the financial markets is all just a smokescreen .
The huge number of redundancies in some of the largest companies in the European Union proves that it is not just speculative use by large investors that harms the working classes and society - it is capital full stop as well as the economic system , which is driven by profit and the capitalist thirst for making money .
What the workers need are measures to protect them from employers ' greed , not symbolic gestures , which actually justify the capitalist management of the economy .
We will be voting against this new liberal theme tune .
The ' structural reform ' of the labour market that it advocates translates as increased insecurity in employment contracts .
This is basically the policy conducted throughout Europe and , far from wanting to " continue and speed this up " , we want instead to put an end to it .
We would not be against creating an " appropriate environment to foster investment " as long as this did not involve making even more profit , when it is private consumption by employees that enables investment to be sustained .
As for retirement , we are still on the front line , battling against these alleged ' reforms ' , which , in actual fact , signify a move towards private insurance schemes .
We are also totally opposed to the liberalisation of the electricity and gas sectors and are , in fact , in favour of establishing a major European public service .
We are also voting against this report because it has been written in hypocritical , anti-democratic waffle and its dominant theme is that of an ' economy of ignorance ' .
Given the situation of the British railways and the electricity industry in California , how can we possibly forget that privatisation is not synonymous with efficiency ?
Not even the prospect of a slowdown in the European and world economies , which has been confirmed by the spring macroeconomic forecast , is making the Commission change its recommendations for the broad economic guidelines for 2001 .
The remedy that it is proposing has remained unchanged over the years : a reduction in public spending , wage moderation and an acceleration of the structural reform process laid down in the Lisbon Strategy , specifically in terms of liberalising the labour market and making it more flexible .
The Commission is not interested in anything apart from price stability and fulfilling the criteria of the Stability Pact .
Even for Portugal , whose prospects indicate greater difficulties in reaching the European growth level and higher unemployment , especially amongst women and young people , a country in which workers are being punished by higher inflation and the concomitant loss of buying power , despite still having the lowest wages in the European Union , the remedy is the same : wage moderation , making it easier for employers to make redundancies , and working towards the objectives of the Stability Pact , with a greater reduction in public spending in the 2002 budget .
The von Wogau report endorses the approach outlined by the Commission and highlights the unique proposal to call the " European internal market " the " euro zone " instead .
The rapporteur endorses the blind quest for price stability at the expense of economic growth .
He disregards the importance of public investment and calls for the " the potential for ( public ) spending cuts " to be " fully exploited " .
He regrets the fact that the Stockholm summit did not make progress on liberalising the gas and electricity sectors and " stresses that liberalisation in the outstanding sectors is essential " .
He " stresses the need to continue reform of labour markets " and expresses the need to reform pensions and health systems . Issues of employment are completely ignored .
We therefore had no choice but to vote against this report .
. ( DE ) The present report on the Commission ' s recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community in 2001 states that the supreme goal of European economic policy is to make the European Union into the most competitive and dynamic economic area in the world by 2010 .
That is an unobjectionable aim in principle , but it is surely no mere oversight that makes the author omit the rest of this sentence as formulated at the Lisbon summit , for it went on to speak of an economic area with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
That is the very heart of the matter .
A cyclical economic slowdown is rightly identified in the report , but once again the neoliberal solutions are trotted out : supply-side economic policies , liberalisation , reduction of government debt and wage restraint on the part of employees in pay negotiations .
Although some important points that were not contained in the report on the European economic situation by the same author have now been incorporated , such as the need for harmonisation in certain areas of tax law , special emphasis on the importance of strengthening SMEs and consideration of environmental factors , some vital elements are still missing .
Unless domestic demand is strengthened , in other words unless people ' s purchasing power is increased , a sustained upturn will be impossible to achieve .
That is why foremost priority must be attached to the creation of new jobs .
We urgently need to redistribute work by devising every possible means of shortening employees ' working hours , to ensure that everyone who earns an income from employment is integrated on an equitable basis into national insurance and pension schemes , to show greater commitment to education and training and to alter the course of public investment policy .
As long as these imperatives are not incorporated into the strategy for the development of European economic policy , we cannot give it our approval .
The European Parliament report adopts the Commission ' s proposals on the application of the Stability Pact , with economic policy guidelines for an even stricter anti-employment package .
It describes continuing wage restraint and greater flexibility on the labour markets as positive factors while , at the same time , recommending stricter measures for workers due to the slowdown and lack of vigour in the European economy and the downward revision in the rate of growth in the ÅU from the original estimate of 3 % to an average of 2.7 % in 2001 .
The Commission considers that the process of promoting more flexible forms of work should be encouraged and that efforts should continue to relax the existing restrictive legal framework on the protection of work even more , i.e. in order to allow more ' economic ' uncontrolled mass redundancies .
Large companies have already applied this measure and made huge redundancies on the pretext of the slowdown in the rate of growth of the economy and have restructured production and staff , with the result that over 250 000 redundancies have been announced in recent weeks .
With acute signs of a recession in the United States , the wave of redundancies will increase as companies endeavour to maintain high profit margins by cutting staff .
This is the policy of the EU , which has given the go-ahead for mass redundancies in order to protect the plutocracy 's profits .
Which is why any reference by the EU to its supposed interest in the workers and in combating unemployment is mere Pharisaism and hypocrisy
The report also recommends accelerating the radical shake-up of the existing insurance and pension system and reviewing this during 2001 so as to deal with the " problems arising from the ageing population " .
It also proposes speeding up the rate of privatisation , specifically quoting the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector as a good example , which should be pursued in the energy , post , airport , railway and sea transport sectors , as agreed .
Clearly , even more difficult and bleak times are ahead for the workers .
Social insurance will be linked to wages , output and the purchasing power of salaries .
Part-time work is becoming the norm and , combined with partial retirement and the high cost of private social care and the commercialisation of the pension , health and welfare systems , is pushing the whole of the working class into unemployment , poverty , insecurity and social exclusion .
The measures designed for the workers are tantamount to a guaranteed level of poverty .
Prosperity is , of course , reserved for big business , which these measures strengthen still further .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece are voting against this report , which promises even greater poverty for the workers and even more mega-profits for big business and which seeks to reverse everything the workers have achieved .
The workers , who are speaking out and demonstrating against these barbaric , inhumane policies in huge mass rallies and strikes in the various countries of Europe , including Greece , will try to ward off the impending storm and we shall be by their side in the fight .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.39 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Consumption of alcohol by children and adolescents
The next item is the report ( A5-0150 / 2001 ) by Mrs Stihler , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Council recommendation on drinking of alcohol by children and adolescents [ COM ( 2000 ) 736 - C5-0020 / 2001 - 2001 / 0801 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , this report concerns the proposal for a Council recommendation on drinking of alcohol by children and adolescents .
Parliament has been asked to give its opinion on this issue .
Our report will not become a binding piece of European legislation but will literally act as a recommendation to Member States .
I should like at this stage to thank the Swedish presidency for its interest in this issue and for organising the successful Stockholm Conference .
The format of allowing young people to make their views known on an equal footing with health ministers made the dialogue all the more interesting .
We know the growing evidence shows that children and adolescents are starting drinking at a younger age and drinking at worrying levels at a younger age .
The problem is growing not only in the northern states but also in the southern states .
France and Spain report growing problems of adolescent drunkenness , associated with fights , violence , truancy , theft and illegal drugs .
Recent surveys show that the UK , Denmark , Finland , France and Sweden report the highest proportions of boys and girls who have been drunk at or younger than 13 .
Scotland , which I represent in this Parliament , has the highest rate of binge drinking amongst 15-year-olds .
The gender gap is also closing , with more girls reporting having been drunk at 15 in Denmark , Finland , England , Scotland and Wales .
Yet the simple fact is that children and adolescents are just more vulnerable to the effects of alcohol than adults .
The rise of drinking to excess by children and adolescents has serious implications for future health .
Drinking behaviour , which occurs during youth , can lead to similar patterns in adulthood .
Certainly many colleagues here will know the consequences of drinking to excess .
But in terms of misuse of alcohol by adolescents , the link between binge drinking , unplanned pregnancy , sexually-transmitted diseases , crime and road-traffic accidents cannot be denied .
You need only go to your local police station or hospital to see the evidence .
What are the solutions ?
Information , education and health promotion are critical in the fight against under-age binge drinking , as are health promotion policies targeted at children , parents , teachers and carers , better labelling on alcohol products , integration of adolescent policies .
In preparing this report I contacted over a hundred schools and fifty youth organisations in Scotland .
Townhill primary school in Dunfermline , where I live , summed up the need for more education when it found that most children in the class were not aware of the health and social problems associated with alcohol misuse .
This leads me on to my second point , an important one .
More research is needed into the nature , scale and causes of this growing trend in binge drinking by children and adolescents .
We need to improve data collection and share information .
Kinghorn primary school in Fife thought that the research issue was important and that an e-mail network of pupils allowing them to discuss and explore the issues was critical .
Thirdly , the issue of selling to under-age people is also an important one .
In many countries there are existing laws which should prevent this from happening .
However , as we all know , this still goes on .
The rise of bootlegged alcohol in many Member States is also a factor .
Proper implementation of existing laws in Member States could go some way to prevent the selling to children and adolescents .
On codes of conduct : much of the alcohol industry has signed up to voluntary codes of conduct and has self-regulation .
Much of the industry has tried to take a responsible view to this issue .
However , there is a real concern among parents , teachers and young people themselves that not enough is being done on advertising .
When you see pictures of babies in beer-logo babygrows , no wonder people have cause for concern .
Powrie primary school in Dundee asked that alcohol should be made ' uncool ' ; TV ads should show vomiting and hang-overs .
Many members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection supported the move for more binding regulation , and the debate continues .
In conclusion , the need for joint action on education and research is critical in the fight against binge drinking by children and adolescents .
At St Elizabeth primary school in Hamilton they noted that there is more to life than the aspiration to get as drunk as possible in as little time as possible , with as big an audience as possible .
Finally , in the words of the World Health Organisation 's European Charter on Alcohol : " All children and adolescents have the right to grow up in an environment protected from the negative consequences of alcohol consumption and to the extent possible from the promotion of alcoholic beverage " .
I hope my colleagues will support this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the relationship between adolescents and alcohol is not a new problem .
Alcohol is part and parcel of adult social life .
It is therefore logical that adolescents will come into contact with alcohol as they approach adulthood .
Children and adolescents are normally unaware of the dangers of excessive alcohol consumption ; born of curiosity to try new things , it can quickly become a habit .
The average age at which children and adolescents try their first alcoholic drink has not fallen .
Young people continue to have their first contact with alcohol in their early teens , as in the past .
The age at which regular alcohol consumption begins , however , is falling steadily .
Alcohol consumption by children and adolescents is an extremely emotive subject , since it concerns the rising generations of European citizens .
The animated discussions in our committee left me in no doubt of the importance of this subject to every one of us .
At this point I should like to thank all my fellow members for their contributions .
We overwhelmingly took the view that responsibility in this area could not be assigned to parents alone ; it was essential to create basic conditions in which adolescents could learn everything they needed to know in order to deal with exposure to alcohol .
I should therefore like to re-emphasise that my opinion relates specifically to children and adolescents and their dealings with alcohol and not to the health implications of alcohol abuse in general .
In February of this year , as the rapporteur said , a conference was held on the subject of young people and alcohol .
One of the points that were made in the declaration adopted at that conference is crucially important , in my view , and I have taken it into account in my opinion . It is the fact that care must be taken to ensure greater involvement of young people in these programmes and measures .
It is particularly important that support and assistance be given to schemes devised by young people for young people .
Since children and adolescents are affected by the problem , they must be involved in the effort to resolve it .
This is the only way to ensure that young people actually commit themselves to the cause .
Prohibitions and regulations alone will not help young people to become responsible adults - quite the reverse .
We can only achieve that if we let them learn to assume responsibility themselves .
( PPE-DE ) . ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking the Commission for having addressed this increasingly acute problem of alcohol abuse among children and adolescents .
May I also say that the Commission has produced a good basis for a recommendation to the Council .
The unimpaired development and health of our children and teenagers is a matter of concern to all of us .
Mrs Stihler and Mrs Zissener have both indicated the nature of the problem in Europe .
For adults in Europe , the consumption of alcohol is often , though by no means universally , an integral part of social life .
Young people , however , are shaped by the drinking habits of adult society , which they copy .
Alcohol consumption is therefore widely regarded as part of growing up .
The drinking habits of young people largely reflect the attitudes and habits of the adult society in which they live .
Role models are therefore of the essence .
It is imperative that young people see alcohol being treated properly and wisely by their families and by society as a whole .
Any inclination to abuse alcohol must be nipped in the bud .
Targeted education campaigns must be used to combat alcohol abuse .
The consequences of alcohol abuse affect us all .
They affect families and societies .
Road deaths caused by drunk drivers , loss of jobs and ultimately family break-ups are but a few examples of the ravages of alcohol abuse .
At the national level there are already many sound laws for the protection of children and adolescents , such as the laws prohibiting the sale of alcohol to minors .
Strenuous efforts must be made to ensure that these existing national laws are more effectively enforced .
Warnings printed on labels , extending to comparisons such as ' one glass of brandy equals three glasses of beer ' , if I understood Mrs Stihler ' s amendment correctly , would serve little purpose , in my opinion .
Such comparisons create confusion and might even give the impression that particular alcoholic drinks could safely be consumed in larger quantities .
Such comparisons cannot give any indication of the actual effects of a beverage on individual people or of an individual ' s consumption capacity .
On the contrary , they might induce people to misjudge their own tolerance levels .
Such warnings would not constitute consumer education ; they would be more likely to confuse or even mislead consumers .
Producers and purveyors of alcoholic beverages are heavily involved in the sponsorship of sports clubs and cultural organisations and of the events in which they participate .
A ban on the sponsorship of youth events would ultimately deprive clubs of vital income .
Why should a brewery which sponsors an adult sports event for a club or association not be allowed to make its marquee available for a youth event too ?
Whether a ban on sponsorship would actually have an educational impact is a moot question .
The most likely effect is that the clubs and associations could no longer afford to stage youth events , which means that young people would be the losers at the end of the day .
Alcohol , tobacco and drugs are three distinct problems and need to be treated differently .
I hope we are addressing each of these problems , and indeed I am sure that we do address them on an everyday basis .
I therefore ask the House to refrain from any attempt to lump these three very important issues together in this report .
Mr President , unfortunately , we all know that drunken driving is the primary cause of death among young people between the ages of 15 and 25 , not forgetting that this figure does not include the number of people disabled as the result of road traffic accidents caused by drunken driving .
The consumption of alcohol , especially at a young age , is becoming an increasing cause of concern to the public and experts alike .
The problem appears to be more acute in northern Europe , where it is linked to an increase in the number of suicides .
Another worrying dimension is that younger and younger children , irrespective of sex or social class , are drinking more and more regularly .
It would be helpful , I think , given that numerous , somewhat cloudy terms are being used , such as use , dependence , abuse , excessive use , if we were to use the term applied by the World Health Organisation , which talks of ' harmful use ' and which refers to the amount , frequency , conditions , form and consequences of alcohol use by young people .
The Council recommendation should be more specific ; what we want is uniform European legislation on this matter .
What we need , first and foremost , is preventive intervention designed to limit use and I think that any reference to measures which restrict demand is important and that our policy should revolve around it .
Access by young people to places in which alcoholic beverages are easily obtainable must be specially regulated , together with any other measures to control supply .
The fact is that we need to be proactive and ensure that young people are correctly informed about the side effects of a drinking habit , as they are for other psychotropic substances , both legal and illegal .
Special reference also needs to be made to the role of advertising .
It is unacceptable that alcoholic beverage companies should direct advertising campaigns at young people , a group of consumers which is highly susceptible to the messages it receives .
What we need to do , within the framework of the European Union , is to organise proper information campaigns and special training seminars for people who come into contact with young consumers .
Having extended its remit to other psychotropic substances , the European Drugs Monitoring Centre could play a decisive role both in this sense and in collating reliable and comparable epidemiological data .
To finish , I should like to express my hope that the European Commission has understood how serious this issue is and will introduce clear and specific regulations which deal effectively with such a serious issue , which concerns the health and security of our youngsters .
Mr President , I have to say , the liberal group did wrestle with this topic to some degree , and has problems with the Commission proposal .
The question is , how motherly should the European Union be in the quest to protect itself from its subjects ?
Indeed , we can see major differences compared to the control of tobacco .
Tobacco is always harmful , whereas alcohol is not , most of the time .
The addictive aspects are completely different .
Tobacco is immediately addictive , alcohol is not .
Also , the seriousness of the tobacco issue is of a completely different order from that of alcohol .
Alcohol does create problems , and sometimes they can be harrowing .
Just think of the road victims caused by alcohol abuse , which Mrs Malliori mentioned a moment ago , or the role of alcohol in domestic violence .
However , the issues are first and foremost of a criminal nature and , as such , they belong with the national , not the European , legislator .
This is also preferable for reasons of content .
The cultural differences in this area are enormous , and a legislator who is closer to the citizen can therefore act more effectively , and , in the final analysis , effectiveness is what it is all about .
In addition , in the proposals , the differences between justified alcohol consumption and alcohol abuse have been watered down , if you will excuse the pun .
In that respect , we believe that the present proposals are to some extent missing the mark .
We also vehemently object to the patronising overtones of many of the amendments , in particular .
We identified much more with the rapporteur ' s original report , on which we should like to congratulate her .
To the Member States , I would like to say the following : be as strict as you like in terms of controlling alcohol abuse , and especially alcohol abuse among young people , but do not hide behind the European Union and behind what you are about to arrange amongst yourselves behind closed doors in the Health Council .
We do recognise the fact that the issue of alcohol has a European , cross-border dimension , although it is not evident from these proposals .
These predominantly focus on the ingredients of alcohol products .
We believe that European legislation in the field of labelling should at least be considered or examined .
This could then include the possibility of using warning labels , as is done in the United States , for example , at least as long as it can be proven that these warning labels serve a purpose .
It could also incorporate the issue of advertising .
Secondly , the proposals deal with taxes , excise , tariffs and such like .
The differences in this field within the Union are enormous .
We wonder about the internal market implications this has , as well as the health implications . That is why my group has tabled an amendment on both scores .
Mr President , all the statistics show that the number of children and adolescents drinking has reached alarming levels over the past decade .
So I congratulate the Commission on this welcome initiative and the rapporteur , Mrs Stihler , for strengthening and improving the Commission 's recommendation .
Children and young people are drinking alcohol more frequently and starting not only to drink but to get drunk at an ever younger age .
In Wales , my own constituency , half of all fifteen-year-olds drink beer every week .
While I would usually be the first to welcome equality between the sexes , in this case we can only regret that over the past decade the number of girls drinking excessively has almost equalled that of boys in nearly every Member State .
Young people , as was said earlier , must be able to make their own informed decisions about alcohol .
The report refers to the importance of involving young people themselves in the campaign to prevent alcohol abuse , so that the right , positive images and the right messages are used , which will reach young people and which will have an influence on them .
We must stop the deliberate targeting of alcohol products at young people .
We must have effective labelling and advertising of the dangers of alcohol , but also readily available information for young people , parents and all those involved in youth work to promote healthy living .
In this way we may be able to stem the increasing prevalence of alcohol , which can be so destructive in the lives of young people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal of attention has been paid in recent years to the problem of addiction with regard to drug use .
Paradoxically , with regard to abusive consumption of alcohol and alcohol dependency , little or nothing has been done .
It is also a paradox that the real situation is very far removed from what is normally thought to be the case .
Alcohol dependency is a much more widespread and deep-rooted problem in social and public health terms , with statistics in many countries showing that around 10 % of the population could be classed as suffering from alcoholism .
This is one of the unspoken tragedies of our times - society appears to be repeating the denial that is one of the defining features of alcoholism and other forms of drug addiction and , as is well known , is one of the major obstacles to recovery for those affected .
The report and this recommendation counter the indifferent approach we have seen in the past and therefore deserve our congratulations and our support .
They rightly focus on children and adolescents in particular .
On the one hand , it is a known fact that alcohol consumption amongst the young has increased markedly and today we are even seeing cases of juvenile alcoholism , which was practically unknown or extremely rare a few decades ago .
On the other hand , health education and information programmes targeting young people will , in the long term , also have a positive impact on the overall prevention of alcoholism .
Many older alcoholism sufferers today are from generations that were unaware , that thought that there was no problem because things had always been that way .
What we need to do now is to provide information , especially for young people .
We must inform , warn , monitor , anticipate and prevent a human and social disaster .
As a matter of fact , we are today facing new challenges , with a situation in which the market is swamped with products that purport to be harmless , such as alcoholic cool drinks or synthetic drinks that are specifically targeted at the youngest drinkers , which could represent the start of their alcohol abuse and , consequently , the door to the abyss , the danger of which we must expose .
We sincerely hope that this recommendation will succeed and that it will be stringently monitored in all Member States .
Mr President , as we know , the report that is before us today has been adopted unanimously in the competent committee , which surely illustrates that there is broad consensus on this subject matter across all the ideological divides .
If you were to ask me to express a point of criticism , this would not be about the gist of this report , but I should only like to mention that , when I read this document , it appears at times that it is labouring quite a few obvious points in a fairly patronising manner , in other words , a number of opinions are being trotted out on which everyone is in fact agreed .
One can also question whether it is , in fact , necessary to tackle an issue at European level once again , of which all Member States are very much aware and on which they are all taking measures .
However , allow me to express my surprise at the fact that , among the keen advocates of this report , especially in the parliamentary committee , I also discovered the names of MEPs from , for example , several Belgian parties in office who , in their own countries , support an actual policy to legalise soft drugs and implement such a policy by adopting an extremely flexible policy of tolerance , on the one hand , and by launching various specific propaganda campaigns promoting the use of soft drugs , on the other . This even includes the Ministers of parties in office who , via the mass media , openly admit to using soft drugs and who even light up joints while on television .
In all honesty , I am extremely annoyed at this form of hypocrisy , where alcohol is rightly kept in check but where the use of marijuana and other dangerous drugs by a certain type of progressive intelligentsia is advertised as being politically correct .
I simply wanted to get this off my chest , Mr President .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having been elected by a wine-producing region , I will gladly support the text presented for the vote .
It is true , we must combat the menace of alcoholism in young people , and this text successfully highlights the role that families , teachers , producers and retailers must play in this area .
This document will certainly been seen as a call for sensible behaviour in Member States and I appreciate the fact that it is not restrictive but makes every effort to make those involved shoulder more responsibility .
Nonetheless , I would like to stress that wine consumed in moderation at meal times has always been an integral part of our culture , our way of life and our conviviality .
Drinking wine , and drinking sensibly , is something that we learn in the family context as we grow up .
This natural product , which is as varied and diverse as the land on which the vines grow , has a beneficial effect on the health and happiness of the peoples of the Mediterranean , as stressed in the amendment that we have tabled .
Mr President , I happened to be Minister of Health when advice came through that the new guidance should be that some alcohol was better than none , but some was also better than too much , and in a sense that is what we need to do through this report : to help young people understand that there is a balance to be struck between the pleasure and the benefit of drinking alcohol sensibly and the dangers of alcohol abuse .
One of the things that had to be learnt was that the units per day that you drink cannot be concentrated in binge drinking at the weekend because the level of alcohol in next day 's bloodstream is then catastrophically high .
Young people need to understand the danger of abuse , they need also to understand the effect of drinking on their study , on their ability to concentrate , on work , especially if they are working with machinery , on leisure and on sport , and we have inserted a warning about the risk of dying if you swim after drinking too much .
Most serious of all is the role of alcohol abuse in triggering or exacerbating mental illness , and especially for young men as the precursor to suicide attempts .
This is a useful report .
It needs further study in some places , not least on the unit labelling , because in Britain the unit is eight grams of alcohol , in Spain and Denmark it is ten , in France it is twelve and in Portugal it is fourteen .
We also need to look carefully at the sports grounds restrictions that are suggested , because there is a huge difference between a ninety-minute football match - give or take the half-time break - and many clubs of course ban alcohol in their grounds , and the all-day cricket match with the lunch and tea intervals .
We have to be careful not to ban the hospitality boxes because of loss of revenue to sport and boardroom drinking because of loss of sanity to sports directors .
But broadly I welcome this as a step for the Commission to consider .
Mr President , the abuse of alcohol by children and young people is a serious problem , and it is a growing problem , but for me it is not an EU problem .
Mr Prodi said last year , here in this Chamber , that , out of consideration for the EU ' s legitimacy in the eyes of the people , Parliament and the EU should not become involved in all manner of ridiculous matters .
The abuse of alcohol by children and young people is no laughing matter - on the contrary - but the problem falls within the province of families , the local community and the Member States .
We are talking about the principle of subsidiarity .
There are sensible things in what is being proposed .
We are discussing the provision of information to young people and the risks of alcohol , but the proposal also contains so much that is over-protective and so many admonishments , and these are aspects I cannot support .
The EU must not dictate the frameworks for the cultural differences in the Member States .
In fact , the EU must ensure that the differences are respected and , therefore , the advertising of beer on English television must be permitted , even if this might be unacceptable on Spanish television .
We must respect diversity and strengthen the principle of subsidiarity , partly out of consideration for the legitimacy of the EU .
Mr President , earlier we voted in favour of the report by Mr Maaten on tobacco products , which contains some excellent measures .
Now , we have exactly the same problem with alcohol ; in other words , we are faced with approximately the same number of deaths , not only caused in road accidents , which is what we seem to focus on , but from cirrhosis of the liver , stomach cancer , throat cancer as well , and this is without including the various social problems .
As in the case of tobacco products , we know that smoking a cigarette is no more dangerous than drinking a glass of wine .
However , as in the case of tobacco products , we also know that drinking alcohol and adopting the habit of drinking begins at a young age , particularly because of the example shown by adults and the positive image it is given in advertisements .
We should , in fact , adopt the same type of measures for alcohol as for tobacco products , and from this point of view , although the Commission report is good , it does not go nearly as far , perhaps because the alcohol lobbies are still more powerful than those for tobacco products , or perhaps because of our culture and customs .
We should , in fact , bring in labelling for all alcoholic drinks to cover 30 % of the product ' s surface , indicating that alcohol kills , that alcohol is dangerous for health .
We should ban advertising of alcohol , however implicit .
We should ban sponsorship of all activities , particularly sporting activities , by manufacturers of alcoholic drinks .
I shall not give a lecture but the truth of the matter is , as in the case of tobacco products , we will not make progress through clamping down on consumers - only through prevention .
That is why we must immediately take action against everything that may incite young people to drink alcohol .
Mr President , I think it encouraging that there is now a considerable consensus on the problem of alcohol abuse by young people and I certainly think that the views expressed here this afternoon should strengthen Commissioner Byrne 's hand in dealing with the problem .
It is regrettable that in our understandable concern to tackle drugs and drug-trafficking we have by and large ignored what is for many people , young and old , a serious form of addiction with immense consequences for society and in particular individuals and their families .
The cost to the state in terms of health costs , loss of work days and production is in my view greater than the revenue generated from the sale of alcohol .
The survey referred to by the rapporteur in this report is startling , and it certainly gives me no pleasure to see Ireland at the top of that list .
Surveys in Ireland reveal a similar and worrying trend with implications for the welfare of a generation of young people with enormous potential and opportunities .
While each individual must at the end of the day take responsibility for his or her attitude to alcohol , there is in my view a need for much stronger action on the part of Member State governments and on the part of the Commission and this Parliament as well .
The targeting of young people by some manufacturers of so-called designer drinks is a case in point .
A stop must be put to such activity and this Parliament , with the Council , should initiate strong action to deal with the matter .
Mr President , like everyone here , I am concerned by alcohol abuse in young people and by the shift in culture , which dictates that young people , in some countries particularly , believe they have to get blind drunk at the weekend so as to be cool .
I acknowledge , therefore , that the Commission ' s initiative has a valid basis .
Unfortunately , our competent committees , which have collectively drawn up around 50 amendments , have again sinned in their overzealous approach .
If their ideas are adopted , instead of combating unsavoury alcoholism , they will have succeeded in harming , amongst others , a whole industry , in other words , the wine-producing industry .
We should make a distinction between the moderate , responsible drinking of alcoholic beverages - of wine in particular , which is part of our culture - and alcohol and drug abuse .
We cannot combat alcoholism by restricting supply .
For instance , would you like the production of wine , beer and spirits to be banned , and to what extent ?
The majority of our countries have a ban on the sale of alcohol to minors and this legislation should be strictly enforced .
Why , though , would we want to ban the sale of alcoholic beverages at competitions and other events ?
The Evin law in France , which is also inconsistent with the single market , bans all advertising of alcoholic beverages at sporting events , but does not ban their sale .
We have also already held epic debates on the labelling of alcoholic beverages .
We have not , until now , succeeded in reaching agreement on a directive .
A recommendation on alcohol consumption in young people is certainly not the way to obstruct us , proposing to place warnings about the dangers to health on each wine bottle , for example , despite the fact that experience has shown such warnings to be totally ineffective in the United States .
There is , moreover , a law on labelling wines , which actually makes it illegal to make the public aware of the benefits of drinking wine in moderation , whereas it has been scientifically proven that drinking a few glasses of wine a day is an excellent way to prevent cancer , vascular diseases and Alzheimer ' s disease in particular .
I shall be voting against the amendments that propose measures which are totally unrelated to combating alcoholism in young people and which show utter disregard for the principle of subsidiarity .
Throughout the EU we have a problem with young people drinking too much .
We are not talking about adult drinking here , let us stress that .
Some of my colleagues have raised the issue of subsidiarity .
We are not dealing with a regulation or a directive here .
We are simply talking about a recommendation .
To try to deal with young people binge drinking and drinking to excess .
It is a way for other countries to learn from each other .
It is important , for instance , that school nurses and doctors are trained to spot the problems of excessive drinking by young people .
We must realise that peer pressure is a problem , lack of self-esteem , parents drinking : those are all problems we should take into account . We should also make sure that we consult the NGOs , which have a great deal of experience in this field already , and make sure that producers and retailers are held responsible for their actions .
I personally would like to see alcohol advertising banned at young people 's sporting events , not at adult events but at young people 's sporting events , and I believe very strongly that we should support this recommendation .
The WHO is supporting measures in this field , the NSPCC is and I certainly hope my colleagues will vote for it .
Mr President , I also wish to join my colleagues in thanking the committee and the rapporteur in particular for their tremendous work on this report .
It is important that when we speak about young people we should recognise that we may not be the best people to understand what they want .
A lot of us are past the first flush of youth and , therefore , we may not be as clued up on today 's youth culture as some of us might like to believe .
Perhaps one of the key points or recommendations that should be in this report is that young people should be asked what they want , what pressures they suffer from and what drives them to binge drinking and abuse of alcohol .
Maybe we would discover that some of the issues which we think of as problems are not problems at all , and that a lot of the difficulties are due firstly to the example they are given by their parents and the older generation ; secondly , the acceptability of young people drinking and , thirdly , the way social events revolve around alcohol .
We also have to ensure that we do not mix the message with regard to what is moderate and what is immoderate drinking .
In particular , we should ensure that information campaigns are reactive and proactive towards young people .
The number of health problems , both psychological and physical , affecting young people because of alcohol abuse is enormous , as is the number of unwanted pregnancies , under-age pregnancies , violent assaults and suicides .
The coroner in County Mayo on the western coast of Ireland said that sixty per cent of suicides or attempted suicides in that area were directly related to alcohol .
Therefore we should have a clear enforcement of the law , an identity card system at national level to ensure that young people do not have access to alcohol and strict enforcement and penalties for people who supply young people with drink .
Mr President , combating alcohol-related harm is a public health priority in many Member States and also at EU level .
This is clearly reflected in the draft of the future Public Health Action Programme where inappropriate use of alcohol is mentioned as one of the key health determinants to be tackled .
Over the last couple of years , there has been growing evidence that alcohol consumption by young people and the corresponding health and social problems have increased alarmingly .
This is why the Commission took the initiative to address the problems caused by the drinking of alcohol by young people in the form of a Council recommendation which is a valid instrument foreseen under the public health article of the Treaty , namely Article 152 .
The broad discussions which we held during the last three years with the Member States , experts and stakeholders clearly show that the drinking behaviour of young people is increasingly similar throughout the European Union and that Community action is therefore justified and appropriate .
I have been very pleased to learn that in the Council working group and in COREPER the Member States have welcomed this initiative very positively .
I therefore believe that this is an issue for the European Union at European level , and not just an issue at Member State level .
I fully agree with those who say that this issue is different from tobacco .
It must be distinguished from tobacco and indeed also drugs . It has been mentioned in the contributions this afternoon that we dealt with this yesterday in the directive that we discussed , and that is dealt with on an EU-wide basis .
But there are many issues relating to alcohol consumption that must be addressed on an EU-wide basis also . For instance , advertising comes to mind .
The codes of conduct that are contained in the television without frontiers legislation : are they being fully and properly complied with ?
These codes of conduct operate on an EU-wide basis . The advertising operates on an EU-wide basis , and as has already been stated by one of the honourable Members , this is a recommendation .
It is not a directive or a regulation . I am equally pleased that the discussion in the European Parliament confirms our concerns and the way to tackle them .
I welcome Parliament 's intention to support the Commission 's approach and to strengthen the proposal through the large number of very constructive amendments .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Stihler , and the Committee on the Environment for their constructive work .
On this basis the Commission can accept Amendment Nos 1 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 18 , 27 , 30 , 31 and 34 .
There are also a number of amendments which contain very valid ideas which can only be accepted by the Commission in a redrafted form to make them fit into the proposal structure and to keep the text consistent .
I am speaking about Amendment Nos 7 , 13 , 15 , 17 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 33 , 35 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 42 , 49 , 50 , 51 and 52 .
A range of Parliament 's amendments suggest to enlarge the scope of the recommendation by proposing broader aspects of alcohol policy or concrete regulatory steps .
I think that we should stick to the proposed approach which is , at this stage , to intensify health promotion and education efforts and to bring the producers and retailers to act responsibly .
During the implementation of the recommendation and in the framework of the future debates on a strategic approach of the Community to reduce alcohol-related harm there will be room to discuss all aspects which could be relevant for an effective alcohol policy .
The following amendments can therefore not be accepted for the purpose of the recommendation , but the Commission will take account of their contents in the future strategy approach : these are Amendment Nos 5 , 6 , 14 , 26 , 29 , 41 , 44 , 45 , 47 , 48 , 53 , 54 , 55 and 56 .
In relation to Amendment No 53 I would draw the House 's attention to Directive 79 / 112 on the labelling of foodstuffs which is a piece of legislation that is within my competence and of course will be kept under review and looked at in the context of the remarks that have been made by colleagues and of the other advice that I get in relation to the labelling of alcohol .
Some of the amendments cannot be accepted because they propose to change a quotation from a legal text and I refer to Amendment Nos 2 , 3 and 4 .
Others are unnecessary because the proposed subject is already covered in the proposal and I refer here to numbers 19 , 25 , 32 and 46 .
The subject matters of Amendment Nos 20 and 37 refer to issues which are too specific to be taken explicitly on board , although in principle they fall under the thematic approach of the proposal .
Concerning Amendment No 23 , the whole recommendation is about alcohol consumption by young people .
The Commission believes it to be very important to mention drink-driving specifically .
For this reason the amendment is not acceptable .
Amendment No 36 cannot be accepted because of definition problems for the purpose of this recommendation .
The age ban has not been defined by using the term under-age , and different legislation applies in different Member States .
Amendment No 28 conflicts with the medical advice the Commission has received .
Amendment No 43 would remove an important aspect of future codes of conduct and therefore cannot be accepted either .
Some amendments can be partially accepted by the Commission .
In Amendment No 9 the first two sentences cannot be accepted because assessment will have to cover all aspects and not just a shortlist of measures .
It makes sense however to accept the reference to the regional and local level .
The changes proposed in Amendment No 12 highlighting only some alcohol policy aspects and not others would be misleading and cannot therefore be accepted , except a reference to self-esteem by young people which the Commission can of course accept .
In Amendment No 16 the Commission cannot accept mention of only certain specific aspects for evaluation as this would be counter-productive .
However , references to good practices and to the role of the medical practitioners are acceptable .
I look forward to seeing the recommendation being implemented because there is no doubt that this will be an excellent basis for working jointly towards a common aim , to better protect our young people , especially children and adolescents .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
General product safety
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0133 / 2001 ) by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety [ 14614 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0045 / 2001 - 2000 / 0073 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , we are debating the revision of Directive 92 / 59 / EEC on general product safety and there is a priority which the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament share , which is to improve consumer health and safety .
This has always been a desire , but in the current circumstances it has become a firmer commitment .
The proposal is intended to guarantee the safety of marketed products and promote compliance with the obligations of producers and distributors .
Producers must only market safe products , must provide consumers with reliable information , prevent risks and , where necessary , finally withdraw dangerous products already on the market .
Nor must distributors supply any product which they know to be unsafe , and they must cooperate with the markets ' monitoring network , which also involves the authorities charged with monitoring product safety .
This revision has followed a method which we believe to be adequate , including the consultation which took place before making the proposal with non-governmental organisations and social agents , companies and so on .
More than fifteen of these organisations were consulted before making the proposal and the intention was to correct the gaps and insufficiencies in the implementation of the directive over previous years .
Some of these suggestions are included above all in the first Council proposal presented by the Commission .
We agreed with the majority of the proposal made to us .
However , we presented thirty amendments , which we believed improved the proposal .
At first reading , twenty-one of them were adopted , totally or partially .
They better defined the concepts of ' safe product ' and ' recuperation ' , pointed to the need for periodic reports to the European Parliament on the success or failure of the implementation of the directive , as well as labelling in the language of the country where the products were marketed , and proposed , amongst other things , that the candidate countries be included in the RAPEX system .
Nevertheless , certain issues continued to concern the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the alternative rapporteurs and the Commission itself .
And in this second reading we are presenting just eleven amendments which were discussed in the Environment Committee and approved at the last sitting by a significant majority , and which at the various informal meetings - there were many and I must thank the Commission and the Council for their interest in this report - we tried to reduce .
I believe we can easily reach an agreement on five of these amendments .
They are amendments which refer to the possibility of an external certification of safe products , to the possibility of harmonising the monitoring programmes of the different Member States , to the inclusion of the precautionary principle in such an important issue and to the establishment and promotion of a network of competent authorities in relation to product safety .
There are more difficulties with other amendments , such as those which refer to the exporting of unsafe products to the Third World and to the safety of services .
We believe it is very important that there should be specific legislation .
At the moment - I do not know if this is the case in the rest of Europe , but in my country it is - services such as tourism , courses in academies or telecommunications are the subjects of much debate , because in many of them there is flagrant abuse going on .
We therefore wish to ensure that there is legislation on this issue soon , as well as legislation relating to the nature of committees .
Mr President , I believe that it will not be difficult to reach an agreement on the eleven amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
And I will stress one which I believe should be a distinguishing mark for Europe .
I am talking about our attitude to the ethics of exporting products , which Europeans consider to be unsafe , to other countries .
This seems to us to be an essential amendment because , if they are unsafe for Europeans , they are unsafe for the whole world , even if other countries have more flexible regulations .
We therefore believe that by supporting the proposal of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , we are also supporting principles which are of paramount importance to the European Union .
Mr President , the directive that is now before us , concerning general product safety , offers the consumer excellent protection against unsafe products .
Moreover , it is particularly suited to achieving the internal market , free movement and the harmonisation which is required for this in an effective manner .
I greatly appreciate the fact that the Council has adopted a large number of the amendments accepted by Parliament at first reading .
The directive in its current version provides for greater transparency , more active monitoring of the markets , a better definition of producer and consumer responsibilities - for that was still a stumbling block at first reading - stricter criteria for product safety and stricter criteria for testing these products .
It allows for better and more effective intervention when products need to be withdrawn from the market .
New , too , is rapid exchange , which I very much welcome in Europe .
I would now like to turn my attention to a specific problem .
It was raised in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and concerns the export ban , enshrined in Article 13 .
This entails an automatic export ban on products from the Community once the Commission has been requested to examine the safety of these .
We do not support this .
Indeed , the proposal that a request for a safety check alone should lead to an absolute and automatic ban is hardly justifiable .
Needless to say , the European Union is in favour of a high level of protection and very strict safety requirements , but a distinction must be drawn between a safe and a hazardous product .
My colleague , Mrs Marialiese Flemming , whom I represent here , has tabled an amendment in this connection , and she suggests only allowing the automatic export ban to apply if the product for which a ban is being issued here should also be banned on account of safety .
This point is of crucial importance to the PPE-DE group , and I hope that our fellow MEPs will support us by adopting the amendment tabled by Mrs Flemming on our behalf .
Mr President , I will begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
As the shadow rapporteur for my group , I have seen her diligence throughout these proceedings and we all wish to honour her work .
This is quite a new state of the parliamentary proceedings , and we need to pick our words carefully as we look forward to a potential conciliation .
At second reading we are deliberately putting forward only a few amendments which centre on some very important principles , and on most of those we will reach a further agreement .
As Mrs González Álvarez has said , the committee passed , by a substantial majority , all of the amendments , and we propose to vote for them today .
We need - we think we shall get - a clear assurance that we shall move ahead from these proposals to the safety of services and the liability of service providers and there should not be any division of principle on that .
We need to make it crystal clear that we shall also be able to take out of the market , not just for us , but world-wide , those products which present a serious risk , not just for domestic consumption , but also in the global market , because such products can easily be recycled , as Mrs González Álvarez says in her new Amendment No 13 .
We are asserting that principle today in the signing off of the Maaten report on tobacco , and it is precisely the same principle that we invoke here .
Of course , there will have to be some compromises and discussions , but we need to look very carefully at what the word " exemption " means , if it is going to be asserted as a limitation on the path to withdrawal .
There is a will to agree and a will to compromise , but we need to do it on the basis that the precautionary principle is always held in mind in our discussions and that this is consistent with other things which this Commissioner and this Commission have done in terms of the banning of dangerous products elsewhere .
Finally , I would like to say that whilst I am certain that we can harmonise the guidelines on safety which will be used throughout the enlarged EU and we can agree on external certification , we need to be careful of other phrases which I hear bandied about as possible compromises .
One is " where appropriate " .
Where is not appropriate , where we are applying the precautionary principle ?
It has to be there throughout , not necessarily as the leitmotif , but certainly as something that we bear in mind in framing the legislation .
So I cannot , I fear , go along with Mrs Flemming 's amendment , and I , like most of the committee , wish to press these amendments .
Mr President , this Parliament and Council directive on general product safety is important to the safety of the consumer .
The aim is that this directive should also incorporate products which still do not come within the province of sectoral legislation and products whose safety aspects are not dealt with very well by sectoral legislation .
That is important for the internal market , and it is also important for consumers to be able to rely on products within the European market displaying a high safety content .
Needless to say , these consumers must then proceed to use these products in a responsible manner .
This directive thus creates more clarity by explaining definitions and , at the same time , simplifying procedures so that Member States can obtain information more quickly .
People still die of the effects of unsafe products .
Moreover , I am of the opinion that it is irresponsible for safe product standards to be observed on behalf of EU citizens , but for citizens outside the EU to have to content themselves with less safe products .
If we take these products off the shelves here , we should no longer export them .
In fact , that is , of course , an issue that goes beyond this report , and I think we have not heard the last of it .
This report can count on our unqualified support .
Mr President , I wish to express my support and the support of my group for the rapporteur and the amendments retabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The Council 's common position improved the methods of traceability for consumer products , cooperation between authorities , producers and distributors in taking action to withdraw and recall dangerous products , and the opening up of the rapid alert system to the applicant countries .
I am very pleased that it has now been made clear that charity shops , car-boot sales and flea-market stalls will not be harmed by this directive as , by their very nature , they cannot provide information on product risk and product origin for second-hand goods .
I support the Environment Committee 's retabled amendments , in particular the specific reference to the precautionary principle , to market monitoring and the European product safety network .
I strongly oppose exempting provisionally banned products from the export ban .
This would be double standards and would go against the very aim of the directive .
If there is concern about the safety of a product , then how can we justify exporting it to third countries ?
As the rapporteur said earlier : safety should be assured for all consumers , not just those in the European Union .
I agree with the need for a fair balance between ensuring that products put on the market are safe and that the measures proposed can be practically implemented - this directive can achieve that .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the directive on general product safety is so important to us because it relates to a key area , namely those products that are not covered by the CE mark .
But this brings me straight to one of the weak points of this proposal for a directive on general product safety , namely the fact that it will no longer be apparent to the consumer whether a product is really safe .
This makes our Amendment No 3 especially important , because it provides quite simply for external certification by authorised testing agencies .
There is an urgent need for the Commission to consider the introduction of verification marks - marks which certify to the consumer that a product is safe and , in some cases , that the product is of above-average quality .
A product is then deemed to be safe when its safety has been verified by an accredited test centre .
This is of particular importance to small and medium-sized businesses .
If we think about the precautionary principle and prevention , it becomes clear that incentives must be created to encourage companies to have their products tested .
I believe that testing by a third party , an impartial agency , would be an important means of easing the pressure on market-monitoring programmes .
And this easing of pressure , along with the predictability deriving from testing and certification , would enable consumers to establish very clearly and easily where reliably safe products can be bought .
On the export ban , let me say that there are naturally many countries whose standards differ greatly from those in Europe .
I believe we should not be so haughty as to regard other countries ' standards as inferior and to assume that ours are the only good and valid standards .


Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs González Álvarez , and Mr Whitehead and Mr Lange for their very comprehensive contribution to the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety .
There is a formal revision provision in the original directive .
The revision coincided with a reinforced commitment by the Commission to safeguard the health and safety of consumers .
The revised directive will progressively lead to a substantial improvement in the possibilities for dealing with safety problems of non-food products .
The Council common position takes account of the fundamental points of the amended proposal adopted by the Commission in the light of the first reading opinion .
21 out of 30 amendments from the first reading have been incorporated in part or in substance in the common position .
Many of the proposed amendments of the González Álvarez recommendation are an improvement to the text and can therefore be accepted by the Commission .
Allow me to address the amendments with which the Commission cannot agree .
First Amendments Nos 2 and 9 reinstate the text of the Commission 's original proposal for a ban on exports of dangerous products withdrawn from the EU market following an emergency decision .
Amendment No 13 justifies this with the risk of reimportation to the Community market of such products which have been exported .
The compromise in the common position would make it possible for the Commission to provide for exemptions from an outright ban on the export of such products .
This was accepted by the Commission , because it was considered by many Member States as a safeguard necessary for them to accept the very principle of a ban ; moreover the compromise leaves it up to the Commission to decide whether waiving the ban is justified .
The risk of reimportation of exported goods can be kept under control with the normal mechanism of customs and market surveillance .
Overall , I consider that the impact of this exemption would be very limited , would be under very tight control and supervision by the Commission itself and obviously would only operate in circumstances where it was justified , clearly rationalised and clearly acceptable and not just to me , but to the entire Commission .
Secondly , Amendment No 3 introduces a requirement in an article that external certification should be regarded as a proof of conformity with the directive .
The Commission can only accept a reference in a recital that such certification can facilitate proving such compliance .
Thirdly , Amendment No 11 invites the Commission to submit proposals related to the safety of services before a specified date .
The Commission is in fact already analysing and considering this issue as it has announced in a statement .
Recital 1 would include a reference to these initiatives , as suggested by Amendment No 1 .
Finally , Amendment No 12 seeks to limit the export ban so that it shall not be applied when a product has temporarily been banned from the Community market for the period needed for further safety investigations .
It cannot be justified to permit exports of products banned from the Community market on the basis of a potential serious risk .
In my view , this action must protect consumers outside the European Union in the same way as it protects consumers within the European Union ; and it occurs to me that if an emergency measure is being taken in this way , it is highly probable that it is an emergency measure because of the nature of the danger involved and very often the most serious emergencies result from the fact that the danger is the greatest .
If that is the case and if my assessment is correct , it means there is a greater need for this emergency proposal to apply not only to consumers within the European Union , but also to consumers outside the European Union .
Moreover , it is clear from this legislation that the evaluation as to whether it should apply in this way or not , will be undertaken by the appropriate committee which will be charged with this kind of work , experienced in doing this kind of work , which does not act precipitously or in a manner that would not fully protect the interests of consumers .
The committee will only operate where there is a clear and serious danger to consumers .
Having explained why the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 , I can inform you that the Commission can , in principle or in reworded versions , accept Amendments Nos 1 , 4 to 8 and 10 , as these amendments constitute an improvement and clarification of the proposal .
To conclude , I wish to thank Mrs González Álvarez again for the excellent report which can be broadly supported by the Commission and on those amendments with which the Commission cannot agree , I am convinced that a satisfactory conclusion can be found as identified and stated by Mr Whitehead .
I hope that this will be achieved as quickly as possible in the next stage of the regulatory process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
COM in beef and veal market
The next item is the report ( A5-0142 / 2001 ) by Robert William Sturdy , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) Nº 1254 / 1999 on the common organisation of the market in beef and veal ( COM ( 2001 ) 87 - C5-0082 / 2001 - 2001 / 0042 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to see the Commissioner here .
I may well disagree with his proposals but I wish to begin by saying that we believe that Commissioner Fischler is an excellent Agriculture Commissioner , although he might have got this report slightly wrong .
That is no criticism of Mr Fischler himself .
It is well known that we need to address the serious problem facing the beef industry , and that is certainly what brought about the Commission 's proposal .
I say to the Commissioner that there is a Byzantine proverb : for those who have food , there are many problems ; for those who have not , there is only one problem , and it is , of course , a great problem when there is too much beef in the marketplace .
This is exactly what the Commissioner is trying to address .
However , in my opinion as rapporteur , he has missed the mark .
It is easy for me to stand here and criticise , but what I tried to do in my report was to be constructive and move the situation forward - I realise that the Commissioner does not agree with some of the measures .
I hope that when the Commissioner addresses us he will perhaps answer one question : Will the 15 Council members agree with the Commission 's proposals ?
I think they might not .
I should like to know whether the view of the Commission is that they will agree with the Commission 's proposals or not .
First , the one thing that was voted out in the Committee on Agriculture that I believe was a mistake was the 90-head limit .
One of the major problems that we have - and the Commissioner is quite right that we have a problem with overproduction and we have pushed forward the proposals to allow the intervention limits to be raised - is that by changing the 90-head limit there is a real risk that we cut off some of those producers in their prime .
I say to those Members who do not understand agriculture that to raise a beef animal from conception to the actual marketplace takes somewhere in the region of three years .
It is a very long process .
You cannot switch off something like that overnight and just say : well , hang on a minute , these cattle cannot be supported because suddenly we have changed our minds .
If the Commissioner cannot at least change that 90-head limit - and we hope that one of the amendments may help us ; we are looking at that at the moment - then at least he should look at helping those farmers who are affected by the 90-head limit so that they can adjust , because agriculture is a long-term process , not a short-term process .
We have seen the effects of BSE .
This is again why I am concerned a little about the report .
As the Commissioner knows , BSE has been a major problem in the United Kingdom .
It has been the archetype of the BSE crisis .
We got through it and with careful construction we brought our market back .
It was rather unfortunate that foot-and-mouth disease played a part in destroying the very work that had been done to get the marketplace back , bearing in mind that foot and mouth has nothing to do with food , in as much as it is of no danger to the public .
I ask the Commissioner not to make knee-jerk reactions , because I believe this is a knee-jerk reaction .
At the moment I cannot accept the new amendments tabled .
I have a great concern that we are trying to move away from the real issues here .
As I said , it is easy to stand here and criticise and I hope the Commissioner takes on board the amendments .
The question we ask is whether or not the proposals satisfy the requirements : I believe a few of the Commission 's proposals do but the majority fall short .
I leave the Commissioner with one last thought : if he finds it impossible to accept Parliament 's proposals , then he may wish to see the report referred back to the Committee on Agriculture .
Then we could rediscuss it , because we have put forward some good proposals and if it is a wish of this august House that it be referred back , then so be it .
. ( FR ) Mr President , the financial implications of the emergency plan proposed by the Commission to deal with the upheavals in the beef market as a result of the BSE crisis , have now been referred to the Committee on Budgets .
This plan was published on 13 February and was , therefore , unable to take into account the crisis caused by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease , two areas infected with which were discovered in the United Kingdom in February .
In these circumstances , I believe it should be stressed to the House that the current number of cases already represents a potential cost of over EUR 170 million , and that , on 8 May , the Commission quite rightly proposed establishing a reserve of EUR 1 billion .
This new crisis to hit European farmers has three major consequences .
The first is a direct cost to the Community budget , which still has not been defined but which is regularly increased . The second is a negative impact on beef and veal consumption and exports and lastly , the third is an impact on animal destruction programmes and , as a result , on slaughter costs .
In addition to the Commission ' s proposals , we must therefore be well aware that we are up against a major problem .
All the financial forecasts of beef consumption and exports are approximate , since they do not take into account the consequences of the recent outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease .
It is my view , therefore , that beef and veal consumption in 2001 will , unfortunately , fall by more than the 10.8 % , forecast by the Commission .
It is also unlikely that exports in 2001 will reach 60 % of the GATT limit .
The financial requirements could well , therefore , be higher than the Commission ' s forecasts .
We all understand that , in normal circumstances , financial inaccuracies would have been enough to justify a refusal but , given the urgent nature of the situation , the Committee on Budgets decided to support the Commission ' s proposal and it hoped that Parliament would approve the amendments , as the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have been able to , thanks to the excellent work by Robert Sturdy , while requesting a prior consultation of the budgetary authority should the costs incurred need to be revised .
Mr President , Commissioner , limiting the number of bulls for which premiums are payable to ninety per farm , one of the points in the Commission ' s seven-point plan , is unlikely to prove effective in matching beef production to demand in the European Union .
It is universally accepted that , in view of the fall in beef consumption , cattle farming cannot be sustained at the accustomed level .
But let me say , Commissioner , that the burden of this reduction must not be distributed unfairly to the detriment of particular regions .
If we want to speak about a new regime of premium entitlements , we cannot base such a regime on an absolute ceiling , as the Commission proposes , but on a solution that is reasonable for all farms , a point that Mr Sturdy has already made .
Such a solution can only be based on the amount of available grassland or , perhaps better still , on the input of working hours , in other words on the number of farmhands employed in accordance with the laws and regulations - and let me stress that last proviso .
Incidentally , if you remember , we have held this discussion already . We held it when we were discussing the organisation of the market in beef and veal in the context of the debate on Agenda 2000 .
But when you write , Commissioner Fischler , in your reply to a letter from the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that there is only one derogation from the 90-head rule in the new Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany and that the reduction there ought now to result in structural change , you are missing the point that the number of persons employed in agriculture in those regions has fallen in the last ten years from 800 000 to 150 000 .
May I say to the Commission that this is quite enough structural change !
Or , if I may resort to sarcasm , do you perhaps want to solve the beef problem at the expense of these new Länder in eastern Germany , thereby ensuring that the farms there will be forced to shut down ?
Why , in fact , can we not contemplate a tighter squeeze on premium payments on the basis of stocking density per hectare of forage area ?
You have provided for a reduction from 2 to 1.8 livestock units .
But I should like to see a different system , one which would render the 90-head premium limit superfluous .
Just imagine it were left to the farmer ' s discretion to decide how drastically he cut down the number of his cattle below the density threshold at which premiums became payable .
For this , however , the farmer would have to receive an additional compensatory payment corresponding to the extent of the voluntary reduction .
This could be called beef set-aside , by analogy with fruit and vegetable production , because we spend considerable amounts on set-aside premiums for non-production in those domains too .
If this system were to result in a lower level of beef production , it would be right and proper for us to reward those farmers who trim the size of their herds in such a natural way instead of producing surpluses which cannot be marketed and may even have to be destroyed .
Perhaps , Commissioner , you could take to this idea .
Your conversion need not be immediate !
Mr President , as has already been said , the reform presented to us by the Commission on 13 February 2001 , as a package of seven measures to deal with the problems created in the beef market by the BSE crisis , clearly deserves critical consideration by our Group .
Firstly because , while the Community cattle sector is hoping for measures to solve the crisis it is facing , only two of the measures in this package appear to be appropriate for resolving one particular crisis , that is , the Commission ' s budgetary crisis in relation to solving it .
Only the removal of the ceiling on public intervention of 350 000 tonnes for meat , with a view to preventing the implementation of the so-called safety network intervention system , seems to be a genuine crisis measure , as well as the measure - already approved by the management committee for meat on 16 March - of introducing a new intervention method for the sale and storage of animals of more than 30 months .
Please allow me to say also , Commissioner , that this measure does little to improve consumer confidence and to resolve the market problems , since we are storing meat which will later have to enter the market , thereby creating significant imbalances within that market .
The other five measures are really directed at the sector , but they are not urgent and they can enter into force and have their effects in the short and medium term .
These measures should really have been proposed with the calmness required for a reform in a sector suffering such a deep crisis .
However , I must be absolutely critical in relation to two of them .
One is the removal of the national limit on premiums for male cattle by means of individual laws ; I believe that this measure is wrong and would lead us to a market of quotas , which would be closed and narrow , and would do absolutely nothing for the transparency and simplification of the CAP nor a future reform of this sector .
The other is the restriction of production , as intended , by means of the reduction in the premium for suckler cows .
Commissioner , this proposal , which lays down that , in order to receive the premium for suckler cows , between 20 and 40 % of the animals for which the premium is requested must be heifers , is intended to reduce the quantity of meat available on the market ; but what it removes is quality meat which originates from herds of suckler cows bred within extensive systems .
This measure therefore has the completely wrong objective and is clearly contrary to the often-repeated objective of Community agricultural policy promoting extensive agriculture .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner , but first and foremost I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Sturdy , for an outstanding report , many parts of which I can support .
It is , of course , necessary to intervene in some respects in order to remedy the problems that do after all exist in the beef sector , but I would like to emphasise that consumers ' lack of confidence has nothing to do with whether meat is produced on an intensive or extensive basis .
I would like to stress that a reintroduction of the 90-head limit will have very serious consequences for some countries in particular .
It will result in more bureaucracy and it will not provide any relief whatsoever in connection with the consumption of beef , which is after all what we need just now .
With regard to the buy-up scheme , I would like to say that it is not an aim in itself to buy up animals in order either to put them into cold storage or subsequently destroy them .
Consequently , we have proposed that we donate the healthy tested beef to areas that need crisis help .
We can do this very easily for the costs associated with the intervention buy-up .
I would , then , like to draw the Chamber ' s attention to the fact that the proposal to tighten up the stocking density requirement , namely by reducing the number of livestock units per hectare from 2 to 1.8 , will not have the desired effect either .
Nonetheless , we agree that the intervention ceiling should be abolished for the years 2001 and 2002 .
However , with these few but - I hope , Commissioner - clear comments , we would like to support your proposal but , at the same time , also draw attention to the fact that we should not , through the new decisions we make , contribute to maintaining the distortion of competition that currently exists between some of the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , several points in the Commission ' s crisis plan for the beef market have already been dealt with , of course .
The slaughter programme has gone through the administrative process , and we dealt with clover ley here in a debate on matters of topical and urgent importance .
So let us now concentrate on the things that remain to be discussed .
I essentially wish to confine my remarks to the 90-head limit .
It should be made clear that this ceiling already applies in Europe but is not compulsory .
That was the big mistake in Berlin .
It would have been better to have adopted the proposal we made in Parliament at that time to the effect that there should be an additional mechanism in the degressive premium model to make allowance for the cost of labour .
This idea has now been taken up again , as the speakers from the other groups have made clear .
I hope the Commission will adopt this proposal , so that we can give farms with higher livestock populations the opportunity at least to adjust this 90-head limit .
As a result , larger farms with species-related husbandry methods involving additional labour inputs would have a means of obtaining reimbursement of their costs .
I believe we would then have made this limit less rigid as well as having introduced an enlightened social factor .
I hope that the House agrees and that it will vote accordingly tomorrow .
Mr President , Agenda 2000 sets out the key indicators for the domains of agricultural , structural and finance policy in the EU for the period from 2000 to 2006 .
Its aim was to sever the link between aid and production levels in the relevant product markets while keeping the loss of income and jobs within reasonable bounds , an aim which was formulated at a time when the restructuring process seemed destined to run fairly smoothly .
After the outbreaks of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease , the beef and veal markets collapsed with no sign of an early return to stability .
Farmers are counting on the additional special funds being provided now rather than disappearing in an interminable bureaucratic labyrinth .
The promises made in the initial weeks of the crisis regarding the special purchase scheme must first be honoured .
Incorporating this scheme into long-term plans to alter the organisation of the market in beef and veal will exacerbate the financial situation of beef producers .
The present draft amendment to the Regulation on the common organisation of the market in beef and veal essentially fulfils the Commission ' s aim of reducing the oversupply of these products .
Some of the proposals , however , have nothing at all to do with the consequences of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease .
The quality of products is not automatically better if a farm is bigger or is managed in a particular way .
Present market trends are unlikely to act as an incentive to invest in beef production .
The fixing of any form of ceiling for the payment of support is therefore an unwarranted additional financial burden on those who have already made investments .
Farmers depend on this income , and the 90-head limit will certainly be resisted .
Mr President , we have , on several occasions , stated that the best way of improving the situation of the zootechnical sector in Europe is to restore consumer confidence in the operators of the sector .
In order to achieve this goal , I feel that , first and foremost , it is vital for the institutions to ensure that the information they issue is correct and that appropriate terms are used to inform the public about BSE .
Talking about contamination , mad cow disease or infected meat does nothing to encourage the consumer to buy beef or veal .
BSE was not caused by a virus or a bacterium , and so we must prevent the use of inappropriate terminology generating phobias or psychosis among consumers .
What I am saying is part of the debate seeking to ensure that consumers are provided with correct , comprehensive information without creating futile panic .
Ensuring that information issued is correct is the most effective way of encouraging consumers to start buying beef and veal again , and this is much more important than any economic support the European Union may provide or any subsidising of farmers .
Mr President , Commissioner , European cattle farmers are being dealt heavy blows .
The huge drop in the consumption of beef and veal as a result of the BSE crisis has put the price of meat under heavy pressure , and consumption and exports have fallen even further in the wake of the foot and mouth crisis .
It is evident that the sector needs help .
However , the contingency plan suggested by the Commission appears to be a plan which will only restrict the production of beef and veal in the long term .
Commissioner , changing a common organisation of the market to have a long-term effect is something which we would term a reform , rather than a contingency plan .
Fortunately , the rapporteur , Mr Sturdy has included a number of amendments in his report which could serve as a contingency plan , namely by encouraging cattle breeders to have bulls slaughtered while they are still calves .
The measure to restrict animal premiums per cattle farm to a maximum of 90 animals , provided that the number of livestock units is reduced from 2 to 1.8 per hectare , will cut down production in due course .
The fact is , however , that , in this way , cattle farmers are not only affected by the existing crisis , they are also being hit financially by the Commission .
I therefore also support the amendments which propose increasing the premium for animals in proportion to the reduction in the number of livestock units , so that the financial incentive to produce more is actually being taken away from farmers .
Abolishing the intervention ceiling , a purchase scheme to which the Member States contribute , will enable the Commission to exercise the highest possible level of influence on the market price .
It keeps the costly safety net principle , which is funded 100 % from the EU budget , at bay for the time being .
Unlike Mr Sturdy , I am in favour of storing , rather than destroying , the meat purchased .
I would remind this Parliament of the foot and mouth resolution which it adopted in April and which urged that healthy animals should not be destroyed .
Agriculture is all about what we received from God in Creation .
It transcends economic interests and is all about ethics and responsible stewardship .
The current proposal from the European Commission is intended to compensate beef and veal producers for the huge instability that the market has suffered in recent months as a result of the successive crises to have hit the sector .
I understand the reasons behind this proposal and especially its timing , but I think it is quite inadequate , for the following reasons : first of all , I find it unacceptable that the special premium for male cattle should be reduced , if only temporarily . For the sake of reducing production , this measure would penalise Member States that are still net importers of meat , which is the case of my own country .
Secondly , it is hard to understand the creation of the special system of intervention buying for meat from animals over thirty months old either from the point of view of consumer confidence or that of cost , given that , even in a few months , it will still be impossible to dispose of meat that is stockpiled now .
It would be more sensible to buy these animals in order to destroy the meat .
Thirdly , encouraging extensive production makes sense but this must be accompanied with a special premium entitlement for small farms , which will not benefit from these incentives because they cover too small an area .
We are insisting once again on applying the ' one size fits all ' approach , as if all farms had the same capacity to adapt and to survive .
Finally , authorising organic farmers to use set-aside land for fodder - the subject of Mrs Auroi ' s report - can only be seen as symbolic at a time when producers are facing increased feed costs for their livestock .
Why are we not allowing farmers to use set-aside land for protein crops ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I too would like to praise the work that our fellow Member , Mr Sturdy , has carried out on the issue of amending the COM in beef and veal , following the BSE crisis .
We are faced with several problems : we need to address the imbalance in the beef and veal market , support farmers ' income and restore consumer confidence .
With regard to addressing the imbalance between supply and demand , first of all , I would like to point out that no one here and that includes the Commission , the rapporteur and the Committee on Agriculture is suggesting that we leave it simply to the effects of the free market .
I would like to think that the need to regulate supply , as we have to do today , will also be uppermost in our minds when we tackle the new , further-reaching reform of the common agricultural policy .
To return to the issue that we are dealing with today and in view of the reduced level that production must fall to , I would like to stress how crucial it is that we find a balance in the division of efforts required , on the one hand , by suckler herds and milk herds , and by industrial rearing methods and farms using grazing .
It would be ironic , just when the need to produce quality beef and veal by encouraging the use of grass is acknowledged , if it is the traditional suckler herds that are the cause of the main expenses of this COM ' s new adjustments .
I therefore ask that the 90 head limit be reinstated in order to qualify for the special premium , which supports the Commission ' s point of view .
I am not neglecting the fact that the Member States who have waived this limit as part of Agenda 2000 could come up against some problems .
Since Amendment No 12 of Article 1 introduces the possibility of taking into account wage costs , however , I believe that this measure is fair .
In the same way , I believe that the farmers who are already being penalised by the fall in market prices must not be punished further by a reduction in government support for cutting their numbers of cows per hectare .
I would also like to draw the Commission and the Council ' s attention to this issue so that the level of premiums per hectare of forage area remains unchanged .
As for the other points , naturally , I would also like to voice my support for not applying the ceiling for buying into public intervention of 350 000 tonnes of beef and veal per year in 2001 and 2002 as well as my support for the steps advocated by the rapporteur to promote beef and veal products .
Mr President , the seven-point plan was proposed , as we are all aware , in response to serious concerns about falling consumer confidence in beef and the resulting pressure on the intervention ceiling .
We understand that these concerns have abated somewhat in recent weeks and that consumption forecasts have now improved significantly .
If the Commission still believes that emergency measures should be introduced to inhibit over-supply in the beef and veal sector then these changes should not jeopardise the long-term future of the quality , grass-fed beef sector .
For this reason we would oppose any alteration to the existing rules for suckler cow premia and beef special premia .
Attention should instead - in our view - be focused on the removal of surplus calves from the system .
Whilst respecting the aims of Agenda 2000 we would therefore seek renewed justification from the Commission of the need for such radical proposals and would call for the re-evaluation of these measures .
Mr President , the draft Council regulation and the parliamentary report are confined to the purely administrative aspects of the problem of BSE and make no provision for any substantial procedure for identifying and combating the causes .
No mention is made of the role of the multinationals which , in order to maximise their profits , ignore the consequences of their unacceptable feeding methods and are only interested in containing the inevitable shock waves and crisis on the beef and veal market .
At the same time , by proposing measures to generalise and reduce the rates of growth in livestock farming , the European Union is treating all Member States the same and this is intolerable .
In other words , it treats production in developed livestock farming countries and in countries such as Greece , which is less self-sufficient and where production systems are less likely to have fostered the emergence of this disease , in the same way .
If the European Union really wanted to deal with the problem , it would treat production in countries such as Greece differently by cancelling all quotas for the expenditure incurred and covering it by reducing support for livestock production in the countries which are responsible for these health problems .
The ban on the use of meal and bonemeal should be finalised and measures taken to change the system of prices and subsidies so as to encourage the production of fodder crops to replace meat and bonemeal .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Sturdy on his work .
The reform of Europe 's beef regime is necessary for market balance and the restoration of consumer confidence .
It must , however , be done in a manner which safeguards the interests of family farming as distinct from intensive production .
Reasonable margins for farmers must be central to any restructuring proposals .
Without farmers we will not have a beef sector .
Already , many farmers are leaving the sector .
It is right to plan the future of Europe 's beef sector based on extensification and traceability .
As regards trade liberalisation , I wonder what steps will be taken to protect European producers from the unfair competition from third country imports where the same rules do not apply .
I have serious reservations about the individualisation of the male beef premia .
It is complicated and administratively difficult .
Likewise on supply control , it is wrong to target the suckler herd which is the foundation of quality beef production .
The proposal to set up a national purchase scheme should , in my view , be re-examined .
In the present climate the storage of beef for later sale will hot help to reduce volume , and do little for consumer confidence .
Finally , it would be wrong to draw panic conclusions - as Mr Sturdy already said - on the long-term sustainability of Europe 's beef sector during this very depressed period resulting from the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have discussed the subject of beef and veal and the crisis in the sector a great many times in recent months .
It is important that our institutions concentrate on developing a European production model , a model that must , of course , suit many different national situations which , in some parts of Europe , have different production characteristics .
I would now like to comment very briefly on the Sturdy report itself .
Firstly , we consider it essential to limit the effect that would arise if the Member States were given the possibility of amending or derogating from the ceiling of 90 head per holding .
This production increase is , in actual fact , insignificant , while the derogation is essential in certain production contexts and does not in itself contribute to production intensification .
Similarly , the plan to introduce individual rights into the system of special premiums does not appear to take account of the usual production customs of large parts of the Community , which are characterised by the presence of specialised holdings which do not manage the entire breeding cycle but only the last stages .
Secondly , in the light , apart from anything else , of the definitive ban on animal meals and of the requirement to use vegetable proteins alone , there will have to be a heated debate on the Blair House Agreement and it will have to be revised on the basis of the requirements of European production .
Finally , we consider extremely important the support and enhancement and promotion actions implemented across the sectors .
It is just as important that we attempt to do this on a Community basis , above all , rather than on a national basis as before , because it is only in Europe that we can provide a response to the demands and requirements of the consumer .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we have already said , the backdrop to Mr Sturdy ' s report is the dramatic context , both for farmers and consumers , we should remember , of the BSE crisis and the resources put in place to eradicate it .
Commissioner , one of the seven measures that you proposed several months ago is today being proposed for implementation .
This is , in addition to using set-aside land to grow protein plants , a step in the right direction , even if , in the opinion of the Group of the Greens , it is still not enough .
Mr Sturdy has tried to push the Commission position on farmers further , by dealing with other aspects of beef production .
On the other hand , he has not considered a serious problem of fraud in the BSE crisis .
Now , Commissioner , I suppose that you too have seen the latest report by AFSSA ( the French Agency for Food Safety ) , which has been well-documented and is damning on this issue .
It shows that the cases of animals suffering from BSE , described as naïve and , more often , extremely dumb , are caused by the fraudulent use of bone meal from carcasses in animal foods .
We therefore need urgent measures to step up checks and sanctions .
The health of consumers depends on this , as does consumer confidence .
The second point that I would like to draw your attention to is that the measures proposed by the Commission are moving towards extensification whilst relieving a saturated market , but there is a risk that the special premium for cutting headage of male cattle per hectare will have no effect unless a ceiling is imposed on surface areas , since the advocates of high productivity may attempt to claw back this premium , which is not intended for them , by increasing surface areas , which are , in any case , already high in their case .
We should therefore do our best to encourage small holdings , which are endangered and threatened by the latest food crises , and this is what I hope you will soon be doing .
NGL ) . ( EL ) Mr President , I have a question to put to Commissioner Fischler .
When Commissioner Fischler passes , as all of us must , to the other side - although not for a long time I trust - and he meets St. Francis of Assisi who asks him : ' Commissioner , why so much slaughter for nothing ?
Why so many animals stored without ever getting to market ? ' what will he reply ?
What I mean is that we have arrived at a certain point .
We are in a period of crisis .
Of course , compensation has to be paid , including to the holdings responsible for the crisis , if they are not to go under completely .
But , at the same time , we need to break away from the outmoded concept of industrialised , intensive livestock farming .
In this sense , I think that , while dealing with the crisis , the Commission ' s measures should look to find an alternative model .
And a distinction should be made between the countries which are responsible for the crisis , which invented BSE , and the countries which protected and still protect the European Union , between importing countries and countries which saturate the market with exports and ruin the budget and between small and large companies , so that we can move towards a model of small , ecological livestock holdings .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that the subjects of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease have disappeared somewhat from the headlines , and with good reason . Thank goodness for that !
In my view , their absence from the front pages will do more than anything else to restore consumer confidence .
Commissioner Fischler , I should like to appeal to you to accept the amendments in the Sturdy report , because referring the report back to committee after the vote would only cause delays , as far as I can see .
I could not explain such delays to the farmers , consumers and voters back home .
What are we actually asking for ?
The first thing is that the goalposts should not be shifted in the middle of the game .
The rules were laid down in Berlin .
We are calling for the reintroduction of a limit of 90 head of cattle .
I believe this is something upon which all of us , from our widely diverse regions , really must continue to insist at the present juncture .
As for the plan to reduce the stocking density to 1.8 livestock units per hectare from 1 January 2002 , I must tell you in all honesty that I am also at a loss to explain this to the farmers in my region .
Another lesson we must learn relates to the repeated references to alternative production methods .
I believe that organic farms are a good thing , but they are no panacea , because we are already seeing that there is too little purchasing power and too few markets for their produce .
It is my opinion that the amendments could be accepted as they stand - time forbids me to repeat the wording of each one - from my point of view and perhaps from your perspective too .
And last but not least , our guiding principle throughout this sector should be the need to produce safe food . Safety cannot be regulated with premiums .
Safe products are the key to the restoration of a stable beef and veal market .
I would like to congratulate Robert Sturdy on bringing forward a common-sense report here .
I would also call upon the Commission to accept the recommendations .
Otherwise the report should be referred back to committee , because the key to European beef production is quality , and that is what we can sell to the consumer .
I think we have to take out the poor-quality calves that are born so that in the long run we can produce quality beef .
An attack on suckler cows and their numbers is exactly the wrong way to go , because this is very much quality , grass-fed beef , in which the consumer has great confidence .
We need to take a much more positive approach to selling beef again .
I think the UK has shown that .
We have now returned to consumption above that of the 1996 level , therefore we need to move forward .
The 90-head limit is wrong and to bring in individual claims will be a bureaucratic nightmare .
We really have to move forward .
Destruction is also the key .
If you are going to have a buy-up scheme for the over thirty-month cattle , then for goodness sake destroy them , do not bring them back onto the market at a future date , because this will be lower-quality beef , and if you are not very careful , this will actually destroy the future recovery of the market .
Mr Busk made a good point .
If these cattle over thirty months old are tested and found not to have BSE , why cannot they be provided as aid in the future .
Why do we have then to destroy them ?
What we cannot do is to put them onto the European market .
So I think the long-term solution is to take on board Robert Sturdy 's report .
Let us go out and sell good-quality European beef to the consumer .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have focused particular attention on a point that has come in for a degree of criticism from some other MEPs , namely the introduction of the 90-head rule .
I regard the introduction of this rule as an entirely desirable step , for two reasons : firstly , because it releases funds which we could use to assist smaller farms and family holdings wherever possible and , secondly , because it accords with a certain principle of equality .
In our economic legislation we have support systems for enterprises with up to 50 employees , for enterprises with up to 250 employees and for those enterprises with a payroll in excess of 250 employees .
In the farming world , I do not see the logic behind the special treatment of large agricultural holdings .
It seems to me that our policies will not bear fruit in the future unless we make a point of supporting the small and family-run farms , the protection of the landscape and environmentally beneficial soil cultivation , especially in ecologically sensitive areas , instead of pouring a considerable percentage of our financial resources into large farming businesses .
In my view , there is no justification for us in the long term to go on having the lion ' s share of our aid resources creamed off by farms with thousands of animals , nor will the people of Europe accept such a situation .
I therefore hope that the Commission ' s proposal will be adopted .
I know that my opinion differs from those of my group and of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but I nevertheless hope that we can keep the 90-head rule as proposed by the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Ladies and gentlemen , before moving on to the Commission communication , and before welcoming Mr Prodi , I have some distressing information to share with you .
Gorka Landaburu , a very well-known Basque journalist , was very seriously injured this morning in a horrific parcel bomb attack .
His life is not in any danger , but I would like to send , on behalf of all of us , our wishes for a speedy recovery .
I would simply like to say that , on the day after elections were held in the Basque country , in which the great majority of Basque people renounced violence , this latest attack on the freedom of expression has achieved nothing , other than to disgust us and arouse our deep concern .
Sustainable development strategy
The next item is the Commission communication on the sustainable development strategy .
I shall now give the floor to Mr Prodi .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , " sustainable development is any development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs " .
This concept , formulated by the Brundtland Commission in 1987 , laid the foundations for the Rio declarations .
The European Union committed itself to translating this concept into concrete strategies in time for the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development .
We are , therefore , coming to the end of a long story and I am pleased to inform you that , today , the Commission has voted on - or rather , has adopted - its proposal for a European Union strategy for sustainable development as part of our preparations for this World summit .
Sustainable development is indeed a fundamental goal of the EU and has been one of the main aims of European integration since its incorporation into the new Article 2 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is , therefore , very appropriate that sustainable development should have been given such a prominent place .
It used to be seen as a luxury , but it is now increasingly recognised that there are a number of major trends giving cause for concern that we need to address now - before it is too late .
Some of these trends , like global warming of the atmosphere or the loss of biodiversity , concern vital aspects of the earth 's ecological functioning on which the fate of humanity depends .
However , the subject of sustainable development should not be seen as all doom and gloom .
The real challenge of a sustainable development policy is , in fact , to ensure that economic growth , social cohesion and environmental protection can go hand in hand .
In this regard , further technological progress and the use of cost-effective , economically acceptable instruments will be critical .
If we structure our policies intelligently and announce our long-term targets in good time , our economies will not find it too hard to pursue the path of sustainable development .
The strategy paper the Commission has adopted today seeks to lay the foundations for the European Union strategy , which should - and must - be adopted by the forthcoming European Council on 15 / 16 June in Gothenburg .
The paper is our response to the invitation issued in Helsinki in December 1999 to " prepare a proposal for a long-term strategy dovetailing policies for economically , socially and ecologically sustainable development " .
As well as featuring on the agenda of the Gothenburg Summit , I expect this subject to be one of the points discussed with President Bush at the bilateral meeting prior to Gothenburg .
What is the strategy we are proposing and which we have adopted today ?
First and foremost , this strategy is the first step in a two-stage approach .
Firstly , we are committed to assuming all our responsibilities at international level and thus displaying total solidarity in this field .
We intend to ensure that all our policies help to promote global sustainable development .
Once we have put our own affairs in order , we shall insist that other developed countries accept their responsibilities as well .
We also wish to place sustainable development on the agenda of all the international institutions .
Secondly , promoting sustainable development means linking and integrating the economic , social and environmental objectives of our societies .
Unless we make our policies more coherent , progress towards sustainable development will be very limited .
For the strategy to succeed , we need to move beyond the abstract discussion of concepts and definitions of sustainability : we have to translate the Brundtland concept into action .
To overcome sectoral resistance and set goals that meet long-term requirements , we need incisive policies and ambitious decisions . And , of course , to achieve this , we need the individual and collective commitment of the citizens .
Governments can set the reference frameworks but , ultimately , sustainable development can only come about if people and businesses make the right consumption and investment decisions .
The Commission is taking up this challenge by proposing horizontal measures to improve the overall effectiveness of our policies .
These measures are designed to ensure , in particular , four things .
Firstly , that when policy is drafted in any particular field , its likely implications , good or bad , for any other policy areas are identified .
Secondly , that all policies have sustainable development as their central concern .
In particular , tangible sustainable development criteria must become guiding principles in future reviews of common policies such as the common agricultural , fisheries and transport policies and also in other sectors .
Thirdly , that subsidies which encourage wasteful use of natural resources are removed .
This is an area in which we will have to take courageous decisions .
Fourthly , sustainable development depends on the daily investment , consumption and mobility decisions of millions of businesses and consumers .
Widespread willingness to explain and active support for sustainable development is therefore essential .
Thus , we want to encourage businesses to take an active approach in this field , inviting , for example , all publicly quoted companies with at least 500 staff to include in their annual reports an assessment of performance against economic , environmental and social yardsticks .
The third feature focuses clearly on the risks we will have to face in our endeavours to promote sustainable development .
In addition to the more horizontal measures , we are proposing a number of clear objectives and measures at European Union level to tackle what we consider to be the risks of affirming the principle of sustainable development .
You may remember that , in March , we identified some alarming trends of irreversible deterioration in six areas : climate change , poverty and social exclusion , the ageing population , traffic , the diminishing of natural resources and loss of biodiversity and , lastly , threats to public health .
These trends affect us all , and in order to halt them we have to take specific , incisive action , and we have to do so now since , in many cases , we have now reached the limit .
The recent European Councils at Lisbon , Nice and Stockholm have already decided upon ambitious , objective measures for combating poverty and social exclusion and for dealing with the social implications of an ageing society , so we are not proposing any new initiatives in these two areas .
However , I want to stress that they - the social sectors - are an integral part of the European Union 's strategy for sustainable development , on an equal footing with the environment and public health .
In the other four areas , however , we are proposing new and , I would add , ambitious objectives .
Not surprisingly , the most ambitious proposals are also the most controversial .
To combat climate change , for example , we are proposing , in addition to our Kyoto commitments , further reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 1 % of their 1990 levels every year until 2020 .
We are proposing more ambitious environmental targets for energy taxation , and phasing out all subsidies for fossil fuel production and consumption by 2010 .
These are all proposals which will require quite a high level of political and economic change .
Obviously , steps will have to be taken to develop alternative sources of employment for redundant miners or the fields affected , and we will also need to think about the specific situation of coal in some candidate countries , within the framework of the accession negotiations .
Lastly , the measures we are proposing include the goal that , by 2010 , alternative fuels , including biofuels , should account for at least 7 % of all the fuel consumed by cars and trucks .
To address threats to public health , we propose to ensure that , by 2020 , chemicals are produced and used only in ways that do not pose significant threats to human health and the environment , and to redirect support from the common agricultural policy to ensuring healthy products and promoting quality rather than quantity .
This will mean , for example - it seems to be a popular idea - phasing out subsidies to tobacco producers .
Here , as well , we will need to develop alternative sources of income and activity for , apart from anything else , in some cases , these productions are in extremely poor areas .
This is , therefore , a policy which will require a great deal of coordination .
Our proposals to improve the transport system include disassociating transport growth from growth in Gross Domestic Product and ensuring that the share of road transport in 2010 is no greater than in 1998 , the most recent year for which data are available .
This is a goal that may seem minor but which will require considerable change and investment .
These are a few examples of our proposals for Gothenburg . They do not illustrate all the decisions taken but they are sufficient to show clearly that translating these measures into real legislation will require strong political leadership .
Fourth and finally , the credibility of any strategy depends on effective monitoring of its implementation and on review mechanisms .
The Stockholm European Council decided that all aspects of sustainable development should be reviewed at the annual Spring Council .
Therefore , measuring our progress each spring will mean adding a number of indicators to those already agreed upon in Lisbon .
These indicators will develop naturally from the long-term objectives and targets the Commission is proposing in its strategy paper for Gothenburg .
For the strategy to succeed , the Commission believes that the working methods of all the European Union institutions also need to be changed , starting with ourselves .
At all stages of the Community legislative process , there is , in fact , an unfortunate tendency to develop and discuss policy proposals without paying sufficient attention to the connections between different policy areas .
The way the Commission and , I believe , the Council and Parliament are currently organised reinforces this narrow , sectoral approach .
We must therefore consider what steps should be taken to remove the sectoral barriers that prevent us from developing policies with sustainable development as their core concern across the board .
The Commission , for its part , will establish a sustainable development ' Round Table ' of independent advisors who will report directly to the President of the Commission .
Their work will be taken into account when we prepare the overview report in December every year .
They will also make recommendations on how to make the main body of Community policies more coherent .
We feel - although this is just a proposal - that it might be useful for Parliament and the Council to establish similar bodies , which would help us to sustain ongoing , constructive dialogue .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that if the practical proposals outlined today can be successfully translated into legislation , this will give the European Union a good chance of becoming , in the long term , a more just society , which has much more respect for man and the environment .
If we are to deliver a better quality of life for ourselves and our children , we need to make sustainable development something which all Europeans see as relevant and exciting , not just the experts .
Sacrifices may be needed initially but major benefits will be reaped in the long term .
What we cannot do is sit back and let present trends continue .
We do not expect to change the world at Gothenburg , but what we must do is send out a signal that attitudes and behaviour need to be changed .
Europe must set the standard in this area , and we are making every endeavour to ensure that this new undertaking gets off to a good start .
Madam President , I am absolutely delighted that Mr Prodi and the Commission are giving priority to sustainable development .
Nevertheless , I would like to say that , in this regard , there is an issue which is never discussed and which I believe is a part of European tradition , an issue which we should take into account : man .
We are always talking about the biodiversity of nature , but we do not take account of the fact that , within our programmes in general , there is a lack of projects and working programmes concerning man ' s environment : both the natural environment and , above all , the urban environment , where man actually lives .
Sustainability must take account of the fact that , in today ' s world , we cannot draw a distinction between the artificial setting and the natural setting .
The city is an artificial setting which is just as important as a natural setting . We must bear in mind that we cannot allow our heritage to be destroyed , our cities to be destroyed , the environment to be destroyed , without calculating the consequences for man .
The city is the setting for the greatest injustices , it is the setting which we must take care of in order to prevent marginalisation .
Therefore , if we do not introduce the urban environment and the historic environment , which have made up our European identity , we will lose a great part of our personality .
Salvador de Madariaga said that man is the only tree which picks up its roots and walks .
Well , I believe this is an important issue which we must take into account ; that there is a rootlessness in our society ; that we must take account of the settings in which man lives , because that is where the greatest environmental problems take place , as well as the greatest cultural problems .
Therefore , let us look after that environment and bear in mind that , although the biodiversity of ways of life and settings is important , I believe that the European Union is currently moving away to a large extent from sustainability , in the sense that only gigantic projects are given massive funding , as in the case of the URBAN project .
One of the principles of sustainability is to deal with issues at the smallest level .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is what I ask in order to achieve sustainability .
Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , although I cannot say that I agree with all you have said , the point you are making is clearly extremely valid .
I do not , of course , agree that the European institutions are not starting to respond .
We have made substantial changes precisely to our strategy in promoting regional development , which will reduce the economic disparities between the different regions and sustain a balance between rural and urban communities , and , in this regard , we have observed the recommendations made in the proposal for European spatial development .
Certainly , the basic situation is as you have described it , but , in my view , what we are doing is an improvement , although probably not to the extent that is necessary .
In any case , the Gothenburg Summit should give us fresh impetus to stride out along the path you have indicated .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , you spoke a moment ago about sustainable development which is to take place worldwide .
You specified a number of initiatives which apply to Europe .
That is fine .
There is also a debate surrounding the question of whether European businesses should perhaps not only report on the social and environmental standards which they apply within Europe , but also on the social and environmental standards which they apply when they invest abroad .
What if they invest in Asia , Africa or Latin America ?
Might it not be a good idea to enter into a dialogue with large businesses on the question of whether they should maintain European environmental standards , even if they invest in Taiwan , Namibia or Brazil ?
A large company such as Volkswagen is already developing that strategy .
In that way , Europe could do something for the environment outside Europe , and that is a practical initiative .
We might need to make this strategy compulsory after a number of years , but we need to enter into a dialogue with large-scale industry in the first instance .
I agree with what you say , Mr de Roo , but we must be realistic and implement what you are calling for in Europe first of all , assiduously and incisively .
Only then can we make this demand in cases where investments are made outside Europe .
You are absolutely right : if there is one immediate effect of globalisation , it is the need for the same rules governing these issues throughout the world .
However , in my opinion , for the time being , our task is to be assiduous in ensuring that these matters are respected in the European Union , at least .
In any case , we still have a long way to go before we reach that point .
Madam President , I have listened with interest to what Mr Prodi said .
He has some very good ideas .
A lot can be achieved but clearly it has to be done step by step .
And the rather eclectic list of issues he has listed - the outcome of which is not yet clear - are going in one direction .
However , one thing that does not require any new legislation , as he has proposed , and which will take us on some important first steps towards sustainability is clearly and simply the implementation and enforcement of existing environmental legislation within the Union .
If this is done within the next five years , we will not need any new studies or legislation and it will be a shining example to the candidate countries of what they must do to become members of the Union .
Will the Commissioner tell me what he is going to do about that ?
What you have just said reiterates my answer to the last question : we must implement the legislation in Europe first and then outside as well .
However , you have asked me a different question , referring to the candidate countries too .
I can assure you that the environmental chapter is one of the four most problematic chapters .
When I am asked which chapters of enlargement are the most complex , I reply : agriculture , the environment , the Structural Funds and labour mobility issues .
These are thus areas which require us to discuss the most intricate matters on a case by case basis .
As regards environmental issues , we have even gone so far as deciding to make exceptions for certain EBRD measures and certain aid measures intended to relieve tragic situations outside the Union as well as within , authorising EIB investments in Saint Petersburg and Kaliningrad , precisely in an attempt to make environmental issues a top priority .
I have to say that , in many cases , we will be forced to introduce , not necessarily moratoria , but transitional periods on these issues , considering the complexity of the investments and that the appalling underdevelopment of these countries will make it impossible to balance the situation very quickly .
Madam President , you referred to Saint Petersburg and the June Summit , but you in fact have another Summit this week - with Russia .
How are you going to address the issue of sustainable development in the discussions at the Summit with Mr Putin ?
Are you going to touch upon the issue of energy conservation ?
Are you going to broach the sensitive subject of new energy extraction in Arctic areas ?
Will you be going on to produce a report on the way in which Russia has complied with its earlier commitments from the previous Summit between the EU and Russia in which one of the promises made was to protect the environment in the Bay of Finland when constructing the harbour in Primorsk ?
Will you be demanding that Russia ratify the Esbo Convention on environmental impact assessment in a transboundary context ?
I am just mentioning some of the areas you touched upon at the most recent Summit .
The situation in the Bay of Finland is very sensitive because a port is in the process of being constructed in Primorsk .
I am indeed leaving for Moscow , where the Summit is due to start tomorrow evening .
One of the fundamental points concerns , in particular - I have to admit , thanks to the responsible , constructive insistence by Finland and the Nordic countries - precisely the environmental problems of the Gulf of Finland .
It is in this context that the EIB was authorised - as I said earlier - to give loans , but solely and exclusively for environmental matters .
An exception has therefore been made precisely because we consider the situation to be extreme .
Tomorrow , we will also tackle the wider issue of energy , in view of the energy leaks , spillover , wastage and similar factors in our energy cooperation policy , in the context of which we have , in recent months , already held a large number of technical meetings which have brought great progress .
Lastly - and this is the chapter which concerns me most - there is the whole of the great nuclear waste issue , which we discussed at the last meeting .
I am talking about underwater waste but also waste from industrial plant and power stations .
We are working very actively on this , but the economic scale of the issue is enormous and the cost can certainly not be borne by the European Union alone .
I hope that it will be possible to build a common relationship in order to deal with an issue that is assuming truly huge dimensions in economic terms but which , at the same time , demands incisive action .
Madam President , I would firstly like to thank you for your commitment and for your immediate reaction to the latest terrorist attack in our country , because it is terrible that , once again , an attack has been made on probably one of the most respected people in the Basque Country .

Secondly , Mr Prodi , yesterday we were voting in committee until twelve at night on the Sixth environmental action programme , which constitutes the European Union ' s strategy on the environment for the next ten years .
This is something which concerns me as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions .
The serious problem we are facing is not a lack of environmental legislation : the legislation on the environment is extraordinary .
The problem is that it must be complied with , and I know that the European Commission has initiated legal proceedings against a number of countries .
The process , however , is very long .
The question is obvious : what clear and concrete measures can be taken to oblige Member States to comply with Community Law , and how can the legal processes be speeded up so that this very Community Law is complied with ?
In many cases , this would require us to act outside our competence .
In the majority of the cases which you have cited , Mrs González Álvarez , our only weapon is perseverance in trying to persuade the public , but it is the Member States that are responsible for implementation .
In some cases , we have succeeded , where possible , in making certain specific action on our part conditional upon compliance with environmental legislation , but , as you understand , this can only be considered to be a special exception , in the same way as bringing an action before the Court of Justice - something which has been done in many different areas - can only be considered to be a special exception .
But here we are looking at the roots of the problem : the practical aspects are the responsibility of the national governments .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , it would interest me to know , whether you would deem it useful to comb systematically through all the items in the EU budget in order to establish which of them are conducive to sustainable development ?
Could we use a best-practice method to identify the budget lines with which we actually do anything substantive to promote sustainable development ?
Perhaps we could also carry out a benchmarking exercise so that the development of the individual budget lines could be observed .
Do you believe that the best-practice method could optimise our performance ?
That is what we are attempting to do in all areas .
Today , for example , this subject kept coming up during the Commission 's debate : consider , Mr Rübig , our debate on tobacco subsidies .
Clearly , looking at the matter from the point of view of growers ' incomes , since tobacco is often grown in the poorest areas , particularly the regions bordering on Greece , we had to link this type of subsidy precisely to sustainability , which conflicts , of course , with other principles and areas of concern such as health .
However , we concerned ourselves with providing an income support policy for those who currently earn their living from this product .
There you are : this is a typical example of the need to ensure that agricultural policy is always considered in terms of its sustainability in other fields , in this case the field of health .
I hope that this principle will always be applied .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , this is a day for which I have waited a long time as rapporteur for Parliament ' s report on sustainable development .
I am pleasantly surprised that the President of the Commission mentions both political leadership - which I consider to be one of the most important aspects - and the local level .
If we have both levels , we have gained a lot .
The global level was also mentioned , and I think it good that we should clearly single out that too .
I should nonetheless like to have more practical details .
What does that mean for the European Union ' s activities when it comes to the ways in which we trade , create investments etc ?
Finally , is this to be regarded as an overarching instrument of control for all the European Union ' s activities , or how are we to view a sustainable development strategy ?
. ( IT ) If I understand your question correctly , Mrs Hulthén , you are asking two questions .
On the one hand , we have said that we must adopt a raft of horizontal measures within the European Union to make sustainability a kind of common benchmark against which we must measure all of our decisions , whether in the field of agriculture , industry or transport .
This is a complex issue because it means going back , apart from anything else , on many decisions we have already taken where sustainability was not taken into account .
On the other hand , however , you are also asking me how these rules relate to globalisation , to the non-European countries .
Well then , here we must reiterate our commitment to acting in all international situations and forums but , in many cases , the only thing we can do is lead by example , since we have no weight with which to impose our decisions .
The case of the Kyoto Protocol is extremely significant .
We cannot force other countries to take the same line as us , but , with the strength that we do now have when we act in unity , our example will ultimately carry great weight in decisions taken outside the European Union as well .
Madam President , Mr President , as far as sustainability and your ambitious goals are concerned , we really are in something of a vicious circle .
The forces of the market with their spontaneity and the effects of deregulation very much stand in the way of your highly ambitious goals .
I have two questions .
First : what do you think you can really do under these circumstances ?
One of your predecessors , President Delors , elaborated whole programmes on the issue of shifting modes of transport from road to rail .
If you look at the situation today , however , you will see that very little has changed .
Quite the contrary , in fact , the situation has worsened .
We talk about alternative energy sources and yet solar energy and wind energy are hardly being promoted .
The big energy companies do not want to let such things onto the grid too .
Second : what form should a debate with citizens take ?
What do we want to talk about ?
About facts and figures , or also about how citizens can be involved more democratically and more actively in shaping policy ?
What information do they want to give us , the Members of this Parliament ?
.
( IT ) To answer your question , just a short while ago , I said that we have to set ourselves a goal of energy taxation which regulates energy consumption itself , not just by ensuring that the share of rail transport does not fall below its 1998 level and thus succeeding , by means of practical decisions , in achieving those goals which you , Mr Modrow , say we have failed to achieve , but also by setting ourselves the goal of alternative fuels , including biofuels , accounting for at least 7 % of total fuel consumption by 2010 .
This 7 % may well seem rather a low figure to you , but , from our perspective , it is quite high .
The two goals we have set ourselves can clearly be achieved , with a certain amount of sacrifice , by fiscal and other means , and they can be achieved without harm to the economy .
With regard to labour mobility , we need much more effective awareness-raising .
In order to obtain more tangible results from companies , we propose to introduce a kind of sustainability performance assessment report for all publicly quoted companies with over 500 staff , in order , gradually , to increase public awareness .
There is no question about the fact that the two go hand in hand .
I can assure you that , a few years ago , it would have been impossible for us to sustain the line we took at Kyoto - united , all the countries standing together , resolutely - if public opinion had not , I am glad to say , changed .
We can therefore say that these are two things which must be seen as closely related .
If public awareness is not raised , then , in political terms , we will certainly not succeed in bringing about the changes we propose .
Madam President , I would thank the President of the Commission for a welcome , long-term proposal in a political landscape which is all too often very short-sighted .
I must nonetheless regret the fact that the proposal comes only a few weeks before the Gothenburg Summit , which is why a real dialogue with all the parties possessing an interest in this issue is now impossible .
My first question is about the way in which Mr Prodi plans to ensure that , following the Gothenburg Summit , the process is followed up and continued in such a way that it is the subject of the broadest possible dialogue with different stakeholders .
Mr Prodi very valuably indicated to the world around that this must be seen in a global context .
My second question is therefore about how this affects the strategy in the short term .
The EU ' s activities in a long list of areas - trade policy , fisheries policy , energy policy etc - naturally have consequences for the situations in other countries .
The fact is that it is not appropriate to put one ' s own house in order and then take care of the rest .
Instead , an integrated approach is required .
What is that process to look like ?
With regard to control - as I said at the end of the speech - we propose that the report we present every Spring to Parliament should include an assessment of the sustainability element of the decisions taken .
This is crucial , or we will end up with conflicting decisions .
I also proposed to introduce what I called a Round Table for the Commission : a sort of monitoring body of experts , who will constantly advise us on achieving these goals .
As far as globalisation is concerned , I refer you to my answer to the previous question .
The only channel open to us is to make our voice heard in the appropriate international forums . We cannot do more than this .
However , I would stress that the European Union does have a great responsibility in this matter for it is currently the world ' s leading economic player in terms of the physical scale of its production capacity .
Therefore , we cannot deny that , although , I regret to say , we do not have formal authority , there is no doubt that we have a great responsibility and great influence over the countries and structures outside the European Union .
Mr President , I was one of the first who asked to submit a question to Mr Prodi .
Your colleague in the brown jacket nodded to say ' alright ' , but I was not called to submit my question .
I fail to understand this sort of discrimination .
More than 10 of my fellow Members have spoken , while I have been ignored .
What does this mean ?
Are there two sorts of Members in Parliament ?
Furthermore , I think that the way in which Members who ask to speak are noted is unacceptable .
It should be done electronically , so that those who ask to speak can be sure they will be noted in the right order .
Question Time ( Commission )
Mr Marinos , you know the nature of the debate which has just ended .
There is an element of discretion , but there is also the intention to create a balance between the different groups and nationalities .
I have not taken part in it and I am sure there has been no discrimination and that next time you will have the chance to ask your questions .
That is the only response I can give you .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0169 / 2001 ) . We will examine Questions to the Commission .
First Part
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 45 , 94 and 95 will be taken together .
Question No 45 by ( H-0432 / 01 ) :
Subject : Trafficking in children in Africa European public opinion has been shaken by the recent news concerning a vessel flying a Nigerian flag carrying 250 child slaves off the coast of Africa and the shocking findings revealed in this connection by UNICEF concerning the alarming increase in the trade in children from Africa and the arduous work performed by children .
What action does the Commission intend to take in view of these phenomena which bring shame on our civilisation ?
How does it assess the impact of its policy so far to protect the rights of children in today 's world ?
Does it intend to ask for more ample and substantive information on the living conditions of children from the African countries with which it cooperates and to which it grants development and humanitarian aid ?
What measures does it intend to take in order to protect the rights of children in these countries effectively ?
Question No 94 by ( H-0393 / 01 ) :
Subject : Child slavery and child labour In the light of the recent exposure of child slavery in West Africa , particularly within the cocoa industry , can the Commission ensure that it is doing all it can to end this cruelty ?
How far have the plans developed to introduce voluntary labelling for products not produced by child labour ?
And what further steps will the Commission take if these voluntary agreements are not enough in the fight to end child labour ?
Question No 95 by ( H-0424 / 01 ) :
Subject : Slave-trade in children in cocoa plantations and the chocolate industry UNICEF 's latest report on the situation of children throughout the world contains appalling information about the trade in and exploitation of children between five and fourteen years of age .
It estimates that some 250 million children are sold and exploited throughout the world .
I should like to draw attention to one particular aspect which concerns European industry : leaving aside prostitution networks , the overwhelming majority of children sold into slavery in Africa end up in cocoa plantations which produce the raw material for the European and international chocolate industry .
What does the Commission intend to do within the framework of the relevant international agreements and trade with the poor countries of the Third World to put an end to the unacceptable phenomenon of the exploitation of children and the slave trade in minors , a phenomenon which was officially abolished in 1880 but which continues to exist in the third millennium with the connivance of the developed Western countries ?
The European Commission of course strongly supports pressure from the international community to eradicate child trafficking and child forced labour , in particular in those countries of western and central Africa where , regrettably , these practices are well-established in tradition and even tolerated by the national authorities .
The European Union has repeatedly condemned such policies and ensures that promoting children 's rights is a priority in our relations with the countries concerned .
The Cotonou Agreement reaffirms the parties ' commitment to internationally-recognised core labour standards as defined by the International Labour Organisation , including child labour .
As far as trade agreements are concerned , the European Union seeks to raise support among trading partners for respective core labour standards , including child labour .
The Commission considers that additional tariff preferences under the scheme of generalised preferences should be considered for countries which effectively apply those standards .
The Commission also finances actions which directly address the issue .
Over EUR 1.2 million was allocated to promote children 's rights and to protect them from violence and exploitation in Gabon , Benin , Togo and Nigeria .
The Commission is also financing a project in Benin that aims to strengthen a brigade for the protection of minors to foster more effective implementation of legislation and to raise public awareness on this issue .
Many other activities are undertaken by the relevant international organisations , in particular UNICEF and the International Labour Organisation .
A recent positive signal is the likely ratification of the ILO Convention on the prohibition of child trafficking .
Several west African countries , including Cote d 'Ivoire , should have ratified it by the end of the month .
The Commission strongly supports these initiatives .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
We know that the European Commission operates action programmes with ideas and funding to protect the rights of children in third world countries .
I should like to ask you , firstly , how does the European Commission assess this policy ?
Have you made any fundamental assessments ?
Do you intend to conduct more in-depth controls , rather than the superficial controls which appear to have been the case in the past ?
Secondly , will you join with the European Parliament , which has called repeatedly for a political commitment , to be funded from the European Union budget , on an in-depth policy to protect the rights of children in both the European Union and the rest of the world ?
Will the European Union be tabling its own independent proposal in the run up to the summit on children ' s rights to be held in September ?
The cross-party group in Parliament is preparing an event on 29 May with this objective in mind and it would be a good opportunity to formulate a binding proposal on the protection of children .

Obviously , we will want to take account of the honourable Member 's views and the views of Parliament in preparing for the conference , which the honourable Member quite rightly points to as an important event in mobilising , not just the international conscience , but international actions in order to deal with abuses which we all condemn .
As for an oversight of practice in individual countries , we do , of course , have the possibility of applying the essential elements clauses in our agreements under the Cotonou Agreement in order to try to keep a check on what is happening .
It is important to recognise the multiplicity of reasons for the problem and to recognise the complexity of some of the solutions which are required , which in my judgement go right to the heart of what we often talk about in relation to poverty alleviation as the central part of our development assistance programmes .
I draw attention , for example , to the UNICEF strategy based on the Convention on Rights of the Child , which in my judgement goes to the centre of this debate .
UNICEF strategy focuses on four main areas .
First of all , raising awareness about the problem , which we are trying to do .
Secondly , providing economic support to families at risk and appropriate social welfare .
Again , that is part of our global strategy for poverty alleviation .
Next , improving access to and quality of education and finally putting the case for children 's rights and training law enforcement officials and judicial authorities .
UNICEF offers an extremely convincing analysis and a convincing way forward and I hope along with the contributions made by Members of this Parliament , it will provide us with an intellectual framework for our preparations for the conference later this year .
I have a similar question .
I think the answer was given adequately .
Mr President , my point was to highlight the problem in relation to the European chocolate industry .
The Commissioner spoke in his reply of the help being given to the countries of Africa .
However , I read in Le Monde that representatives of the chocolate industry met on 2 May to discuss the question of forced child labour because they are worried about this problem .
I think that we should look at the question of ethics and the operating standards of the industry , which is located on European territory and manufactures products based on this unacceptable form of work .
Did you follow the debate organised by the International Cocoa Council , the European Cocoa Council , the British trades union in the chocolate industry and the Belgian organisation Caobisco , Commissioner ?
What are your views on this ?
What specific measures need to be taken ?
Yes , I did see the article to which the honourable Member refers .
It has to be said that if you look at the problem globally there are other industries as well as cocoa and chocolate which one should take account of .
I am sure the honourable Member would agree that it would not be sensible for us to try to boycott some products .
To boycott particular commodities or products would simply increase problems in some developing countries , which depend very largely on the export of primary products , and would damage a lot of people who are already appallingly impoverished .
But what I do very much welcome are private and voluntary labelling initiatives , which can help to create premium market access opportunities for developing country producers on a basis of respect for the EC 's international obligations and are aimed at the specific promotion of core labour standards .
Labelling schemes which are objective , which are transparent and which are non-discriminatory can promote exactly the sort of higher labour standards that the honourable Member supports and that I support as well .
Those sort of labelling schemes , augmented by technical assistance from the European Union , are an extremely effective way of dealing with the issue of labour standards , not just in relation to the commodities which we are discussing today , but in relation to other commodities as well .
As usual , we have no objections to Commissioner Patten ' s answer .
We would emphasise that boycotts are not the right way to proceed - especially since we know that , in actual practice , most cases in which children are exploited for slave labour take place in private homes and on smallholdings .
I am also grateful for the support he is giving to UNICEF ' s work .
Dark clouds are nonetheless visible on UNICEF ' s horizon because of the decision not to elect the United States to the Commission for Human Rights .
Is the Commissioner able to reveal anything about the possibility of supporting UNICEF ' s work in these areas ?
We also know that the issue of sanctions against certain other countries in this region , for example against Liberia , is highly topical .
Can the Commissioner assure us that this will not mean reduced support for UNICEF and for work aimed at children ?
We must have intelligent sanctions .
We must support education , in particular , together with the rights-based approach you talked about .
UNICEF is an extremely important global organisation , which I have had the pleasure of working with in the past .
It is , of course , only one of the organisations in the field .
The work which UNICEF has done with the ILO to promote a common platform of action on this subject is extremely important .
However , if the honourable Member is making the point that in order to deal with these global problems we need a greater commitment to multilateralism and to multinational institutions ; if she is saying that there should be one message from this Parliament to the US Administration and to other administrations around the world , then she will have me leading the standing ovation for her remarks , because she is entirely right .
What are we trying to do ?
We are trying to deal with poverty , insufficient education and training , insufficient institutional capacity to apply national laws even where they exist .
We are talking about cooperation in dealing with transnational crime , because this is an appalling criminal activity , pushing young boys into employment and young girls into prostitution .
To deal with all those problems , we need effective multilateral institutions , and I hope that the European Union will continue to be at the forefront of those internationally who are supporting multilateral solutions to these problems .
Question No 46 by ( H-0360 / 01 ) :
Subject : Association Agreement with Algeria and the situation of women Does the Commission intend to champion an improvement in the situation of women in connection with the negotiations for an Association Agreement between the EU and Algeria ?
Is there any provision for education and training for girls and young women in rural areas ?
What improvements in the situation of women within families are planned ?
Second Part
Questions to Commissioner Solbes
The Association Agreement currently under negotiation with Algeria sets out among the priorities in the social and cultural field the promotion of the role of women in economic and social development and the improvement of women 's access to education and training .
Gender questions also figure within cross-cutting priorities in the MEDA national indicative programme for Algeria .
The potential impact on the situation of women is examined before a decision is taken on the financing of each programme .
Women are among the primary target groups of the assistance project for the development of NGOs .
They had received about EUR 5 million under MEDA by the end of 1999 .
An important Social Fund programme is in the final stages of preparation .
It will finance activities for poor women in rural areas through training and micro-credit schemes .
For 2001 we are preparing an education and health infrastructure rehabilitation project and a vocational training reform programme .
These projects will have a direct and positive effect on the living conditions and on the employment situation of women .
The programme European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights has funded several seminars and projects concerning human and economic rights of women in Algeria since 1996 .
In the year 2000 for example a EUR 1.4 million regional programme was launched in the three Maghreb countries .
It aims to promote activities to enhance the participation of women in political and economic life .
Mr Commissioner , your reply is insufficient and very short .
Please be more specific and more precise and tell me what you feel about the killing of Algerian Berbers resulting from the police charge at the end of April in Algeria .
What effect will this killing of Algerian Berbers have on relations between the European Union and Algeria , on relations between the Commission and Algeria ?
The honourable Member accuses me of being too brief .
I try not to go on too long in response to questions , so that people have greater opportunity to ask more questions , but obviously I can read out page after page of well-meaning and well-intentioned prose , if she would prefer .
Of course , we condemn any violence , and there have been all too many acts of violence in Algeria , and we also argue strongly for the promotion of women 's rights and of individuals ' rights in general in Algeria .
We have followed developments in this sensitive field with considerable attention .
I note that President Bouteflika has himself recently criticised the existing Algerian family law , for example .
The European Union within certain limits can certainly aim to act as a catalyst for change through the financing of projects and positive actions as well as through its regular political dialogue with the authorities .
The conclusion of an association agreement will make this process easier through the institutionalisation of our bilateral political dialogue .
Perhaps I can repeat one other thing .
We have just had the annual discussions in the Human Rights commission in Geneva .
It is a matter of some regret that we found ourselves so often on the opposite side of the argument to Algeria in our espousal of the universal validity of human rights .
I hope the association agreement and the dialogue which that will promote will mean that we will have fewer of those disagreements in the future , because we support the development of people 's human rights and the protection of their civil liberties everywhere in the world .
Thank you very much , Mr Patten .
Since the author is not present , Question No 47 lapses .
Question No 48 by ( H-0322 / 01 ) :
Subject : Combating poverty in Greece According to the Commission 's Communication ( COM ( 2000 ) 0594 final ) , there is a wide gulf between the rich and the poor in Greece , and Greece is also the EU country with the second highest ' persistence of poverty ' rate , a fact borne out by the recent Commission report on social cohesion .
In section 2.2 on poverty the Commission points out that in Portugal and Greece 21-22 % of the population have incomes below the poverty threshold , while in Greece 10 % of the population suffer from persistent poverty .
Can the Commission say whether the Greek government has notified it - and , if so , when - of specific programmes and action plans to combat the phenomenon of poverty , given that the take-up rate for the previous Greek operational programme in this field was extremely low ?
Given that Greece also has a very high level of unemployment , almost non-existent provision for training and the lowest education spending in the EU , factors which are directly linked to poverty , does the Commission consider that it is possible meaningfully to address the basic causes of poverty merely by giving social assistance to the poor ?
The Commission communication on the structural indicators which present the most recent data on social exclusion and poverty , stresses that in 1995 in Greece , the indicators relating to the level of poverty , including social transfers , the level of persistent poverty and the relationship between population incomes , which involves the highest 20 % of earners and the lowest 20 % , were higher than the Community average .
This clearly highlights one very evident fact , that the Greek situation is worse than that of the rest of the countries of the European Union .
Nevertheless , we should highlight one very important fact , and that is that we are only referring to the data for 1995 .
When we have data on other characteristics and other time periods , we may see a different situation .
To try to relate the problems of employment and poverty to one single factor is perhaps a mistake .
In our opinion , in tackling the problem of poverty , various dimensions should be considered : the general economy , the structural reforms necessary to improve the level of growth and the standard of living , and also the correct use of structural funds and the implementation of specific policies to improve employment .
In this respect , employment strategies may help in combating poverty .
So can social assistance policies or specific actions aimed at the problem of poverty , such as those stressed at the European Council in Nice .
In this context , the Greek government has committed itself to presenting its national action plan against poverty and social exclusion before 1 July 2001 , and that plan will be in force for a period of two years .
The plan should include information on the concrete policy measures for combating poverty , including those announced recently by the Greek government .
We should also remember that , with regard to the use of structural funds and in particular in relation to the European Social Fund , there are also certain specific measures for combating poverty and social exclusion , and in this respect some of the operative programmes for Greece and also some of the regional programmes include measures on employment , education , health and welfare .
All of this should have a positive effect and change this situation which has been referred to and which of course is the situation as demonstrated by the indicators for 1995 .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
I more or less agree with what you said , except for your comment that if the rate of growth increases , poverty can be reduced .
In Greece , as in other countries , I think , we have seen that it is precisely when there is growth that the gap between the incomes of 20 % of the population and the other 80 % widens and that is where the problem lies .
It is perhaps a good thing that you , rather than the Commissioner for social affairs replied , because this is indeed a question of growth .
I think that this is where the Commission needs a more joined-up position .
Of course , as the Greek government has not sent you its plan , we cannot comment on it .
But I would remind you , Commissioner , that its previous plan to combat poverty had a very low take-up rate and very little impact .
I therefore hope that we shall discuss this again on the basis of the plan because you too have an important role to play .
I imagine that , over and above what you said , the question of taxation and the question of social security also play a very important part in reducing the gap between poverty and wealth , to put it one way .
And what worries me - although perhaps I misunderstood - is that the Commission ' s view is not very clear cut .
I believe that there is little difference between my initial position and your comments .
I have pointed out that economic growth helps to improve the context and you draw the conclusion that it does not necessarily reduce the differences .
Your comment is correct and I do not believe that this argument will take us very far .
It is true that in Greece the differences between the richest 20 % and the poorest 20 % of the population are very high in relation to the average .
What is the Commission ' s position ?
I believe that the Commission has been very clear .
Firstly , I believe that growth is important .
Within growth , it is essential to increase employment .
In order to increase employment , it is not enough to implement measures of a structural nature , such as reducing tax and social costs .
We also believe that adapting the labour markets in order to create more employment is essential in the fight against poverty , but we believe that this does not include the specific actions for fighting poverty referred to at the Nice Council and which you clearly know well .
The necessary actions relate to a series of areas which are well defined .
I believe that this is the position of both the European Union and the Commission .
Question No 49 by ( H-0361 / 01 ) :
Subject : ECOFIN 's warning to Ireland Earlier this year , the ECOFIN Council criticised Ireland ' s state budget and asserted that the country ' s economic policy was causing excessively high inflation .
How does the Commission intend to pursue this matter ?
Is the Commission considering any further measures in relation to Ireland on account of its failure to obey ECOFIN ' s warning ?
Mr President , in my first speech I shall be very brief .
What the recommendation says in its second paragraph , and I will try to explain it , is that the Commission is invited to report , during 2001 , on the economic and budgetary development of Ireland and that the Council will monitor these developments and , in particular , assess whether they are consistent with the broad guidelines of economic policy .
We are in May and for the moment we have a series of economic and budgetary information , but nevertheless I would not yet dare to draw any overly definitive conclusions .
The Commission expects to have greater knowledge of this data , not more precise knowledge , but rather better knowledge from the point of view of compliance with the recommendations , in order subsequently to present the Council with its assessment .
We do not believe that the best method is to work with data which relate exclusively to the first few months of budgetary implementation , which are influenced by the previous budget .
I would thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I think that overheating in the Irish economy demonstrates the problems of having one currency and one economic policy in countries with very different economic conditions .
I now have a follow-up question for the Commissioner .
Do you think it would be to the advantage of the Irish economy to have higher interest rates and a stronger , more highly valued currency ?
Do you think that would be an advantage to the Irish economy in the current situation ?
I shall first give an indirect reply to your first question by saying that that the exchange rates applied to the Union as an average clearly do not correspond to the specific countries which make up the Union .
And if we apply the traditional monetary theory , it is clear that those countries with a higher level of inflation , with greater growth , require more restrictive monetary policies in order to prevent processes of overheating .
The conclusion can clearly be deduced from the comments I have just made .
The problem of the exchange rate has given rise to much discussion and debate , given that the exchange rate cannot be modified , being irrevocable , and given that the problem in Ireland would be resolved by a modification of the exchange rate .
Higher inflation and , to a certain extent , a re-evaluation of the exchange rate , will not go any way towards resolving its problems . Nor will these approaches help us achieve greater equilibrium in terms of the current account balance .
This debate is clearly related to the fundamental debate on whether budgetary policy should be expansive or non-expansive , but there is no doubt that , if the argument used by some economic theorists is true , it is also the case that an expansive budgetary policy would force this adjustment by means of a real re-evaluation of the exchange rate to be even more dramatic than it would be in other circumstances .
Having said this , I will just add that , according to our information , growth is now clearly going to be lower .
Inflation is still high , although it is lower than last November , and the budgetary measures of most interest to us in terms of assessing what is happening in Ireland in the future are , without doubt , going to be the saving plan laid down by the Irish Government , the impact of foot-and-mouth disease in Ireland , which is very significant , and , of course , increases in incomes and expenditure , which so far do not correspond with the budget .
However , as I said before , to draw conclusions in April on the figures for the end of the year seems to me to be far too risky .
Commissioner , it would appear that the general elections in Italy held last Sunday will result in a victory for the central right party , Forza Italia , and that Silvio Berlusconi will become the next prime minister of Italy .
In his electoral campaign , Berlusconi promised his supporters massive tax reductions and , what is more , investment in public building projects .
What is your opinion of these electoral promises ?
Do you think it is possible that the Commission would consider issuing this sort of warning with regard to Italy too , if that country takes an interest in or engages in an expansive economic policy in a situation in which the euro zone really does have inflation pressures , or do these intended warnings only concern the small Member States in the euro zone , such as Ireland ?
As President for the sitting , I declare that the question is not relevant , since it is not a supplementary question .
It has a different scope .
There will no doubt be other occasions to ask this question and receive a reply .
Mrs McKenna has the floor for a supplementary question .
Is the Commission concerned that its pressure on Ireland and Ireland 's Finance Minister may influence the forthcoming referendum on the Nice Treaty ?
I feel that the Commission should be pulling back just in case there might be bad publicity .
What is the point of the citizens of Ireland electing a government if its Finance Minister is not allowed to make his own choice ?
What is the point in us having a government ?
How far will the EU go in putting pressure on Ireland in relation to public spending , because services in Ireland are in an appalling situation ?
If we follow EU lines , it will make things even worse .
We also have to look at EU economic policy and its impact on Ireland in relation to interest rates , over which we no longer have any control .
It is undemocratic to try to decide the economic policy for an individual Member State considering that it is the citizens in that Member State who elect the government to do that .
You ask whether the Commission is concerned at the Court of Justice making a certain judgement in one direction or another as a result of non-compliance with Community legislation .
I believe that amongst all of us we have established some ground rules .
I believe that the fundamental rule is that we must comply with what is agreed .
The Commission has the not always pleasant task of pointing out cases of non-compliance with what is agreed .
In this specific case , the Commission has highlighted that fact , which has also been supported unanimously by the ECOFIN Council .
I therefore believe that interference of this type does take place , but we cannot become hostages in this type of situation .
Secondly , does the Commission intend to take the Irish hostage in relation to their decisions ?
No , the ground rules are very clearly defined in the Treaty .
There are general guidelines which have to be respected and those general guidelines include a series of elements of coherence in relation to the general policy .
Ireland , like other countries , is part of the Monetary Union and the development of interest rates and exchange rates is a problem of interest to all the Member States .
We must all therefore behave coherently in terms of the national economic policy we adopt in accordance with the Treaty , but it must also coordinated in accordance with the Treaty .
Ireland ' s relative weight has been debated in this House on previous occasions .
I stressed at the time that , from the Commission ' s point of view , the rights and duties of all the Member States are the same and , therefore , the economic concept - the economically significant concept - of the different weight of one or other Member State does not have so much importance from a legal or regulatory point or view .
Having said this , the Irish government has full room for manoeuvre with regard to making the increases it considers necessary in terms of public investment and improving its services .
The problem is that this must respect the broad guidelines of economic policy and the Stability Pact .
It is clearly up to the Irish government to define its spending priorities .
I shall be very brief .
My question is about whether the Irish case would have been more serious if it had concerned a country within EMU and within the common currency , but with greater economic clout .
Do you think that the case of Ireland is less serious because it is a country of less economic importance ?
There is no doubt , from an economic point of view , as I have just said , that your statement is correct .
But , from a legal point of view , from the point of view of our legal commitments , the situation is the same for all countries , large or small .
The Treaty does not allow for different treatment for countries in one situation or another .
What decision should we adopt if one small country behaves as a complete ' free-rider ' , gaining advantages from the Union , but none of the disadvantages ?
What would happen if , instead of one country , there were two , three or four small countries ?
What size does a country need to be in order to be significant ?
It seems to me that this argument , although attractive from an economic point of view , is unfortunately not acceptable from a political and legal point of view .
Question No 50 by ( H-0385 / 01 ) :
Subject : Coordination of EU 's views in the IMF and World Bank Informal discussions with Europeans working at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have revealed that there is no coordination of EU action within those bodies .
Has the Commission taken steps to remedy this shortcoming , which means that the EU 's influence is not used to the full ?
Questions to Commissioner Fischler
The Commission has made several attempts to improve the coordination of the European Union and the Monetary Union in order to resolve the problem of the external representation of the International Monetary Fund .
An agreement was reached in Vienna at the end of 1998 , on the basis for a Commission proposal which , however , the Member States did not take up .
The Commission ' s proposal was that , in accordance with Article 111 ( 4 ) of the EC Treaty , the decision would be taken that the Community would in principle be represented by the Presidency of the euro zone , the European Commission and the European Central Bank .
However , the Member States reached an agreement of a different nature , reducing the validity of this proposal , particularly with regard to the role of the Commission , which was reduced to a kind of support for the Presidency of the euro zone .
But these already limited proposals are not being applied in practice .
In practice , what has so far been achieved is something of an improvement in the coordination of economic policies and , through the Economic and Financial Committee , an exchange of points of view in relation to the positions adopted in the International Monetary Fund .
This coordination is taking place both in Brussels and in Washington and I believe that it has brought some progress in the process of coordination .
Now , if you ask me if the Commission is satisfied with this process , I must reply that we are not and nor are we satisfied with the degree of coordination achieved , although we are aware of two limitations : firstly , the International Monetary Fund is made up of States .
The Union is not a member of the Fund as such - a factor which causes us some interesting difficulties .
Secondly , the Fund itself is currently subject to a review of its statutes , a factor which must also be taken into account in order to make progress on the process of external representation .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that honest answer .
I believe it will enable us to continue this work together .
I think it was obvious that small countries , which normally defend the Commission , did not defend the Commission ' s position at the meetings in Vienna .
I also think it is obvious that , in future discussions , we must take this into account when we look at the need to develop the discussion on European governance .
I hope that , in those contexts in which we are to review the EU ' s global role , the Commissioner will address the fact that this issue could be emphasised .
I also hope that the Commission may , in any event , have informal contacts with those who represent the Member States in , for example , the management of the IMF .
I believe they would view it as extremely valuable to be able to meet and go together through the IMF ' s agenda in order to see the need for coordination if our interests are to be safeguarded in that organisation .
I think the World Bank has other systems , but it is precisely the management of the IMF that ought to be able to meet and coordinate their efforts .
It is true that these channels exist and at the moment we have at least three useful instruments .
At the meetings of the Economic and Financial Committee , where the positions to be adopted are debated , the real rules which we take into account for the positions of the different constituencies in Washington - and let us not forget that we are made up of countries which are not members of the Union - the Commission is obviously present .
A representative of the Commission is also present in Washington at the meetings of the Executive Directors of the regions of the European Union or of the constituencies which affect the European Union within the Fund .
Secondly , the Commissioner , each time he attends meetings of the International Monetary Fund , which is usually every six months , has bilateral contacts with the Executive Director of the Fund , with whom , furthermore , we enjoy an extremely high degree of cooperation , not only for the euro zone but also for the various regions of the European Union .
In the euro zone , we have currently accepted the application of the analysis laid down in Article 4 of the Fund , which is produced each year with the International Monetary Fund .
For the area outside the euro zone , we have great cooperation with the Fund , not only in the candidate countries , but also in all of those countries where we are implementing systems of macroeconomic aid , since we always do this in cooperation with the Fund .
Lastly , it is true that the President of the eurogroup represents the euro zone in the Monetary and Financial Committee of the Fund , in the former interim committee .
The speeches of the President of the eurogroup are agreed speeches , which include elements of common agreement between all the countries of the euro zone and we would like this to be the seed for something which may have more content and precision in the future .
We believe that this is a positive step on the road to progress .
Question No 51 by ( H-0326 / 01 ) :
Subject : Trawling for hake The rules on trawling for hake in the Bay of Biscay allow a minimum mesh size of 70 mm .
Given the state of the stock and with a view to improving the pattern of production , it is proposed that the mesh size be increased to 100 mm .
This would cut the amount of fish landed by the fleet by 50 % for the same level of effort , and would increase the vessels ' operating costs owing to the greater effort needed for the same level of catches and the cost of new nets .
Has the Commission quantified the hypothetical gains in production in the long term ?
Has it taken account of the phenomenon of post-escape mortality which is common for other species of gadidae and also affects hake ?
Has it taken into account that increasing mesh size entails a greater degree of effort to land the same level of catches , giving rise to a parallel increase in post-escape mortality and in the operating costs of the fleet ?
Has it considered the likely cost of the new nets and what measures might be put in place to aid the fleet 's transition to new mesh sizes ?
Would it not be more appropriate to start by guaranteeing strict compliance with the current rules before making any changes to the rules on technical measures ?
Commission . ( DE ) Mr President , at the end of May the Commission will be imposing the emergency measure referred to by Mr Ortuondo Larrea in his oral question .
There are a number of academic reports , especially those by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea from last November , that were confirmed at the beginning of this year by the Commission 's Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries .
All of these reports indicate that stocks of hake in the Bay of Biscay and southwest of the Irish coast are on the brink of collapse .
The main problem for the stocks here is the large number of juvenile fish caught .
The number of mature fish is declining constantly and it is to be feared that they are no longer producing sufficient young for stocks to be able to recover .
One possible way of reducing catches of juveniles is to use nets with a larger mesh size .
Using nets with 70 mm mesh , hake of around 25 cm and upwards in length are caught .
100 mm mesh nets , on the other hand , catch hake measuring 40 cm or more .
The planned regulation does not demand that all hake must be caught using nets with a mesh size of 100 mm or more .
We have deliberately made exceptional provisions in clearly designated areas for vessels of less than 12 metres in length fishing on a day-trip basis and for vessels that catch crayfish .
This exception applies to around 1500 , or in other words a total of two-thirds of all vessels for which hake is the primary catch or a by-catch .
I am aware that increasing the size of the mesh entails short-term losses as regards catch weight .
However , unless such a measure is introduced stocks will not be able to recover to an extent that permits sustained fishing .
Scientific research has proved moreover that by increasing mesh size to 100 mm , while maintaining current fishing effort , yields will increase in the long term by at least 70 % .
Of course fishermen will need a certain amount of time to re-equip their vessels with the new nets , and we will give them until August 1 of this year to do this .
Those fishermen who want to continue operating with a mesh size of less than 100 mm - and this is also possible - then any by-catch of hake may not exceed 20 % of the total catch .
This is intended to create an incentive to fish with larger-mesh , more selective nets .
Now let me answer your question regarding whether it is possible to obtain aid for purchasing new nets .
Later in the year we want to present a long-term recovery plan to the European Parliament and the Council .
As soon as this proposal has been approved by the Council , the Member States will be able to grant retrospective compensation to their fishing vessel owners in accordance with the provisions of Article 16 ( 2 ) of the structural regulation .
Such a possibility is unfortunately not provided in the framework of the emergency regulation .
I too view this as a major flaw and have ordered steps to be taken so that the structural regulation can be adjusted in this regard as rapidly as possible .
And now , let us turn to the argument that hake is very sensitive and that some of the juvenile fish escaping from the nets ultimately die anyway .
I will be quite frank with you here .
Our experience has shown that over a longer period a larger mesh size means more adult fish .
This is what it is primarily at issue here , namely to enable stocks to recover for reproduction .
And this , ultimately , will be the best proof that this measure is a sensible one .
Commissioner , I thank you for responding so fully in relation to this problem of hake fishing , but if I have not misunderstood you , you have said that consideration is being given to an exception for vessels of less than 12 metres , amongst which are vessels catching lobster and langoustine .
Now , the information I receive from fishermen confirms that these vessels , although small , fish with very long nets , and that , furthermore , catches of langoustine also include a great number of young hake , because the areas of distribution of langoustine and of young hake , which are the fishing areas in question , overlap very considerably .
I would like to ask you whether , when considering these issues , you have examined the serious affects of langoustine fishing on young hake .
Mr Ortuondo , perhaps there has been some problem with the translation here .
Let me make it quite clear : what I said was first of all that there is to be an exception for vessels of less than 12 m in length - and not those longer than 12 m - with regard to the 100 millimetre nets .
There is an additional condition that these should be small vessels fishing on a day-trip basis .
Second , an exception is to be made for vessels that fish for crayfish .
As to your question concerning the very long nets , I would like to say that in my opinion it is not these smaller vessels that use very long nets .
I believe that we can live with this compromise - and I must concede that it is a compromise - that we have entered into .
It is our opinion that absolute priority must be given on the one hand to ensuring that hake stocks recover .
However , we cannot turn a blind eye to all the social implications that this certainly very stringent measure that we are proposing entails .
We feel that we can respond to this best by making an exception especially for owners of very small vessels , as they depend directly on this economic activity and have no other alternative .
We cannot , however , go further than this as otherwise the measure would end up in practice being ineffective .
Question No 52 by ( H-0331 / 01 ) :
Subject : Reform of the management structure of the Directorate-General for Fisheries Why has the Commission changed the structure of the Directorate-General for Fisheries , downgrading policy on international agreements with third countries in the south and favouring the positions of northern European countries as regards European waters as if the countries concerned owned those waters , in opposition to the positions and interests of southern Member States , which appear to be regarded as intruders both in Community waters and in the EU 's international policy on fisheries ?
Mr Nogueira Román , first of all I would like to make it clear with regard to the wording of your query that your allegation that we pay little attention to the southern Members of the Community is quite simply wrong . I therefore reject it , as I do your insinuation that the Commission regards the southern Member States as intruders - to use your term .
The Commission does not allow itself to be led by motives of that sort where it is a question of ensuring optimal management of the Directorate-General for Fisheries , but concerns itself rather with optimising its work .
It is not a question of south or north here , but of bringing together under one department those bilateral agreements that are based on a financial payment in return for access to fishing grounds .
In this way we will be able to ensure that these are managed in a uniform and coherent manner .
In doing so we are complying with the conclusions of the Council in 1997 , with the position of the Court of Auditors , which was set out in a Special Report , and with the aims of the Green Paper on the future of the Common Fisheries Policy .
As for agreements with third countries , where it is principally a question of exchange of fishing rights , it makes sense to locate these in the department that also deals with TACs and quotas , because the fishing rights in these agreements are already a part of the TACs and quotas .
The case of Norway in particular makes the advantages of this new structure clear as we engage in negotiations on long-term technical measures for the recovery of cod stocks in the North Sea .
You see , there is no unequal treatment here on the part of the Commission , but rather it is a question of finding the most appropriate solution .
Commissioner Fischler , according to my information , Denmark holds 44 % of fishing quotas for Community waters , the United Kingdom 16 % and Spain only 6 % .
This is exactly the opposite of the situation with catching capacities , in which the Spanish proportion , centred mainly on Galicia , rises to 35 % .
These figures prove the profound discrimination and national self-interest that underpin the principle of relative stability , which you do not wish to question .
This same discrimination is now being applied to the structure of the Directorate-General for Fisheries , in a way that favours Denmark and the United Kingdom .
Do you not think , Commissioner , that it is time we applied the European Union ' s intrinsic principles of equality to the fisheries sector , for which you are responsible ?
Do you not think that the States of southern Europe , such as Spain , should be allowed to take their rightful place in the Union ' s fisheries sector ?
Mr President , I must say that to lower the structure of the Directorate-General for Fisheries to this level and to assert that we are biased in favour of Denmark and other northern states is first of all completely unjustified and , second , Mr Nogueira Román , it is an insinuation that I simply cannot accept .
If you went to the trouble of informing yourself , you would see very clearly that since I have been responsible for Fisheries the number of Spanish staff in particular at the Directorate-General for Fisheries has increased out of all proportion .
Compared to the share of the population that Spain represents in the Community , Spain is over-represented in the Fisheries Directorate-General .
So , if you would like to see your criteria applied in the Fisheries Directorate-General , then we would have to reduce the number of Spanish staff .
I hope that you would not want that !
Commissioner , I rise to speak because we are talking about international agreements with third countries from the south and I have received news of Basque and Galician shipowners who are also fishing alongside Andalusians , or who did so within the framework of the previous fishing agreement with Morocco .
I have been told that talks were held with the Commission with a view to studying measures to restructure the Spanish fishing fleet in Moroccan waters .
Could you tell us whether these verbal agreements are going to prosper , be accepted by the Council and be implemented by the Commission ?
Mr President , I would like to point out that this very same question was raised today as number 57 in the oral questions .
It relates to the restructuring measures on Morocco and this in fact has nothing to do with the internal organisation of the Directorate-General for Fisheries .
You are absolutely right , Commissioner , but please understand that the Members are taking the opportunity to ask their questions .
You are absolutely right though .
Question No 53 by ( H-0336 / 01 ) :
Subject : Fires and reafforestation in Greece Greece is a country severely and continually affected by major fires which devastate its forests .
Reafforestation is limited and the fires therefore result in permanent alteration of the natural environment , desertification and the loss of vital ' green lungs ' , mainly around Greek towns and cities .
Land-grabbing after forest fires is endemic in Greece , facilitated by the lack of a Land Registry , a project which is financed by the European Union but which the Greek Government has not even completed by as much as 25 % despite receiving Community funding for years .
What is the rate of reafforestation in Greece and the other Member States of the Union ?
Which Member States have the highest number of fires and largest areas of forest destroyed by fire ?
What is the Commission 's view of the rate at which forest destroyed by fire in Greece is restored ?
Questions to Commissioner Diamantopoulou
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is well aware of the great damage caused by the forest fires that occur every year in the forests of the European Union , and particularly in Greece .
In connection with this I would like to inform the honourable Member that in the next few weeks , within the framework of Regulation No 2158 / 92 , the Commission will be approving a programme of protection against forest fires in Greece with funding to the tune of EUR 1.7 million earmarked for the year 2001 .
To turn to your other questions , first : the average area reafforested annually in Greece in the period 1994 to 1999 totals 2 750 hectares .
This is equivalent to 15 % of the area of forest destroyed by fire in this Member State .
The information available to the Commission only permits comparison with Portugal , where forest areas were restored at a rate of approximately 5 000 hectares per year in the same period ; this equates to 14 % of the area destroyed by forest fires .
Secondly , the area of forest destroyed each year by fire in the various Member States totals 73 500 hectares in Spain , approximately 50 000 hectares in Italy , 36 500 hectares in Portugal and 19 000 hectares in Greece .
Thirdly , it is very difficult for the Commission to assess efforts in Greece to restore areas of woodland destroyed by fire as of course there are numerous factors at play here .
Reafforestation of the affected areas is - as you know - an integral part of national forestry policy and the success of restoration efforts depends especially on a number of key factors , namely the annual capability of Greece to undertake reafforestation , the chance of natural forest rejuvenation in the areas affected by fire damage and , lastly , the afforestation of new areas , for example areas used for agriculture .
In certain cases this can create a substitute for the forest areas destroyed by fire .
In the end , of course , success depends especially on the quality of forest fire prevention measures and on how well fire-fighting systems perform .
These can help to reduce the extent of destruction caused by forest fires in years to come .
I shall try to make do with your reply for the time being , Commissioner , until I can come back with the new data which , I think , are vital if we are to have a more detailed , full and constructive discussion .
Questions Nos 54 to 58 will be replied to in writing .
Question No 59 by ( H-0349 / 01 ) :
Subject : Religious discrimination Can the Commission confirm that Article 13 of the Amsterdam Treaty outlaws discrimination on the grounds of religion ?
Article 13 of the Treaty clearly states that discrimination must be combated and provides a basis for policies to combat discrimination .
However , Article 13 cannot be used as a basis for obtaining direct results or creating individual rights .
The facility to take recourse to the Court and full application of the policy against discrimination depend on application at national level of Directive 2000 / 78 , i.e. the directive against discrimination adopted by the Council .
This directive introduced a general framework for any indirect discrimination , including on the grounds of religion or belief .
Én particular , Article 4 ( 2 ) deals specifically with churches and other public or private organisations based on religion or belief .
This provision allows religious employers to substantiate difference of treatment on the grounds of religion or belief but always looks at any such ban within the context of the type of work and general circumstances .
These exceptions generally refer to employees whose work is such that it affects the ethics or ethos of the organisation in question .
Under no circumstances , however , can they constitute the rule .
I am glad that the Commissioner has confirmed the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of religion .
I am concerned over the practice in some Member States .
As she may be aware , in the United Kingdom there is a clergyman - the Reverend Raymond Owen - who has been refused permission to go to an industrial tribunal to resolve outstanding issues relating to his dismissal by the church authorities .
This would not have been the case in various other Member States , or had he been a religious minister from a non-Christian organisation .
This case seems to exemplify the discrimination that exists against Christian ministers of religion in certain Member States of the Union when they are in dispute with their ecclesiastical authorities .
United Kingdom law fails to incorporate properly the Council Directive of 14 October 1991 - most notably Article 8 which notes that Member States are allowed to exclude certain limited cases of employment .
However , the UK Employment Rights Act of 1996 , in part 13 , chapter 1 , specifies particular types of employment that are excluded from the Act but makes no reference to the clergy , therefore implying that the clergy is covered by legislation , which is not in fact the case .
I hope the Commissioner will agree to look in detail at this case and receive the Reverend Owen and representatives from his trade union so we can make a formal complaint .
I would be delighted to meet the organisations in question and discuss the matter , but I must point out that the Member States have to transpose the directive into national law by December 2003 and the specific case you referred to dates back to the 1990s and is not covered retroactively by the directive .
Nonetheless , I would be happy to look into the matter and to investigate the reverend ' s case .
Question No 60 by ( H-0350 / 01 ) :
Subject : Social security funds in Greece The viability of social security funds has been a subject of consideration by the European Union 's institutions recently .
Similar deliberations are also taking place in the Member States .
In Greece , a significant discrepancy has been revealed between the data provided for analysis of the viability of the Greek social security funds and the reality of the situation as the funds have not brought their records up to date and are , therefore , unable to determine the exact number of people insured .
What is the Commission 's view of this situation ?
Do the data which the Commission receives from Greece for processing undergo statistical correction ?
Why was the computerisation of the Greek social security funds not completed under the Kleisthenis programme as part of the 2nd Community Support Framework ?
What provisions have been made under the 3rd Community Support Framework in this respect ?
I assume that the question raised by Mr Alavanos , especially as regards statistics , refers to the actuarial study commissioned by the Greek government and not to statistics provided for the purposes of the institutional bodies of the European Commission .
According to the Commission ' s information , the purpose of this study was to broaden the fiscal prospects of the insurance funds and , eventually , to identify the changes needed in order to safeguard their fiscal viability .
There were huge problems in carrying out the study due to the large number of funds in Greece , and there were problems due to the auxiliary insurance funds and , more importantly , as the result of shortcomings in the computer system .
Naturally , the Member States are responsible for drafting this study .
The Commission is not , therefore , in a position to check if the data used by this firm is correct or to check the methodology used in order to conduct the study .
As for the second question regarding statistics on social security funds , Greece has been obliged to provide the Commission with these data since 1994 , within the framework of the procedures relating to the European Union .
There are difficulties with the flow of data on the part of the Greek authorities when it comes to collating and updating detailed data .
Progress has been made in this sector since 1996 , now that primary expenditure in the wider public sector has been legalised and rationalised and is better controlled , but I have to say that there are problems with the information received by the European Union , due mainly to the lack of detailed information , particularly from certain funds .
Your third question concerns the modernisation of the public administration , especially the insurance funds , under the Kleisthenis programme .
There was a commitment under the Kleisthenis programme to computerise the ÉÊÁ , which is the main social security fund , and to computerise the policy for a standard social security number for all persons insured in Greece .
Under the second Community Support Framework and the Kleisthenis programme , certain projects in these two sectors should have been completed by now .
IKA has started restructuring and modernising but there have been delays due mainly to legal differences regarding the results of the invitation to tender , unfortunately for the most important action plan , i.e. the integrated computer system .
This programme was due to be completed in 2001 but has been extended to 2002 .
I have to say that the modernisation of both the IKA and some of the other funds will need to be completed by reorganising them under the third Community Support Framework and information society programme .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her extensive and fairly detailed reply .
If possible , could she perhaps be more specific on the forecasts and the specific funds incorporated into the third Community Support Framework ?
It is clear both from the Commissioner ' s reply and from our knowledge of the facts of the matter that there is a great deal of ambiguity surrounding the number and status of pensioners in Greece and that is no basis for national or Community policy on matters such as insurance , pensions etc .
What I can be specific about , based on the commitments of the Community Support Framework , is that the reorganisation and modernisation , i.e. the computerisation of the ÉÊÁ , must be funded and completed under the information society programme .
I cannot make any comment on commitments relating to the European Operational Programme for the other individual funds .
Question No 61 by ( H-0363 / 01 ) :
Subject : Forthcoming Commission Green Paper on corporate social responsibility Does the Commission still support the view expressed by Anna Diamantopoulou in her address to the EU Committee of the American Chamber of Commerce on 30 October 2000 that ' when voluntary action fails , the pressure for regulation grows ' and that ' there are certain abuses of basic rights which simply cannot wait for voluntary action to address them ? '
How will this view be upheld in the Green Paper on corporate social responsibility currently being prepared by DG Employment ?
What sort of monitoring system does the Commission envisage in order to allow for both voluntary action and legislative regulation ?
The Commission is preparing a communication on corporate social responsibility , basically a Green Paper , and discussions will start in June .
However , let me say quite clearly that the principle on which the Green Paper is based is that any action relating to corporate social responsibility , any corporate social action , has nothing to do with compliance with current legislation , which is taken for granted .
When we talk of corporate social responsibility and of new action , we are talking about greater investment in human resources , in the environment , in the social environment and in the immediate vicinity by which , of course , we mean over and above their obligations under the law .
I should like to make it clear that , as far as the legislation is concerned , it sets out the minimum standards with which companies must comply .
As far as the logic of corporate social responsibility is concerned , it refers to higher standards which form the basis on which corporate operations are developed .
I wish I was as confident as the Commissioner that compliance with present legislation by companies is something we take for granted .
Sadly in recent years we have all too often seen some companies - not the majority - responsible for abuses in third countries , including the problem of child labour on which she was so eloquent when we spoke together at the EU Committee of the US Chamber of Commerce , to which I refer in the question .
I am asking her for an assurance that Parliament 's call for a legal base for monitoring European companies ' actions in third countries will be included as one of the options in the Green Paper .
I share her view that voluntary action is important .
However , I put to her that she has to include the option of regulation .
When we look at the actions against bribery and sex tourism , and when we look at the recent very interesting draft report of the International Council on Human Rights on the legal accountability of businesses , we see that world institutions are considering legal actions and legal responsibilities .
I want an assurance that this will be discussed and therefore form the basis for consultations through her Green Paper .
I should like to highlight two basic aspects of the Green Paper .
One relates to European policy and the other relates to the international dimension of the problem of corporate responsibility .
At European level , failure to comply with the law is a matter for the Member States and we have the facility , both through the European Parliament and through the Commission , to impose sanctions on Member States who fail to ensure that the law is applied .
As regards the international dimension and the issues such as child labour to which you referred , proposals have been tabled either on a Community label or on corporate codes of conduct , which we want to link with an independent assessment of how these companies operate at global level .
One of the questions which will be raised in the public debate triggered by the Green Paper in June will be how we can mobilise international monitors , independent international bodies , in conjunction with government organisations and with what specifications , so that we have an objective assessment at international level to which to refer .
Only then will there be any real point to the Community label , codes of conduct and lists of companies with a positive impact at global level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask you whether the Green Paper also takes account of the fact that eighteen million businesses in the European Union have fewer than 250 employees .
This accounts for two-thirds of all employees and affects more than 60 million workers .
Most of these enterprises are family businesses .
Many businesses also have a life cycle .
We are always talking about start-ups , but we should also think of those companies that close for reasons of age or various other reasons .
In my opinion , attention should be paid to ensuring that livelihoods are not put at risk , because this would , of course , be an enormous strain on the workers in these businesses , but also for the entrepreneurs who want to cease trading .
How will the Green Paper deal with these issues ?
Naturally , best practices for action by companies in the Community relate mainly to large companies .
The existing corporate social responsibility network is also made up of large companies .
However , you will see that one chapter in the Green Paper deals with collaboration between large and small companies and best practices , of which we already have examples in several countries in Europe , where large companies form networks with small and medium-sized enterprises to support them , train their employees and keep them abreast of new practices .
I think , and here I agree with you , that the Green Paper and the new role played by companies may offer a great deal of support , especially for small companies .
Question No 62 by ( H-0365 / 01 ) :
Subject : Equal treatment on pay I gather that the Commission is launching a campaign next year on the principle of equal treatment in respect of pay , which I welcome as it is the Commission ' s task to monitor the implementation of the equal pay directive .
In spite of the fact that the Directive has been in force since 1975 , its results have been conspicuous by their absence .
Pay differentials are still at their 1980 levels - in the EU , men working full time earns on average 27 % more than women working full time .
In some countries the difference is as much as 30 % .
It is important to clarify the background to the Member States ' difficulties in combatting pay discrimination and the extent to which a review of the Directive is necessary .
Is the Commission prepared to look into how the Directive and the case law of the Court of Justice have been applied in the Member States , and whether it is necessary to update the Directive ?
As Mrs Theorin says in her question , the issue of unequal pay between men and women in the European Union is still a major problem , despite long-standing national and Community legislation and case law .
It is one of the first principles contained in the Treaty of Rome , it was one of the first laws passed in 1975 and we reiterated and strengthened it in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
And yet , the situation is the same as it was at the beginning of the 1980s .
What the Commission has done so far , over and above legislation , the application of which is causing serious problems , with governments failing to set up mechanisms to ensure that existing legislation is applied correctly ; so over and above the fundamental question of application , the Commission has drafted proposals and , in the guidelines for 2001 , this issue is examined very seriously , it is one of the guidelines and we shall have a fuller picture when we assess national action plans not only of the situation in the Member States but also of the action and initiatives taken to deal with this issue .
May I remind you that , at the Stockholm Council this year , the Commission undertook to develop indicators so as to ensure that there would be no difference between men and women due to unequal treatment .
Similarly , the fifth programme for women contains action which calls for proposals , initiatives , innovative ideas and transnational collaboration in order to bring about a better understanding of this phenomenon , together with proposals addressed to governments and companies , so that we can achieve faster , more substantial results than we did during the previous decade .
On the basis of the results and initiatives which I have mentioned , the Commission , with Parliament 's help of course , will assess whether the directive on equal pay for men and women needs to be updated again .
The crucial factor for change is for the wage gap to be made apparent , not only at national level but also at every place of work and within every branch of industry , that is to say at that level at which the wage negotiations take place .
It is at that level that the analyses of women ' s and men ' s wages are required as a basis for doing something about wage discrimination .
In Sweden and Finland , we already have legislation requiring all employers to prepare annual equality plans , including plans for securing equal pay for work of equal value .
Yesterday evening , the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities voted through a proposal to implement this throughout the European Union .
I would ask the Commissioner whether she is prepared to give her support to this proposal .
The policy applied in Sweden on the question of equal pay is , I think , both pioneering and effective , because it is the only country which has managed to minimise the wage differential .
I think that it is an ideal model and I totally agree that it would be an excellent idea if it were implemented by the other Member States , which is why I think that , initially , it could be used as a best practice between governments , to be adopted initially on a voluntary basis as a pilot project .
This European dimension of the Swedish model could then be used as the basis for binding resolutions .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou , for your cooperation with Parliament this afternoon .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 93 and 96 to 112 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

EEC-Denmark / Greenland Fisheries Agreement
The next item is the report ( A5-0129 / 2001 ) by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fourth Protocol laying down the conditions relating to fishing provided for in the Agreement on fisheries between the European Economic Community , on the one hand , and the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland , on the other ( COM ( 2000 ) 865 - C5-0028 / 2001 - 2000 / 0348 ( CNS ) ) .
The Commissioner is not present , but I am assured that he is on his way .
In the interest of time we should start this debate .
Mr President , at the moment Mr Fischler is in the Committee on Fisheries , which was scheduled to finish working at 9 p.m.
However , it was very important that he spoke to us there about the planned reform .
In this respect I appreciate why he is not yet here at the moment , and in any case he knows us all quite well already .
This is indeed a tricky business : Greenland lies only a few kilometres off the coast of Canada , while it is more than four hours ' flight from Copenhagen but is nevertheless a part of Denmark .
Denmark , meanwhile , is a Member of the European Union , while Greenland withdrew from the EU more than 15 years ago following a referendum .
Have no fear , I do not intend to give an impassioned speech in favour of Greenland returning to the EU , although I am sure that would be an interesting debate .
I simply want to clarify how difficult the situation before us actually is .
Since Greenland withdrew from the EU in 1985 it has had Fisheries Agreements with the Community .
These were necessary in order to regulate fishing in Greenlandic waters and set catch quotas for European fishing boats .
The Third Protocol to the Fisheries Agreement expired on 31 December 2000 and was replaced by a new one that came into force on 1 January 2001 .
Yes , a Fourth Protocol has now been in operation since January 2001 .
If one looks at today 's date then one can see that we in Parliament are trailing behind by some months .
However - and this should be emphasised again in the context of the present debate - the reason for this delay does not lie with Parliament !
The signing of the Protocol went ahead in September 2000 .
However , the Commission did not submit the Protocol for Parliament ' s approval until the end of December 2000 , in other words shortly before it was officially due to come into force .
If we want to take our role seriously , and be taken seriously , as the body responsible for budgetary matters , then this way of handling procedures on the part of the Commission is unacceptable .
In the interests of ensuring good relations between the Commission and the EP there is an agreement to allow Parliament a period of six months between submission and entering into force to afford it time to make comments .
And Greenland too , incidentally , which had to wait for four months in vain for payments , was not best pleased - to put it mildly - with the behaviour of the Commission .
The advance payment that the Commission then initiated off its own bat in mid-April did little to change that .
In the case of future Agreements the Commission should pay more attention to the deadlines and arrangements in order to avoid irritations of this sort , which give rise to ill feeling between institutions and damage the international standing of the EU .
Why do we need a Protocol of this sort at all , when after all it costs the EU EUR 42.8 million per year ?
On the one hand , of course , it directly benefits EU fishermen who lay their nets in Greenland 's waters .
These fishing possibilities are irreplaceable .
On the other hand , the Agreement with Greenland is of tremendous importance as regards the Fisheries Agreements with other nations such as Norway or Iceland , as it is through the exchange of fishing quotas that the Agreements with Norway or Iceland are possible in the first place .
In the Fourth Protocol the fishing quotas have at last been reduced to a realistic level .
Conservation of stocks and sustainable management were the deciding factors in setting the quotas .
And this is a good thing , as we do not want to fish to the point where there is nothing left to catch . We want to leave our children and grandchildren the chance of making a living from fishing .
One question , if not the most important question , in the case of Greenland will be : will cod recover ?
Despite some signals to this effect , there are still no positive , conclusive findings from fishermen or the scientific community .
This is of course bound up with the problem of what we so appositely call ' paper fish ' .
What use is it to our fishermen , after all , if on paper they are allowed to catch so many tonnes of fish but the fish is simply not there ?
We need more realism here .
This includes the possibility of fishing other species , as is expressly provided under the new Protocol , and also annual review and confirmation of quotas and support for joint venture projects , which has so far been lacking .
We need a realistic fisheries policy with Greenland .
I therefore advocate undertaking a cost-benefit analysis before the renewal of the Protocol and a review at mid-term with the active involvement of Parliament .
In doing this , one issue will be how to separate financial compensation for purely fishing possibilities from the total contribution , which also covers development projects .
As you see , there is still a great deal to be done .
I hope that the proposals for amendments we have put before you will pass through Parliament successfully .
If relative stability is to be brought about , however , I would ask you to reject this motion .
We are , however , in the process of elaborating a compromise to show how unanimous we are in our efforts with regard to the subject of fisheries .
I welcome the Commissioner .
We understand the difficulties that you have had this evening but we felt it appropriate - and the rapporteur agreed - that we should proceed , as we know you understand the situation .
Mr President , I am not going to talk at length on the great number of irregularities in this Protocol .
We simply have to look at the text and compare it with the Council ' s mandate to see how arbitrary the Commission has been .
Furthermore , if we compare the Protocol with any other agreement with the South , it is frightening to think how sure some high-level officials in the Directorate-General for Fisheries must be of their position of impunity .
That is the heart of the matter .
Not the fact that there are EUR 300 million to solve the crisis facing the fleets affected by the failure with Morocco and that there is more than double to pay for fishing opportunities in Greenland which are not even worth what has been spent on their negotiation , not to mention the cost in terms of the loss of prestige and credibility of the Commission .
Nor is the most important element the fact that , unlike the agreements with the South , there was no clause allowing new Member States access , nor the fact that only shipowners within the agreements with the South have to contribute to the funding of the external fisheries policy , nor the fact that it is impossible to control the spending of this considerable amount of tax-payers ' money .
The important thing , Commissioner , is that this Protocol demonstrates in a few pages the extent to which the CFP can be arbitrary and unfair .
Furthermore , the Director-General for Fisheries ' attempts at an explanation before our committee could be called laughable if the gravity of the situation did not make them insulting .
He thinks it is completely normal to have double standards in terms of the benefits of agreements for the North or for the South .
And he added unashamedly that Council ended by approving this Protocol .
Of course we are also going to approve it , because we are very aware of the difficulties of ending up without a fisheries agreement .
Neither do we have great hopes for an improvement in the mid-term review , since the Protocol makes it clear that , if one party does not wish to deal with an issue , that issue will be left out of the review .
If this is not the case , if we have interpreted it wrongly , we would ask you , Commissioner , to make a gesture to calm the worst fears of the fishing industry and to put an end to the feeling that our CFP always benefits some people at the expense of others .
It only remains for me to thank Mrs Langenhagen for her work in the Committee on Fisheries .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen , on the quality of her work and on the speed and care with which she has produced her report , thereby responding to the urgency which the Commission and the Council had demanded of us .
However , I would like to say that this debate concerns a fishing agreement which is atypical for many reasons .
Firstly , because it is the only Community fishing agreement which is not international , since the Community negotiates it and signs it with a Member State , as well as with the local authorities of Greenland .
This international agreement is in no way ' international ' and it is barely a ' fishing ' agreement , since it does not distinguish - despite the claims of Parliament and the Council - between the specific amount intended for development cooperation and the amount corresponding to fishing possibilities .
This is fundamentally a development cooperation agreement dressed up as a fishing agreement .
EUR 14 million is intended for development cooperation but it is also the case that the very limited use of the fishing opportunities means that most of the remaining 28 million also goes into the coffers of Greenland ' s treasury , with no compensation for the Community ' s fishing sector .
Another idiosyncrasy of this agreement is that it is the only one in which shipowners do not have to pay a single tariff for carrying out their activities .
It is regrettable that there has been hardly any development of the possibility of creating mixed companies and that exploratory campaigns have not been developed at all .
Commissioner , the sector affected casts doubt upon the figures supplied the Commission on the true use of fishing possibilities .
According to some reports , only 12 % of the fishing possibilities were utilised within the last agreement , and the agreement negotiated by the Commission , which it is proposing to this House today , prevents these possibilities , paid for the Community tax-payers , being used by other Community fleets with an interest in fishing in these waters .
The whole thing is a wasteful mess .
Iberian fleets - Spanish and Portuguese - which before joining the Community fished in these waters , are still being excluded , 15 years later , from the scope of this agreement , owing to an abusive interpretation of the principle of relative stability .
Given the high financial figures involved , second only to Mauritania , the Community must make a real assessment and not a fictitious one .
Furthermore , Parliament should have been consulted during the negotiation .
The Socialist Group will vote in favour of the amendments of the Committee on Fisheries and also the amendment tabled by Mrs Figueiredo .
Mr President , to start with , I would like to thank Mrs Langenhagen who , with this report , has once again produced a good and thorough piece of work .
The Greenland Agreement is important for the Union , especially because it gives the Community the opportunity to enter into other very important fisheries agreements , for example with Norway and Iceland .
There are four countries that benefit from the Greenland Agreement , but there are even more Member States that benefit from the agreements with Norway and Iceland .
In short , the third country agreements that the Union has with countries in the north , west and south bring many advantages .
With reference to respect for the principle of relative stability , we are therefore opposed to Mrs Figueiredo ' s Amendment No 9 .
In this area , I would also support the ideas discussed by Mrs Langenhagen during her submission .
I am pleased that the fishing possibilities , to which access is being purchased , are more realistic than in the previous agreement .
I share Mrs Langenhagen ' s desire to apply the principle of ' money for fish ' , i.e. separation of the financial consideration for the fishing possibilities , on the one hand , and the resources for development needs , on the other .
I would like to call upon the Commission to seek a solution model which Greenland ' s local Government can accept and which distinguishes between the value of fishing rights and more development-oriented financing , which is actually taken into account in the budget items , as is reflected in their headings .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , I have put forward an amendment to the effect that those fishermen who benefit from the agreement must also be involved in financing the agreement .
This is a proposal that we always make because we feel that the users must contribute to the financing to a greater extent .
We believe that this principle should apply to all the EU ' s fisheries agreements .
Mr President , for the Greens this agreement is rather different to others .
As we have said here many times , our position is not against fisheries agreements in principle but more against the way in which they are negotiated and the terms arrived at .
All too often there is very poor - if any - scientific understanding of the status of the stocks .
There is also poor control and enforcement of EU fishing activities .
Negotiations do not take place in a regional context .
That is why we have generally voted against them .
The Greenland agreement is different .
It falls in the geographical zone of three international fisheries organisations : the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea , the North West Atlantic Fisheries Organisation , and the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission .
These are among the most scientific regional bodies that exist .
There is therefore scientific information on the status of the stocks being fished and we note with approval that the overall quantities to be fished have been reduced dramatically and are more in line with responsible fishing opportunities .
Both NAFO and NEAFC also have among the best and most comprehensive programmes for control and surveillance .
For that reason , this time we will support the agreement .
We will also support the amendment by the Liberals on the Commission recovering the costs of the agreement from the ship-owners who benefit from it .
This is an extremely important principle , which should be followed .
The old Fisheries Protocol between the European Union and Greenland mainly benefited Germany , which received around 80 % of the quota despite the fact that it used , on average , around 12 % .
The new protocol guarantees fewer fishing possibilities , arguing that this is a more accurate picture of the real catch .
Nevertheless , we still need to resolve the fundamental issue of guaranteeing fishing possibilities for fleets from other Member States , which are able to make use of the predicted catch possibilities .
Until such fishing possibilities are guaranteed , we cannot achieve greater balance in the cost of the protocol , which would be of economic and social benefit to these countries . We would also be disregarding the conclusions of the Council of Fisheries Ministers of October 1997 , on the fisheries agreements and the underutilisation of quotas .
Hence our proposal for an amendment , which seeks to ensure that all Member States can make use of the fishing possibilities that are available .
The current situation is especially unfair to fleets such as Portugal ' s , which has fished in those waters since the 1930s , although Portugal did not sign up to the protocol when it joined the European Union in 1986 .
The existence of a small quota for Portugal could reduce its fishing deficit by 12 000 tonnes , which would help to keep afloat the rest of its deep-sea fleet . I should point out that of the 52 factory ships that existed in 1990 , only 14 are still operational .
Mr President , the fisheries agreement with Greenland remains controversial , and this is because the fishing possibilities granted to the European Union are not fully used and the other Member States are not allowed to use them .
In this way , the European Union is paying a very high price .
We must remember that this is the most expensive agreement , together with the Mauritania agreement , since the Moroccan agreement disappeared , simply as a result of what is known as ' paper fishing ' .
The fact that Member States other than the ones that traditionally benefit cannot use the fishing possibilities makes this agreement controversial .
If we add the fact that , in the agreements with the South , shipowners have to contribute increasing amounts of tariffs for the funding of these agreements , while in Greenland they are exempt from these payments , we have another good reason to describe this as a discriminatory agreement .
As chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , I would like to point out that the partial payment brought forward by the European Commission , before Parliament has expressed its view , has been strongly criticised in our committee because , while legally possible , it is nonetheless politically unacceptable .
I hope that the mid-term review of this agreement - and of the common fisheries policy itself - will consider and overcome these difficulties , which have nothing to do - I stress - with Greenland , which is offering us its waters .
The agreement must serve to genuinely promote fishing cooperation , opening up new avenues to new Member States in order to jointly develop the fishing potential of Greenland to our mutual benefit , that is to say , the benefit of those States and of the European Union , of those who are fishing now and of those other Member States who are not doing so .
At this difficult time for the agreements with the South , after the failure of the negotiations with Morocco , I would like to take this opportunity , Commissioner , once again to remind you , for the second time in this debate , of the political priority and urgency of European solidarity , which should take the form of a generous , practical economic plan for the people affected by this agreement , as was approved at the Nice Summit .
Commissioner , this is now the second major fisheries agreement between the European Union and a third party .
The first issue that must be raised about this agreement , which is of such huge scope , is that there appears to be an unacceptable degree of confusion between what is a fisheries agreement and what is development aid for a region which , although part of a Member State of the European Union , has decided not to be a part of the Union .
We have nothing against such development aid and in fact I feel it may be totally justified , but I fail to understand why this development agreement should be disguised as a fisheries agreement .
This is a fisheries agreement which reflects and lays claim to the principle of relative stability based on historical catches , but one in which the historical facts are ignored !
Portugal will soon be celebrating 500 years of fishing in Newfoundland .
Fishing in Greenland is actually a little more recent , and does not date back 500 years .
It would , therefore , be difficult to say that any fishing tradition is older than that of Portugal in the seas of Greenland .
To say that Portugal has no place in this fisheries agreement is something that we could never accept and which is completely out of touch with the reality of the situation . We can therefore not accept this interpretation of the principle of relative stability .
Ladies and gentlemen , those of us who believe in the European Union and in the existence of a common European maritime and terrestrial territory can neither accept nor approve the type of discrimination and favouritism that appear in this Fisheries agreement with Greenland .
We cannot understand why the fleets of Germany , France , the United Kingdom and Denmark should be given favourable treatment , particularly since they cannot even reach the level of catches allowed under the previous protocol and since they have not taken advantage of the opportunity to create joint , mutually beneficial companies .
We cannot accept the discrimination against the fleets of other Member States such as the Spanish and Portuguese fleets - and within the Spanish fleet , the Galician fleet - that want to fish in Greenland ' s waters and which are in a position to make business agreements with local agents , as allowed under the agreement .
What we want , and it should not be necessary to have to say this once again , is sustainable development and the preservation of fish stocks .
Lastly , we also want the European Union to maintain a real presence in Community waters as it does in the markets .
Commissioner , as the rapporteur emphasises , our experience of the previous fisheries agreement with Greenland was extremely disappointing , with much lower percentages of catches than the quotas that were initially established .
Despite that fact that it did not fish , the European Union nevertheless made payments , on time , of an average of EUR 38 million per year during the period covered by the previous agreement .
The most shocking aspect of this third agreement is that fishing possibilities for the period in question are being reduced , whereas the European Union ' s financial compensation , which stands at around EUR 43 million per year , is being increased .
In other words , we are paying more for fishing considerably less .
What has brought about this decision by the European Union to sign a fisheries agreement despite the negative experience of the previous agreement ?
Our rapporteur highlights two main reasons : the first is the importance of this agreement for the conclusion of other agreements in the region , specifically with Norway and Iceland , and the second reason is that it is crucial for the fleets of countries that fish there .
For these reasons and despite all the inconsistencies , the rapporteur proposes that we adopt the report .
I understand these reasons and shall , therefore , not oppose the rapporteur ' s proposal , although I have adopted various amendments tabled by other Members of the House .
We must nevertheless bear in mind that , according to the two main arguments invoked by the rapporteur to persuade us to support this agreement , this one was to be followed by other fisheries agreements , which did not happen , as we know , with the agreement with Morocco . The agreement with Morocco was not signed despite the fact that this was essential to the fleets of two Member States that fished there and the fact that it was a fundamental sign that we needed to give in order to conclude other fisheries agreements in the region , with Mauritania and with other countries to the south of Mauritania , for example .
There can be no doubt that this is an incomprehensible two-tier policy with two sets of standards , and I hope that the relevant Member State governments - Portugal and Spain - take due account of what has happened and what is happening with this agreement with Greenland , in order to make a similar procedure hold sway in the Council .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Langenhagen for her work on this .
Indeed she went beyond the call of duty and applied herself very sincerely to consideration of the Greenland problems and the European problems .
Having said that , this agreement should be based on economic criteria .
We should evaluate what we are buying , consider the cost of catching it and consider whether the game is worth the candle .
We should not get involved in the business of giving aid and buying fish at the same time .
It is not the business of our Commissioner for Fisheries to deal with aid to Greenland .
In the first place , Greenland was once a Member of this Union . It chose to leave .
We do not owe it any economic aid .
If it is poor and hungry , let our people in the Commission who consider such problems deal with that .
We are dealing with fish .
This should be a commercial activity .
We should buy the fish and ensure we are getting good value .
We have to consider also that we are dealing with countries that are normally weaker than we are .
We must ensure that we do not exploit those countries and do not allow our fleets to damage or exploit their fishing stocks .
I do not accept that we should charge the ships that specifically go there .
When we buy these fish they belong to the European Union and should be shared out amongst the fishermen on the same basis as all the other fish that the Union controls , in order to create a balance .
It does not necessarily not make sense for Portuguese fishermen not to go to Greenland .
In relation to historic rights , 500 years ago Basque fishermen went to Newfoundland .
Fishermen from Bristol went there as well and also fished around Iceland .
Today they would not do that because the navies of these countries will not allow them to do so .
Historic rights are not necessarily right .
Generally speaking , we should apply common sense to today 's problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank you warmly , Mrs Langenhagen , for your excellent report on the conclusion of the Fourth Protocol to the Fisheries Agreement between the Community and Greenland .
I am also pleased that you , as rapporteur , recommend approval of the proposal .
Among other things , the Fourth Protocol , which was initialled on 13 September 2000 in Copenhagen , creates a basis for re-assessing the relationship between the Community and Greenland .
The most important measure for this re-assessment is described in Article 14 of the Protocol .
An interdepartmental working group of the Commission will review measures that are intended to bring more transparency and accountability into relations with Greenland .
This review will take place by 30 June 2003 at the latest .
The objective of this mid-term review is to create a new framework for future cooperation between the Community and Greenland .
Parliament will of course be involved in drafting such an agreement in accordance with the provisions in force .
What are the most important aspects of the Fourth Protocol ?
First of all let us consider catch quotas .
These have been reduced by comparison to the Third Protocol in order to set catch possibilities that are also actually available .
This applies especially to cod , which has been reduced from 31 000 tonnes to 2 000 tonnes ; redfish has been reduced from 52 000 to 31 000 tonnes and roundnose grenadier has been reduced from 8 000 to 3 350 tonnes .
A new article has been included with the aim of intensifying cooperation within the framework of regional fisheries organisations , especially with regard to implementation of monitoring and control regulations and in the field of research .
Financial compensation has been set at EUR 42.8 million , taking into account the desire of both parties for close and stable relations and with due consideration for the development requirements of Greenland and for inflation .
I would like to emphasise that the Commission supports the rationale behind most of the proposed amendments , and will cooperate constructively with Parliament on these issues .
For formal reasons the Commission must nevertheless distance itself from the amendments in their present form .
Concerning Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , the Commission supports Parliament ' s wish to be informed appropriately , in advance , about budgetary issues or other issues connected with the implementation of the Protocol .
However , the Commission already makes relevant data available in accordance with the Interinstitutional Agreement .
For this reason the Commission considers the proposal to be unnecessary .
As regards Amendment No 3 , the opinion of the Commission here too is that the amendment is largely covered by Interinstitutional Agreements , especially the Framework Agreement of 5 July 2000 .
The cost-benefit analysis referred to is part of the information provided to Parliament prior to the renewal of a Protocol .
The Commission does not feel that annual cost-benefit analysis would be very useful .
The Commission therefore cannot accept this proposal either .
The Commission rejects Amendment No 4 on principle because it contradicts current practice with regard to Protocols to Fisheries Agreements and affects the Commission 's powers of negotiation .
As the Protocol is an annex to the framework agreement , no new mandate is required to renew it .
It goes without saying , of course , that the Commission , as chief negotiator , has responsibility for ensuring that the guidelines laid down by the Council for the negotiations are adhered to .
In the case of the Fourth Protocol with Greenland the Commission proposed guidelines for the negotiations - which were approved by the Council - because it wanted to introduce several far-reaching changes compared to the previous Protocol , especially the provision relating to a mid-term review .
As far as the latter is concerned , too , the Commission will make an effort to inform Parliament , and especially the Committee on Fisheries , in the appropriate manner .
Amendments Nos 5 , 6 and 7 are not acceptable because they interfere with the authority of the Commission .
The Commission agrees with the content of Amendment No 8 , although it would forestall the mid-term review , and that does not seem sensible .
The Commission cannot agree with Amendments Nos 9 and 10 because they do not correspond to some of the principles of the Common Fisheries Policy .
Amendment No 9 fails to take into account the principle of relative stability , which assures certain Member States that they will have certain catch quotas in Greenlandic waters too .
I would like to add here that the Commission constantly encourages Member States to utilise their fishing rights to the greatest extent possible and also always makes a point of reminding Member States of the possibilities of quota exchange .
Amendment No 10 would result in 100 % of the costs of the agreement being taken on by the fishermen , and this has never before been the case with any previous agreement .
Such a proposal also raises considerable legal and practical problems and I think that it is unacceptable for this reason .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Extension of duty-free access to least-developed country products
The next item is the report ( A5-0128 / 2001 ) by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2820 / 98 applying a multiannual scheme of generalised tariff preferences for the period 1 July 1999 to 31 December 2001 so as to extend duty-free access without any quantitative restrictions to products originating in the least-developed countries ( COM ( 2000 ) 561 - C5-0136 / 2001 - 2000 / 0239 ( COS ) ) .
Commissioner , I wish to begin by expressing my satisfaction at the inclusion of this report in today ' s sitting , at the very time that in the buildings of the European Parliament in Brussels , the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries is taking place .
This is a good opportunity to discuss this measure , which is designed specifically for these countries , but also to reflect , once again , on the problems affecting them and how these can be overcome , even though we have already considered and adopted a general proposal on this issue .
Nevertheless , I must say straightaway that I profoundly deplore the Council ' s decision not to involve the European Parliament in defining and considering this measure . I also deplore the fact that no representative of the Council is here with us today .
I think that this is unacceptable behaviour and we hope that it does not set a precedent .
Incidentally , since this is a measure designed to cover 49 countries , the vast majority of which are ACP countries , it would be desirable , when defining the measure , to sound out the views of these partners of ours . We should do this even if , or perhaps because the countries for which these measures are mainly intended , measures to exempt them from paying customs duties on products from the least-developed countries , are basically those who are not members of the ACP group .
With regard to the measure itself and in general terms , we feel it is a positive step , although its scope is limited .
I say limited because , as we all know , exports from these countries represent no more than 0.4 % of world trade and 1 % of the European Union ' s imports . It is also limited because more than 99 % of Community trade with these countries already benefits from complete exemption from customs duties .
The measure is a positive step , which we would like to be seen as merely the first step in a deeper and more global approach , which we think is crucial , feasible and designed to respond to the countless problems facing the poorest countries in the world . I am not talking only in terms of trade .
As a matter of fact , I think that it would be a huge mistake to be so presumptuous as to think that these countries ' problems will all be resolved through measures that are primarily geared towards what is known , sometimes rather simplistically , as " integration into the process of globalisation " .
We must take account of the fact that , rather than solving these countries ' problems , this process of liberalisation has ultimately become a genuine problem for them , given that their economies are so weak and that the gap separating them from the industrialised countries is so wide .
At the same time , we must not forget that just as important , if not more important than access to the market for these countries is their ability to feed communities that often have no access to the most basic means of subsistence , and this should make our main concern their self-sufficiency , food security and also the survival of their family-based farming structure .
Furthermore , still in the field of trade , there are various other aspects we must consider in addition to facilitating the export of the products laid down in this measure .
I am talking about the prices of products normally exported by these countries , which are being gradually but constantly knocked down . This also applies to the non-diversification of production and , consequently , to the concentration of exports around a limited range of products , moreover not specialised products , not to mention , for example , the sensitive issue of rules of origin .
Basically , although we should give the final version of the agreement as adopted by the Council the broad approval it deserves , for the reasons I have mentioned , it still raises some particular concerns .
The first of these specifically concerns the transitional periods that have at last been adopted for sugar , rice and bananas , although we are fully aware of the problems that the issue raises and I do not , therefore , think that this matter should be a source of further controversy .
Secondly , I feel that we need to ensure that there is proper supervision of the agreement ' s implementation in order to guarantee that the LDCs and their communities really are its final and definitive beneficiaries . We must also ensure that the agreement is not implemented in a way that puts the ACP countries at a disadvantage .
In my opinion , an appropriate and broad allocation of quotas for the types of exports covered could improve the effectiveness and discipline of the agreement ' s implementation .
I shall finish by saying that , in any event , it appears essential to monitor the real impact of implementing this agreement .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Lamy , thank you , Mr Miranda , for your excellent report .
I too am pleased , despite the criticism I have concerning this initiative of the Commission .
I feel that granting the least developed countries greater access to our markets is a first step in the right direction .
Of course we in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would also have liked to be involved in the decision-making process from the outset , instead of having to decide on an objective that ultimately has already been decided .
We hope that such matters will be settled differently in future .
In principle , the Committee on Agriculture too welcomes this initiative , although of course it has formulated a whole range of reservations .
There is perhaps a legitimate fear that , via triangular operations , more goods - such as sugar for example - could enter the European Union than these countries produce .
This can be prevented , however , by giving individual countries a quota for the amount of sugar they can supply .
This would be easy to keep track of , and also feasible using present-day methods .
A fear repeatedly expressed was that goods would now enter the country that do not comply with our health and hygiene regulations .
To this I can only say that we already have very clear European Union regulations regarding what food products may be imported into the EU at all .
In my opinion - and this brings me to a more personal part - accepting this report was the right thing to do - for the Committee on Agriculture too .
But in many respects the attitude adopted by the Committee on Agriculture is too protectionist for my liking .
One need only look at what a tiny share of European Union trade these countries account for .
These countries are dependent on a few products that they can export .
It is right for the report to talk about ' everything but arms ' .
That is precisely what we supply to these countries and what we are least likely to import from these countries , as they do not produce arms of the quality we require .
I also believe that we have no need to fear being flooded with goods .
I would have wished the Council to adopt the Commission 's proposal to stick with the original three-year transitional period .
I also feel it is important , however , that we support these countries in producing for their regional markets .
In this regard I think it is slightly cynical of the Committee on Agriculture to include the motion that we have to keep an eye on these developing countries to ensure that they are not turning excessively to producing crops for export .
Up until now virtually no one has really bothered about this .
In the Committee on Agriculture I also saw motions to delete altogether the sentence stating that we welcome this initiative .
I think this is regrettable , especially when one considers that the European Union represents a community based on solidarity that operates with large transfers of funds .
Why then should we not give the poorest people in this world a certain transfer too ?
As I said before , I would have liked the Committee on Agriculture to take a much less protectionist stance .
But there I shall leave it for the moment .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too should like to highlight the appropriate timing of this debate in the context of the Third United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries , which is now being held in Brussels .
And precisely for that reason I believe it is worth putting the debate in context by reminding ourselves that the world of the 49 least developed countries at which the measure we are concerned with is aimed is a world where life expectancy barely exceeds 50 years , where 10 % of infants die before their first birthday , where 50 % of children under five suffer from malnutrition , and where the average per capita GDP is little more than EUR 282 per year .
These are figures that still shock us even though are they well known .
They shock us , first of all , because these figures are not just abstract statistics but speak for those who cannot speak for themselves , and because we know that every figure reflects real conditions which affect people who are also real .
People who have the same rights and the same dignity as we have , who see poverty and underdevelopment looming over them for the simple reason that they were born where they were born .
Secondly , these figures shock us because , despite the aid and development policies that the European Union and the Member States carry out to fight poverty and underdevelopment throughout the world , not only are the figures not coming down but the abyss separating the rich countries from the poor countries is growing ever deeper .
Now , changing the reality reflected by these figures means we must not just sit back in resignation but must enter the field of action and practical measures .
Thus on behalf of my Group I should like to congratulate you , Commissioner , on the ' Everything but arms ' initiative .
This initiative is a good step in the right direction , although to optimise the results that may come of it additional measures should be taken in additional fields .
That is precisely why I regret the fact that the Council , under pressure from certain Member States which I prefer not to name , has introduced longer transitional periods , as has already been reported , which may lessen and in any case delay the impact of this initiative on these countries ' economies .
I also regret the points in the draft resolution of the report we are discussing which were highlighted by the representative of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , which show a desire either to protect the interests of the Member States or to safeguard the advantages of the ACP countries .
Both these interests and these advantages may be legitimate .
But in no case , in the Christian Democrat view , should they prevail over the duty of the European Union to foster lasting economic and social development in developing countries , particularly the least developed countries , as the Treaty stipulates .
Mr President , we think Commissioner Lamy ' s ' Everything but arms ' initiative , which should allow the least developed countries to place their products on European Union markets with no quantitative or tariff restrictions , is a positive measure .
In this overall evaluation we agree both with Joaquim Miranda and his report , which was approved by our Committee on Development and Cooperation , and with the concerns and criticisms that the rapporteur expresses with regard to the proposed amendments to the Regulation that we are discussing here .
We also feel it is unnecessary , mean and even pathetic that for products like sugar , rice and bananas the proposed opening-up will not be fully effective until 2009 .
The reasons that have led to this cautious measure do not seem justified to us .
Other machinery could have been set up to protect Community production of these foodstuffs without diminishing the value of the initiative we are debating through this move .
We believe that the proposal made by Mr Miranda that this whole question should be discussed with our partners , the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries , within the context of the Cotonou Agreement , is also pertinent .
This ' Everything but arms ' programme is essentially a political gesture , the essential value of which lies in the European Union ' s show of solidarity towards those who are most in need within the developing world .
As a gesture , it is of interest and important , but there is no reason to exaggerate its consequences - which some have defined as a threat to certain sectors in the European Union - or to exaggerate its positive effects , which are certainly very limited , on the economies of the actual countries affected .
Even though this is all it may be , what should be stressed is that it is a little step in the right direction .
Perhaps the most debatable point is the discrimination it makes among developing countries between least developed and slightly more developed ones ; this is an arbitrary division and therefore one that introduces injustice , something that in the medium term we should overcome .
Lastly , I shall mention a detail that we believe is indispensable and which is already hinted at in the regulation to which this initiative refers . It is the need to establish strict controls to prevent fraud , whereby the produce of other countries , even highly-developed ones , might reach Europe via countries that are beneficiaries of these measures in order to benefit from the new conditions established here .
This really could become dangerous , and it would also be cheating the generous intentions behind the measure , which if defrauded would turn against the interests of those whom we are trying to help today .
Mr President , the Commission put forward a good proposal - at least from a strategic point of view - and , at any event , it is a step in the right direction .
However , having been through the Council ' s mangle , it undeniably looks less impressive .
Industry has lobbied well , in the sense that it has succeeded in convincing certain Member States that the EU system will collapse if developing countries are given the opportunity to export just a little bit more sugar and rice than they do at present .
I will not even go into the subject of bananas .
Despite the fact that the EU countries like to use fine words about being advocates of the free market , protectors of the developing countries and a region with responsibility in the world and with high social ideals , etc. etc . , it is apparent that these kinds of words can generally only be used on special occasions .
There is occasionally something of a gap between words and action and , if there is one thing that the developing countries need , then it is action .
As other speakers have mentioned , there is a kind of tragi-comic situation in the fact that the opportunities of the least developed and poorest nations are being discussed in Brussels right now whilst we are simultaneously having the same debate .
It is to be feared that , in both places , the discussion will end once again with a lot of words and , in reality , very little action .
But OK , it is a small step in the right direction , and so we can only wish the Commission luck with the new proposal and the new communication on sustainability which also , after all , mentions agriculture . We must therefore hope that the Commission has the necessary strength to settle matters with the agricultural organisations in the various countries .
In any event , it is absolutely necessary for us to get to grips with the problems associated with the poorest countries , the number of which has , after all , grown from 25 to 49 over the past 30 years , with only one country disappearing from the list .
The developing countries need free trade , debt rescheduling and aid , both technical and economic , and all three are needed urgently .
Mr President , while some of the motivations behind this initiative are obviously very good , the Greens / EFA Group has a number of questions about the initiative , both on the details and the general thrust .
On the detail , as has been said , about 99 % of LDC exports already enter EU markets duty free .
The problem is not so much about access as about supply-side constraints , about issues concerning infrastructure , education and training .
Agriculture is the key area where LDCs do not currently have access , yet it is precisely the area in which we see delays in relation to sugar , rice and bananas .
Others have raised legitimate concerns about food security in poorer countries .
Rather than using their land for ever-increasing exports of agricultural commodities to the north , there are important questions to be asked about feeding their own populations .
I want to raise the question of the general principle behind this initiative .
When I was at the ACP meeting in Gabon earlier this year , Commissioner Nielson praised the initiative by saying that it was a great sign of progress that poor countries are now being thrust into competition with each other .
To me that is not a sign of progress , but a sign of madness .
If the poorer countries compete with each other on small numbers of commodities that can only bring down international prices , with the winners being those in the north , not those in the south .
Markets in the north are not , sadly , infinite .
We are already seeing how the EBA risks undermining the Cotonou Agreement and how the preferential access that has already been guaranteed to ACP countries is now coming under threat .
In some senses the EU is being accused of taking from the poor to help the poorest .
Finally , I am concerned that open markets and global integration are becoming a substitute for development policies .
We need to think more imaginatively about supporting poorer countries in their own regional development strategies .
Commissioner , you described the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative as a world first .
If this initiative begins to have a real effect in the near future , bringing about a qualitative and effective improvement in the quality of the living conditions of the people concerned , then , yes , it will be a world first .
Even so , if I may , I would firstly like to ask about the timing of this initiative , which is scheduled a few months prior to the re-launch of the WTO negotiations .
It would be regrettable if this proposal were used primarily to attempt to bring round all the developing countries to the European position at the WTO .
I would , however , like to look at the content of this initiative .
Europe imports six times the amount of agricultural products from LDCs than the United States , yet this only represents 1 % of all the European Union ' s exports .
This shows the magnitude of the effort that rich countries must make in order to attempt to restore some balance within the world trade system , which more than works in their favour .
Several aspects of this initiative give me cause for concern , however .
First of all , the lack of consultation with either Parliament or the ACP countries , which are stressing , as they did at the Joint Assembly , that the preferential system for sugar , for example , as well as all the Community protocols , could be compromised .
Also , the need to reclassify impact studies in order to improve understanding and take into account the legitimate concerns expressed with regard to the potential negative effects .
Then , products destined for industrialised countries should benefit from access to minimum guaranteed prices and should be protected from fluctuations in exchange rates , whereas the economies of the LDCs are all too often dependent on the international environment and on the exports of one or two basic products .
Lastly , diversifying production must be actively encouraged , all the more so because , as confirmed by experts at the United Nations , production capabilities were weakened in the last decade and some industries died out due to competition from imports .
The French High Council for International Cooperation stresses , for example , that the right of the LDCs to protect and to support their fragile industry , particularly in terms of their food safety , must be recognised .
Now , in order to guarantee this sovereignty of food , to make considerable progress in meeting the people ' s most pressing needs and to have access to technology , the LDCs are in dangerous and vital need of substantial external funding , and for this to be provided in a spirit of cooperation which will help develop their production capacity .
If we can give them help by opening up our markets to their products , the liberalisation of trade cannot be seen as a development policy .
How , indeed , can essential needs be met when the growing burden of debt continues to condemn every attempt made by these countries to invest in a future ?
In 1970 , this debt was equal to 10 % of the developing countries ' GNP , and now it represents more than 40 % of their GNP , whereas the total amount of public money given is less than that paid in interest on the debt .
France had , in fact , made a commitment at the second Conference on LDCs to give 0.20 % of its GNP , but in 1999 , only 0.08 % was actually given .
I cannot stress enough the gravity of the situation behind these figures half of the population lives on less than EUR 2 per day , one in three does not have access to electricity , one child in three suffers from malnutrition .
The time has come , therefore , to listen ...
( President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , in the Commission report on the Union ' s development policy , which was published last year , it was noted that the EU ' s trade policy has more impact on the development of countries than the total sum of the entire aid policy .
The Commission ' s ' Everything but Arms ' initiative is therefore commendable .
However , for the least developed countries , market access is not sufficient .
They lack the infrastructure to capitalise on market access .
Furthermore , the transitional periods for rice , sugar and bananas are long , and after these , a safeguard measure can be used at will .
Additionally , the EU ' s product requirements are high .
In order to turn the initiative into a real success , it is important to help the least developed countries gain market access .
Technical assistance is required if the requirements which European consumers prescribe in terms of their food are to be met .
Only then can food safety be taken as a guiding principle .
Otherwise , the European market will retain its protectionist character .
I emphatically support the rapporteur ' s call for a study of the actual implications of the initiative .
In the past , the indigenous people of the least developed countries rarely benefited from the opening up of markets .
The evaluation of the Lomé agreements in the 90s made that abundantly clear .
Unfortunately , the Miranda report contains a few contradictions .
The text of our resolution has the feel of a compromise .
The European farmers , the ACP group , the consumers , they all seem to be gaining from it .
Although I understand the positions of all parties in and outside the European Union , I still believe that we need to make a choice .
Either we choose to improve the situation of 600 million people in the least developed countries , or we do not .
Finally , Mr President , I would urge the Commission also to involve the US and Japan in the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative at the LDC Conference , which is currently being held in Brussels .
Mr President , as the Socialist shadow rapporteur on ' Everything but Arms ' I welcome this agreement as a significant step in advancing fairer trade access to bring development to the world 's poorest countries .


Commissioner Lamy has been accused of many things in bringing this forward : of a cynical attempt to buy votes in the WTO ; of seducing developing countries into untrammelled free trade ; of seeking to divide the solidarity of the ACP countries ; of robbing the poor to pay the poorest .
Each of these criticisms has some validity and we need to keep them at the front of our concerns as we take this issue forward .
But Mr Lamy should be congratulated , after years of inaction , for helping us take a huge step towards bringing down agricultural protectionism which - according to the United Nations - robs developing countries of some USD 100 billion a year , more than twice the amount of international aid flows .
In his reply , let me ask the Commissioner to address some important questions .
When Ingo Feustal of DG Trade told our Committee on Development and Cooperation on 6 March that Cotonou consultation procedures had been followed and joint impact assessments would be produced , the Commissioner should honestly accept tonight that Declaration XXIII of the Cotonou Agreement , requiring a joint-ministerial trade committee recommendation , was not observed and that no such assessments have yet been produced .
Mr Lamy should commit the EU to providing the aid required by the LDCs to exploit the new opportunities and by other ACP countries to achieve transition .
He should recognise that the EU is currently badly failing to fulfil its promise to the rum-producing countries .
Mr Lamy should guarantee that administrative arrangements will prevent hygiene rules being used as a disguised form of protectionism and , at the same time , apply rules of origin which prevent fraud but enable LDCs to add value to their raw materials .
Finally , Mr Lamy and I both come from sugar-producing regions .
Like him I strongly resisted those who sought to scare our farmers and industry with wholly misleading claims about the consequences of the proposal .
We all know they are dwarfed in reality by the impact of the sugar protocol within the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , now that the Berlin Wall has gone , the walls around Europe must also be razed to the ground .
The overprotection of our markets is at the expense of the poor , and particularly the poorest , countries .
That is why my group too applauds the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative .
However , free market access will not automatically lead to a higher level of exports from the least developed countries .
For that to happen , supply , above all , will need to become better , more diverse and more competitive .
Also , exports should not be at the expense of the local market .
The current initiative will not be able to substantially improve the economic situation in the least developed countries .
Indeed , what does free access mean without the means or the expertise to raise industry to Western standards ?
What does this fine initiative mean if it does not apply to sugar , bananas and rice for the time being ?
Precisely those products which many countries can offer competitively .
Europe must help the least developed countries to cope with globalisation .
For that reason , all walls will need to be taken down .
So , the European Union is opening its borders to all products from the least developed countries , except arms , as if Mali or Bangladesh exported arms to Europe anyway .
Everything but arms - but bananas , sugar and rice too , or , in other words , sensitive sectors for European countries but staple sectors for the LDCs .
Furthermore , 40 of the 48 LDCs were already reaping the benefits of these preferences in the framework of the Lomé trade system .
Therefore , their situation will not change in the slightest because of this measure .
On the other hand , however , it is the non-LDCs that will feel the change , with the end of non-reciprocal trade preferences under the Cotonou Agreement and the creation of free trade areas by 2008 .
This measure will actually stimulate competition between the LDCs and non-LDCs , even within the same ACP group , which has not even been consulted .
We are still taking the approach that only liberalisation and competition can lead to development .
In return , as has already been mentioned , Mr Lamy is obviously expecting support from the LDCs at the negotiations in Qatar and , more broadly speaking , expecting them to join the WTO .
On the face of it , these proposals appear to be favourable , but they risk confining the LDCs to the role of exporters of raw materials , at the expense even of the food requirements of their own populations .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Miranda , for the valuable support he has given to what was the Commission ' s and is now the European Union ' s initiative .
Opening up our markets to the poorest countries , and this time , fully opening up our markets , has , overall , been well received , although it is undeniable and to be expected that this proposal should have given rise to some concern and some criticism , both in this House and in the Council .
I shall therefore try to give very brief answers on the various issues that have been raised , starting with the impact of this proposal , which , we are occasionally told , would pave the way for a massive influx of agricultural products from the LDCs onto the EU ' s market ; your report itself puts into perspective the concessions made in terms of volume .
It is true as you have said that these countries account for only 0.4 % of total world trade and 1 % of EU imports .
These figures are unlikely to increase in a sudden and spectacular manner , especially when the export capabilities of these countries are taken into account .
We are , however , committed to increasing these capabilities , particularly by imposing health standards , as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler mentioned , but also and more generally by improving infrastructures .
We , and by ' we ' I mean the Commission , Poul Nielson and myself , do not , therefore , see this as a substitute for aid , and here I am replying directly to the point made by Mrs Lucas .
With regard to the deadlines , it is true that the Commission has re-examined its original proposal in light of the discussions held on the impact of this proposal .
It is correct to say that we changed the schedule to bring about a gradual opening of the market , but over time to open it completely , for bananas , sugar and rice .
It was on this basis that the Council gave its final opinion .
Some regret these concessions .
I myself would probably have preferred not to give concessions , but our common law is that of qualified majority and we had to achieve a qualified majority .
As for respecting the Cotonou Agreements , I would like to reiterate that the ACP ministers welcomed this proposal last December , and that they stressed the need to respect this agreement , which is what we have done .
The Commission consulted Mrs Boudjenah and Mr Rod as well as the ACP countries on its proposal , and is currently in consultation with the ACP countries on the provisions needed to maintain the competitiveness of these countries , in accordance with Declaration XXIII , which Mr Howitt quite rightly quoted .
With regard to the desire expressed by some of you to make more progress , the report clearly demonstrates that universal agreement has not been reached on either the timetable or the resources .
We are taking a step in the right direction and we are endeavouring to make our actions match our words .
Let us begin by implementing this proposal and let us encourage other trading partners , as Mr Belder proposed , to move in this direction as well .
The Commission shares the rapporteur ' s point of view on consultation with Parliament .
This was a decision that would have been submitted to the codecision procedure if the Commission and Parliament proposals at the Intergovernmental Conference on reform of Article 133 had been accepted by the Member States .
We know now that this did not happen and that we are , therefore , bound by the rules of the Treaty , which , on the issue of Parliament ' s involvement , unfortunately remains unchanged .
We have , therefore , worked and , in accordance with the commitments I undertook when I entered office , I personally have worked directly with the various competent parliamentary committees , with the Committee on Development and Cooperation in January , with the Committee on Agriculture at the end of January and with the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy in February , and I fully intend to continue doing so , unfortunately with the inadequate Treaty texts , which involves working on all the important paragraphs of our trade policy with the House .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this report represents a valuable contribution to our efforts to avoid the LDCs becoming marginalised in a trading system that is becoming increasingly global .
The discussion that we are holding today is , nonetheless , welcome , as Mrs Ferrer said , given the UN Conference currently taking place in Brussels .
I believe that this report confirms the breadth of consensus between our two institutions on our main goals for managing the multilateral trade regime .
As Mr Martínez Martínez said , this is a small step rather than a great leap forwards , but it is undeniably a politically important step , no more , no less .
It is now up to us to work resolutely towards putting this into practice .
Thank you for your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Maritime safety
The next item is the joint debate on two recommendations for second reading :
( A5-0140 / 2001 ) by Mr Watts , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 95 / 21 / EC concerning the enforcement , in respect of shipping using Community ports and sailing in the waters under the jurisdiction of the Member States , of international standards for ship safety , pollution prevention and shipboard living and working conditions ( port State control ) ( 5179 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0074 / 2001 - 2000 / 0065 ( COD ) ) ;
( A5-0144 / 2001 ) by Mr Ortuondo Larrea , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 94 / 57 / EC on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( 5178 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0075 / 2001 - 2000 / 0066 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I begin by paying tribute to the Council and the Commission for the efforts they have both made to reach an agreement on a text which I believe will significantly improve maritime safety .
But the question that has yet to be satisfactorily answered is why did the Erika have to break up for the glaring deficiencies in maritime safety to become apparent ?
Indeed we only need to look at statistics produced by the Paris MOU organisation to see the appalling state of too many of the world 's ships .
These statistics were available long before the Erika and continue to show that standards are actually deteriorating .
As rapporteur , I maintain my position that the Erika package will help to improve maritime safety but I am afraid will not prevent another Erika .
I do not make that point lightly .
It will only , as an amendment to an existing directive , be effective if the Member States concerned are willing to implement it effectively .
If you look at the existing controls , several Member States simply fail to fulfil their legal responsibilities .
I am very pleased that the Commissioner has taken swift and decisive action to try to ensure that this is no longer the case .
I welcome the joint determination on the part of the institutions to toughen these measures .
In particular , I recommend that we support the proposals to focus our checks on the black-listed flag states and introduce a ' three strikes and you 're out ' rule whereby a ship detained for the third time within a specific period will be banned from Europe 's ports .
I regret the lack of progress on the issue of the voyage data recorder , the ' black box ' .
We believe , as a Parliament - and we have said this many times in the past - that this is essential for both environmental and safety reasons .
We are pleased that the Commission favours , in principle , a ' black box ' being fitted to all ships .
We are pleased that the Council has made a political commitment to this effect .
But what we need is not a political commitment but a legally binding commitment to ensure that these are introduced to old ships and new within five years .
The case for fitting VDRs has been made very often .
Indeed the IMO itself has agreed in principle that they should be fitted .
Vessels fitted with voyage data recorders have a better safety awareness and a better safety record .
In other words , it is not just useful after the event but contributes - in my view - to a change of the safety culture for every ship to be fitted with a ' black box ' voyage data recorder .
According to the UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch , the reluctance to accept the value of data recorders and take positive measures to fit them in merchant vessels is " a contributory factor to the poor safety record of some ships sailing today " .
A ship fitted with a ' black box ' is a safer ship .
I know that the Commissioner and the Commission have worked hard to try to seek a compromise in this very difficult and complex area .
I would welcome tonight a report back on progress with regard to reaching a satisfactory compromise on the particular issue of the ' black box ' .
The public simply will not understand why , after so many tragic events at sea - the Herald of Free Enterprise , the Scandinavian Star , the Estonia , the Erika and many others - we cannot just get on and fit ' black box ' voyage data recorders .
Finally , I thank my Parliamentary colleagues for the assistance they have given me over the past few months in preparing this report .
I say that to colleagues from all political parties , from all Member States .
I also look to them for continued support through the codecision process .
This , I believe , will be the first time in the field of maritime safety that we as an institution will be using the new powers granted to us by the Amsterdam Treaty .
Let us use them so that we can look in the eye the families that have lost loved ones at sea and say to them that we will not compromise on safety .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is now a year and a half since the tragic accident of the Erika , which caused a real environmental disaster on the French coast near the Straits of Dover .
During this time the European Parliament has been working on a proposal made to us by the Commission , called the Erika I package , containing two or three important reports .
One of them has been approved ; the second , by Mr Watts , has been commented on by him ; and the third deals with classification societies , the organisations that specialise in carrying out vessel safety inspections . These are of particular importance to us because , if we do not manage to properly ensure that ships sailing under the flags of European Union Member States - or better still all ships - do so in suitably safe conditions , we are going to have to put up with a lot more accidents like that of the Erika .
Sadly , as I said at the beginning , it is a year and a half since that accident in December 1999 and we are still here debating the Commission proposal at its second reading .
I think we will have to go on debating it in Parliament .
I do not believe that we in the European institutions are responding adequately to citizens ' demands .
I believe they want faster , more effective responses in areas that do not just affect people but , as in this case , also affect the environment , animals and plants .
On 30 November 2000 , the European Parliament approved eighteen amendments to the Commission proposal at first reading , and in its amended proposal of 12 December 2000 the Commission only partially accepted Parliament ' s amendments .
On the basis of the political agreement reached in December 2000 , the Council approved its common position on 28 February 2001 , in which it accepted fourteen of the amendments proposed by Parliament .
When the matter was considered anew in the Parliamentary Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , certain questions were again raised . I shall mention in particular , in increasing order of importance , first that recognised organisations should not be authorised or engaged if they or their staff have certain links with ship owners or operators .
The Committee has also accepted that it should be general practice for recognised organisations to consult with each other periodically to maintain their quality standards and also that these classification societies should agree to provide the Commission with periodical reports and be willing to cooperate with Port State control administrations .
There was an amendment , which I myself withdrew at the Commission and Council ' s demand , concerning the cases where a classification society did not have its headquarters or main office in the European Community .
I believe this matter is also important , because we are going to monitor classification societies that are based in our countries but not those possibly recognised ones that have their headquarters outside our countries .
But the most important thing - and this is where the greatest disagreement lies - is the financial liability of classification societies when they are negligent in some way in their vessel inspection duties .
In view of the Commission ' s proposal that there should be a ceiling to this financial liability of classification societies , the European Parliament has attempted to find a compromise with the Council ' s position by providing an option , so that instead of a fixed limit there can be a range within which each Member State can choose its own most fitting or most appropriate ceiling .
The Council , however , rejects this position and does not want to talk about ceilings .
I think we need to go into this further in order to reach an agreement as quickly as possible .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank both rapporteurs .
After months of work , Mr Watts and Mr Larrea have succeeded in reaching consensus on both reports in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
We had a united stance at the first reading and we will be united again for the second reading tomorrow .
For this reason , I do not want to say very much at all about the information they have presented on this matter , but will move straight on to procedure .
I regret , however , that the Council again rejected our offer to carry out an informal conciliation procedure so that the Erika I package could be concluded with regard to these two directives in the next few days .
Our offer was to seek a compromise prior to the official second reading in Parliament and then jointly conclude the dossier in the next few days with the confirmation of the Council .
I think it is a pity that this cannot be achieved .
There are two remarks I would like to make here : first I would like to mention that I had to negotiate hard with Mr Gayssot , the French Transport Minister , like my colleagues on the railway package , but at least he was available and we were able to speak .
The Swedish Presidency was not there at all .
As the European Parliament , we should pass a resolution that unofficial three-way discussions should only be agreed to if the minister participates .
After all , we do not send our conseillers to an informal conciliation procedure ; we try to bring our own personal weight to bear .
The second practical point concerns what the Council offered us twice as a compromise , which in fact was an insult to our intelligence , since it was not a compromise at all .
I only hope that the Council , and the Swedish Presidency , may yet think better of it .
We are prepared to continue negotiating until the end of June , after this resolution and after the Council has passed a resolution on this matter , in order to reach an outcome quickly in a Conciliation Procedure .
I have an important request to make of you , Madam Vice-President : we as the European Parliament represent the concerns of the Commission in this matter , as the Commission too wants to introduce a voyage data recorder .
However , as Parliament we are very much afraid , no , we are sure , that the Council is always putting the brakes on us and delaying this matter so that we cannot move on to Erika II .
If the Commission is in favour of voyage data recorders , it should support us in the Watts report .
The same goes for the Ortuondo Larrea report .
We are on the side of the Commission , which has proposed maximum limits .
When we suggest as a compromise setting minimum and maximum amounts for the financial liability of classification societies , then this is a fair compromise .
Mr President , I hope that the Commission not only has its eye on the Council , but that it will honour its promise , bearing in mind that the Commission and Parliament are natural allies .
Mr President , in German there is a saying that goes ' before the court and on the high sea one is in God 's hands ' .
Before the court this is certainly likely to be the case , but on the high sea we can give God a helping hand , and I believe that the Commission did this when it originally put forward the Erika I package . We should perhaps recollect here that this package also included the port state control administrations , the classification societies , and proposals with regard to double-hulled vessels .
I too would like to thank Mr Ortuondo and Mr Watts very warmly for their work .
Mr Ortuondo pointed out earlier that one and a half years have now passed and I believe that at some point the people too will say : how long does it actually take you in Europe to pass regulations when a disaster like the Erika takes place ?
It would be good if the Council would make a bit of an effort , as our colleague Mr Jarzembowski said earlier .
The Commission and Parliament are ready .
All we need for proper regulation is the Council .
I think it is obvious that - as Mr Watts said - the only issue left to discuss is that of the voyage data recorder .
We must be able to find a solution here .
I have no wish to conceal the fact that I personally am not one hundred percent convinced as regards the issue of ceilings for the liability of classification societies .
However , I think that if we as a Parliament want to stay together , then we must be united in a conciliation procedure too .
Sometimes , therefore , one must be able to set aside one 's own reservations .
But an abstention from voting is also a possible way of demonstrating unity in Parliament .
Commissioner , I have a small request : could you perhaps , independently of the two dossiers , give an appraisal of what was decided by the IMO at the end of April on the issue of double-hulled vessels , and tell us what the opinion of the Commission is on it ?
That would be good , because then we would have the whole package .
We clearly ought to enter into the conciliation procedure with the Council .
But maybe then it would not take so long .
Because - and Mr Jarzembowski is quite right - it is high time that we concluded this and time that we were able to tell the public that we have taken political action .
The public expects this , and so it must be done .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for producing these successful reports and for their excellent work .
The reports focus attention on the essential factors in increasing maritime safety .
There is still , however , much to be done to improve maritime safety .
Besides imposing stricter rules , we have to ensure that the solutions implemented are realistic and , furthermore , viable .
The Council has incorporated in its general position a large number of the amendments adopted at Parliament ' s first reading .
Regarding classification societies , the problem is amending the article that deals with liability in such a way that maximum as well as minimum limits are defined in it .
Many Member States do not , however , intend to accept that a maximum limit should be set .
With regard to the directive on Port State control , the problem is the black boxes , which we must hurry to fit in vessels .
There must be a black box on all ships , but financial reality makes it necessary to seek solutions wherein present cargo vessels could be equipped with technically simplified black boxes .
In my opinion , the approval and scrutiny of classification societies must be tightened up .
Expanded inspections must be made of high-risk vessels in particular .
The criteria for allowing high-risk , blacklisted vessels access to a port must be made more stringent .
Our group thinks it important that a solution be found for the problems , that both proposals be adopted speedily , and that we make progress in matters of safety .
I still nevertheless wish to draw attention to the fact that decisions made solely within the Union to increase maritime safety are not enough . For example , questions of liability must be dealt with on a global basis .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteurs warmly for the huge amount of work they have done .
Secondly , I should like to echo what Mr Jarzembowski said .
I believe that there is a great deal of truth in it .
It is all about the procedure at the moment .
I am increasingly being driven to distraction with regard to the way in which we are time and time again pushed into codecisions .
I would want things to move faster , and that should be possible .
In fact , everyone - whether it be the IMO or the Commission - is convinced that such a voyage data recorder , for example , is useful .
Ultimately , we have very difficult procedures behind us , involving Mr Gayssot , inter alia .
In my opinion , we should be able to achieve results faster one way or another , not just now , but also in future .
That is one thing .
Secondly , I believe we are right in retrieving the VDR by means of an amendment and , thirdly , it is even more important specifically to consider the evaluation of port State control , for that is what matters .
That also includes the quality of that Port State control ; not just the technical side of things , but also the human factor , such as the way in which the crew is set up .
I have a good mind , pending the second Erika package , to ask again for extra consideration to be given particularly to the crew , the number of crew , the nature of the crew , etc .
I believe we simply need to draft another proposal in this connection , for we are not adequately covering that area , and the public will be at a loss to understand why that is .
Mr President , there was a time when European businesses ruled the seven seas in terms of transport .
To do this , they used their own ships which were registered in the country in which the owner was based , and mainly employed crew from their own countries .
The substances they transported were less harmful than now , and they were little affected by extremely cheap competitors , particularly from the Third World .
Furthermore , they could not afford any major scandals affecting public opinion in their own countries .
It is precisely in those circumstances that working conditions and safety in shipping were far from ideal .
But State governments and trade unions were better equipped than they are at present to monitor the course of events .
If businesses wish to withdraw from State intervention , this can best be done in shipping activities partly carried out outside of the territorial waters of States .
In those areas , attempts are made to use unsound ships and underpaid crew .
These ships are registered in a country other than that of the owners , and that is preferably a country were taxes are low and the level of inspection negligible .
Crews are recruited where unemployment is high and wages are low .
Many ships are obsolete and neglected , and the chances of waste and cargo ending up in the sea are significant .
Safety for the crew is generally minimal , and the environmental risks high .
I am , in fact , of the opinion that ships should not be inspected by private classification societies , but rather by the government , in sound coordination with trade union and environmental movements .
Until that is the case , it remains crucial to ensure that classification societies are not dependent on those they are meant to monitor , for , without such a guarantee , any form of control would be an empty exercise .
I am keen to support proposals which rule out classification societies if they have ties with the ship ' s owner and which demand better periodical inspection of these societies .
That is a step forward , as is banning single-hulled tankers and refusing access to ships from states sailing under a so-called ' flag of convenience ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the Council 's decision to include in the common position the essential points of the amendments adopted by this House .
We of the UEN Group consider particularly important the fact that the Council , like the European Parliament , has endorsed the principle that the system for inspecting certain potentially dangerous ships , an extended inspection to take place annually , should be mandatory rather than discretionary .
Who knows how many environmental disasters we could have averted for our marine life , our coasts , our fishing fleets and our tourist operators ?
Who knows how many oil tanker wrecks , how many deaths , how much serious pollution we would have avoided in our continent if proper inspections had been carried out ?
Let it be quite clear that these inspections should not just assess the technical aspects of vessels but also respect for social standards on crew living and working conditions and crew training as well .
I would point out that 70-75 % of accidents are caused by the human factor .
I would like to end by saying we welcome the fact that the Council has recognised the importance of installing voyage data recorders , better known as black boxes , on board vessels .
In our view , this should not just be an essential condition for entry into European Union ports but also an effective way of applying one of the underlying principles of Community environmental policy : ' Polluter pays ' .
Mr President , the most important and fundamental comment that I must make in this debate , as MEP for the Atlantic regions , is that , 18 months after the Erika disaster , the many people affected by this terrible oil slick are caught up in a very slow , complex and extremely unfair compensation process .
Out of 1 200 applications for compensation , only 200 have been paid under the IOPCF Convention .
The sums which are being claimed , and which are justified , are systematically reduced on an arbitrary basis .
The procedures take so long that many coastal businesses are at risk of bankruptcy , particularly shellfish and fish farmers , and the fishing and tourist industries .
The IOPCF Convention functions as a mechanism to limit the responsibility of the oil companies , which are thus exonerated of a considerable proportion of cover for the damage that they themselves have caused .
It is now more obvious why the United States steered clear of this mechanism ; as the settlement by Exxon of the total damages caused in the Exxon Valdez disaster , in other words , FRF 50 billion , would never have been paid had it become involved .
The total damages caused in the sinking of the Erika , are admittedly more modest and are currently estimated to be FRF 5 billion , but a maximum compensation of FRF 1.2 billion can be paid under the IOPCF Convention and not a penny more , because compensation paid under the Convention relates to sums held by the Fund , and not to the losses sustained by the victims .
The State and local authorities are therefore forced to make up the shortfall , which means that the taxpayer has to bear the costs of a proportion of the responsibility that falls to the polluter .
We absolutely must correct this extremely serious discrepancy .
We have made a good start with the first Erika package , which is being considered tonight at second reading and we , in my group , approve of the improvements proposed by the rapporteurs , for giving responsibility to ship classification societies .
However , when this House considers the second Erika package , we must ensure that a genuine system of responsibilities is established that is clear , fair and which also acts as a deterrent to the two main players , the shipowners and charterers .
Mr President , we are reminded daily of the need to achieve results speedily in the area of maritime safety .
Only this week there was another accident involving a cement freighter in the so-called Kadetrenden channel in the Baltic Sea between Denmark and Germany .
The delicate-sounding names of the ships , like Erika or Ievoli Sun , should not blind us to the fact that in European waters there are all too many unseaworthy rust-buckets plying about .
As someone who lives on the German coast all I can say is : enough is enough !
The present proposal , which is now before us for its second reading , is a part of the so-called ERIKA-1-package named after the first , very competent proposals of the Commission in response to the accident involving the tanker Erika off the coast of Brittany .
When we concluded the first reading , we were full of optimism , inspired by the Commission ' s new-found élan , and we believed that our amendments would be - must be - approved by the Council too , because speedy implementation was supposed to follow .
But then things do not usually happen quite as one expects them to .
Today , unfortunately , we are not much further on . And yet the recommendations of Parliament were entirely reasonable and this was reflected in the common position .
Unfortunately , it was not then possible to reach a positive outcome early in the context of the three-way discussion .
I say early , I mean of course in logical sequence !
I very much regret this because avoiding a conciliation procedure would have speeded up the entry into force of the regulations .
Can anyone possibly understand the Council ' s blockade any more ?
There is no doubt that we need a practicable and fair solution to the issue of the liability of classification societies , and one that is also appropriate in terms of competition .
We need to have ceilings for financial liability and the amounts need to be insurable .
I therefore welcome the proposals relating to this .
We must not forget that the issue of liability is not a question of one-sided apportioning of blame .
All players involved must bear their recoverable share of the responsibility .
This , of course , is expressed in the form of a greater duty of care - from the shipbuilder to the ship-owner - than has hitherto been the case , and also in concrete sums of money .
I say we ought at long last to take a step forwards in the interests of safety .
I call upon the Council to support the Commission and us and make its own contribution actively and visibly in the interests of safety .
Mr President , Commissioner , I support what the rapporteur said about the importance of losing no time in getting this package approved .
At the same time , my thoughts turn to how important the forthcoming Erika 2 package will also be in warding off the single biggest environmental threat to the Bay of Finland , namely the construction in Primorsk .
We are on the way to landing ourselves in an extremely difficult situation in which what are perhaps the worst tankers in Europe are to be used to transport large quantities of oil in the sensitive Baltic .
In connection with the discussion of this package , I would appeal to you , Commissioner , quickly to take such measures as will ensure that we obtain the ' black box ' Mr Watts is talking about , as well as a reporting system for the Bay of Finland .
Ice classification must also be taken into account in this context .
At the same time , we must note that , even though it is the accidents that attract attention , deliberate emissions are unfortunately the source of the greatest pollution .
There is much to suggest that prosecutors in the European Union must begin to cooperate better within the framework of Eurojust and , in that way , dare to address this phenomenon .
Unfortunately , we are sent many reports , but the prosecutors rarely set to work .
Mr President , the loss of the oil tanker , Erika , triggered a long list of activities on the part of the Commission .
That is good .
However , it would have been better to act before an accident than after one .
There are two interesting factors in this context .
The first is that the Erika was registered in Malta .
Malta-registered vessels have been involved in quite a few losses . In the current membership negotiations , there are therefore reasons for imposing far-reaching requirements when it comes to maritime safety and the environment .
The second factor is that the Erika had been approved by an Italian classification society .
There has been a lack of supervision of classification societies .
This is shown , in particular , by the fact that the same classification society also approved the Ievoli Sun , which sank less than a year after the Erika .
Tougher demands upon classification societies are therefore one of the most important components of the proposal we are to adopt a position on .
Such a system would have placed a number of question marks over this particular classification company and certainly over a number of others , too .
Other efforts are required , too .
It is important that the rules governing double hulls should be as stringent here as in the United States .
However , rules alone are not enough .
The Ievoli Sun was only eleven years old and fitted with a double hull .
However , the vessel was poorly maintained , had a poorly trained crew and had been detained in a Dutch port three times before the accident occurred .
It is therefore of the greatest importance also to tighten up on Port State Control and clearly to increase the minimum standard for both vessels and classification societies .
The proposal tabled by the Commission is crucial and an important step in the right direction .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , it must be recognised that the sinking of the Erika caused a wave of indignation at the time in European public opinion against the shortcomings of existing measures and the inability to prevent a catastrophe of this magnitude .
This accident revealed the limitations of a political approach that tried to deal with maritime safety exclusively within the framework of international organisations like the IMO .
Therefore the Commission and especially the Commissioner Mrs De Palacio must be congratulated on the excellent work they have done over this period .
In one year they have tabled six proposals aiming at improving maritime safety , showing the great importance attached to this subject .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Ortuondo and Mr Watts , for the excellent work they have done .
In any case , one year on , although it seems we could be quite satisfied with the way we have responded to the expectations of our citizens , I think we should already have given these measures final approval .
In view of the urgency with which both this Parliament and the Council have dealt with this package of measures , one might think we have been able to react quickly .
In reality , however , the debate on this subject has lasted quite a long time , and if we go to conciliation we shall still have to wait several months before we see these measures finally adopted , which will affect the credibility of the institutions we represent .
And even though one year may seem a relatively short time by Community standards , we must agree with the Commission that perhaps we are jeopardising the effectiveness of the Erika package by discussing matters of secondary importance .
The very extensive international safety regulations that today govern maritime transport have brought about a drastic reduction in accidents and pollution , and the measures we are debating today show the commitment of our institutions to enhancing vessel safety and the protection of the marine environment .
Finally , I should like to keep up this sense of urgency in our work without resting on our laurels .
I trust in this Parliament ' s determination to move the Erika II package forward with the three new measures that complement those we are debating today , and I agree that the Council too must hurry up and support Parliament .
Mr President , quite frankly , it is difficult at this point to add anything new ; apart from anything else because the situation is rather odd .
As other Members have said , we fully support the Commission 's proposals . Let us all pull together , so to speak , so that we can present a united front to the party we really have to convince , which is against this proposal as it stands .
It is an extremely reasonable proposal , which is not intended to distort the initial position .
Ultimately , we are calling solely for this instrument which is so very important - as the rapporteur , Mr Watts , made clear - more in terms of the culture of safety than in terms of efficiency : this black box can genuinely change behaviour , it can force people to realise that the issue of safety exists and that they must be properly equipped .
The aim is therefore to introduce , as far as is possible , a new culture of safety , and to define a different two-pronged structure for financial compensation .
Moreover , I feel that Parliament 's proposal gives much more consideration to the principle of subsidiarity , which gives each Member State different options to choose from .
Therefore , basically , there is no great dispute .
What is truly incomprehensible is how the Council can fail to realise the importance and political consequence of a taking a timely decision on this matter .
It has already been said that we cannot allow issues which are , when all is said and done , so minor , further to delay an initiative which would carry great political weight , not just because it would put an end to and remedy a situation which has caused great alarm but , in particular , because it would show that , for once , we are being more far-sighted .
We would not want , one day , even before we succeed in launching this measure , the accidents of lots of little Erikas which , I am sorry to say , continue to take place in our waters , to cause another major disaster .
We do not want this to happen and we call upon the Council to act wisely .
Mr President , sea transport and its importance have been discussed on numerous occasions in this Chamber .
Because it is more environmentally friendly , we have also talked about the need for or the suitability of modal transfer onto short sea shipping , which could be an element in the Community strategy to comply with the Kyoto commitments ; about the fact that recent studies show that sea transport is responsible for only 12 % of all discharges into the sea , or that it is the most energetically efficient mode of transport , and that compared with overland transport structures , which are highly saturated in developed countries , especially in Europe , the sea is an open , free infrastructure that is still far from saturated .
The media occasionally report on the tragedies that occur , sometimes with the loss of human lives .
Fortunately , because of both the extensive international safety regulations and the more rational attitude and greater awareness that today govern sea transport , accidents and pollution have been considerably reduced .
I believe that the measures under consideration today reveal the commitment of our institutions to take on and to enhance vessel safety and the protection of the marine environment , and for that we must congratulate the Commission and the Vice-President , who have tabled six legislative proposals in less than a year .
They have reacted well .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I want to talk about vessels not just as places of work but also as places where the living conditions of professional seamen are developed , and therefore I think that , in addition to the efforts to improve safety for the lives and wellbeing of seamen , an effort also needs to be made to improve the living and working conditions for these workers while they are aboard ship .
Mr President , first of all I want to thank the rapporteurs for the excellent work they have done all this time on these two very important proposals .
I should like to remind you that the Erika package , as has been said , was presented just after a truly regrettable disaster , which caused environmental problems for four hundred kilometres of European coastline ; we acted swiftly and appropriately in the proposals , but in the informal trialogue we have regrettably been unable to reach an agreement between the three institutions .
What the Commission regrets most of all is that we have been so close to reaching one : only a tiny bit more was needed .
In the end it was non-essential aspects that separated us , but I fear that these aspects will make us go to conciliation and we will take another three or four months to achieve an agreement on the proposals .
All this when we can all - Parliament , Commission and Council - be very proud because thanks to our firmness , particularly in Parliament and the Commission , thanks to our work by common accord we have succeeded in getting the International Maritime Organisation to adopt our demands in practically every detail on the use of double hulls as a better or equivalent system to ensure greater oil tanker safety , laying down maximum time periods in which single-hull tankers can be retained and allowed to berth in our ports .
We have to face the facts , but of course the Commission will carry on working so that in conciliation we can reach this agreement between the three institutions as soon as possible .
Basically between Parliament and the Council , although we shall perform our mediation duties , which is our job .
Points concerning crews have been brought up during the debate .
I agree with you - several of you have mentioned it - that the crew problem is crucial .
We have presented a communication on seamen , on crews , on their preparation and training .
We understand that positive proposals must also be submitted , and we are examining how to extend the benefits of proposals such as the one currently in force in Great Britain , the tonnage tax , how to encourage other Member States of the Union to adopt these kinds of measures , because of course disasters often occur simply through human error .
It is true that others are due to substandard vessels , as has been mentioned here , but all too often it is a matter of human error , lack of preparation , sometimes even details like the fact of speaking different languages and not understanding each other , and things of that kind .
That is why this point has to be emphasised here , because there are safety aspects connected with it .
Let us move on to the proposals .
With regard to Amendment No 1 to the Port State control Directive , I must say - as I have reiterated on other occasions - that the Commission fully agrees with what the rapporteur , Mr Watts , says on the need to gradually incorporate in fleets the mandatory installation of black boxes in those fleets sailing to European Union ports .
But we insist that this is not the place : we are raising it in the Erika II package ; Parliament is discussing it , and in my understanding it is not in this Directive that we should be raising it .
We also believe that the proposal to automatically ban a vessel for not having a black box is not practical .
Clearly a vessel cannot be banned from sailing without an initial inspection , and as a matter of principle a ban cannot be used as the solution to just any problem concerning safety on board vessels .
In the port state control system , a suitable response to that omission is inspection and subsequent detention of the vessel .
The proposed amendment , moreover , includes vessels over three hundred tonnes gross , which far exceeds both the international system and the Commission ' s proposal , which only covers those over three thousand tonnes gross .
In addition , it is highly likely that at an international level vessels will be fitted with a simplified voyage data recorder , which will be much cheaper to install and will nonetheless provide the essential data , which are also so important for facilitating inspections by port authorities .
The Commission also feels that the proposed amendment should not be included in Article 7 , since it refers to penalties for prolonged lack of compliance by vessels that do not meet minimum standards or that fly flags of convenience , and here we are talking about penalties against a vessel for a specific omission .
Most of all , however , our view is that these issues refer more to the future amendment that would have to be introduced in the other proposal that forms part of the Erika II package .
I agree , then , Mr Watts - I have told you so several times - with the need : you are quite right to include black boxes .
The problem is where .
The voyage data recorder would also have to be considered .
We have to analyse the possibility of combining them or just think about one system or the other depending on the type of vessel and the type of cargo it transports .
As for Amendment No 2 concerning the review clause , the Commission can accept it , but the review process should take into account a period of three years from the date of implementation of the Directive and not from the entry into force of the Directive , since it is necessary to assess the implementation of the Directive after a significant period of time .
With this partial modification we have no problem in accepting it .
In relation to the second item in the package , the Directive on classification societies , I should like to point out that I fully agree with the rapporteur , Mr Ortuondo Larrea , and all the other Members of Parliament who think that it is all too easy for the Member States to simply place the whole burden of liability on the classification societies and thus exclude their own liability as regards genuine control by the port authorities .
In relation to the subject of liability , which is the most controversial amendment , I should like to point out that unlimited liability is already a principle in the case of major offences .
I regret that in the end , because of the problem of minor offences , we have not been able to reach an agreement on this initiative .
Compared with the major improvements in maritime safety that are achieved here in the general text , the truth is that in the end we have got tangled up - I repeat , I feel quite sad at this - in an aspect that is of minor importance in comparison with the whole .
In the end , however , focusing on the proposed amendments to the Directive on classification societies , the Commission can accept Nos 2 , 5 , 6 and part of 7 - provided that the reference to its duplicating IMO Resolution 847 / 20 is suppressed .
We cannot , however , accept Amendment No 1 .
In this respect we agree with Parliament that there should be no family or business links between the shipowner and the classification society , and this is already included in the text .
The problem is that the proposal you make goes one step further and therefore implementation becomes practically impossible .
I hope you can reconsider this amendment , because I really think it would be better for everyone .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 deal with the critical subject of liability .
Parliament wishes to set maximum levels of liability , and I agree that the principle of liability should be kept .
In fact the Commission sought the upper level for harmonisation in the proposal for a ceiling .
I must remind you , however , that on all the other subjects we have reached an agreement .
Having said that , we must try to move the proposal forward as soon as possible .
We will have to seek agreements if we cannot get to a second reading .
The Commission will always be there to propose formulas and help mediate , but in any case I must again reiterate the excellent job done by the two rapporteurs , both Mr Watts and Mr Ortuondo , and this House as a whole , because I believe it has been extremely useful not only for the Commission ' s positions but also in general for improving the quality of the proposals .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Uniform driver attestation
The next item is the report ( A5-0151 / 2001 ) by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 881 / 92 on access to the market in the carriage of goods by road within the Community to and from the territory of a Member State or passing across the territory of one or more Member States as regards a uniform driver attestation ( COM ( 2000 ) 751 - C5-0638 / 2000 - 2000 / 0297 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , the problem of cheap labour from elsewhere versus more costly labour carried out by EU subjects has , in connection with the pending enlargement , been in the news rather a lot in the last few weeks , and with good reason .
Labour costs of non-EU-subjects are significantly lower than those of EU workers .
According to some members of the Council , this could lead to inevitable tension within the labour market .
That concern is not totally unfounded .
At least , if we consider the transport sector .
In that sector , certain international carriers make use of drivers from third countries for cross-border transport within Europe .
These drivers mainly hail from Eastern Europe and beyond and put much less heavy pressure on the labour costs of a company than do their European colleagues .
There are a number of reasons why non-EU drivers can be active within the Community transport market .
First of all , there are international agreements , such as the CEMT , as well as bilateral agreements which grant Eastern European businesses access to the Community market .
Thanks to these agreements , businesses from outside the EU are allowed to carry out international transport within the European Union , in a restricted manner or not , as the case may be .
Secondly , non-EU drivers can drive Community vehicles , provided that they have the necessary licences .
This last aspect , in particular , is the subject of debate in this report .
In practice , it appears complex to verify across the EU whether the documents which a non-EU driver produces at an inspection point are the correct ones , in other words , whether this person has been employed legally and whether all social conditions have been fulfilled in the process .
This difficulty has led to all kinds of practices in which non-EU drivers work for Community businesses illegally and under social conditions which are considerably worse than those enjoyed by their EU colleagues .
This results in distortion of competition between EU businesses and , understandably , protests among EU drivers .
That is why the Commission has proposed introducing a uniform driver attestation for all drivers who drive lorries from Community businesses .
This attestation - equivalent to the Community licence for international transport within the EU - is then proof that , for the relevant driver , legislation and social conditions which apply to the business in the country where it is established , have been met .
The attestation does not detail the content of those conditions , but merely their application in terms of working conditions .
According to the Commission proposal , this attestation should be introduced for all drivers who work for Community businesses .
This means that certain routine actions , specifically the use of more than one driver from different Member States for a lorry during one journey , would be rendered more difficult .
In addition , the wholesale introduction of this attestation into the EU will entail a considerable administrative burden , because an extensive number of attestations are to be issued in a very short space of time .
Bearing in mind that the key goal of this measure is to thwart the use of so-called ' illegal ' non-EU drivers for lorries of EU businesses , the scope of this proposal appears to be somewhat on the generous side .
That is why most members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism are of the opinion that the scheme should in the first instance be restricted to drivers from third countries .
In that way , the root of the problem is addressed , and the administrative burden , which could delay the implementation of the proposal , is reduced .
In addition , according to that same majority of the Transport Committee , this scheme should - without evaluation - apply to all drivers who drive lorries of EU businesses , two years after the introduction of the attestation for third-country drivers .
A major argument in favour of this decision is the assumed irregularity in their working conditions , too .
If the attestation were also to apply to EU drivers , this would create an entirely transparent situation in which national proof of employment could be replaced by the attestation .
It would then be important to resist the increasing pressure on the content of working conditions and not to allow competitive pressure in the sector eventually to end up as a burden upon drivers .
Mr President , if we accept this proposal , that does not mean that all problems involving non-EU drivers will be a thing of the past .
The existing CEMT and bilateral agreements offer - also for EU businesses - ample scope for using drivers from third countries on international transport within the EU .
That is why I would like to end my speech by calling on the Member States to keep sight of this proposal ' s cardinal concept in the negotiations surrounding this licensing scheme .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur for his report , but also the Commission for the proposal , which it presented at relatively short notice .
We should not forget that three-quarters of all freight transport in Europe continues to take place by road and working conditions remain a major problem , because they not only have direct economic effects , they also have an impact in terms of security policy .
The market is distorted by so-called social dumping .
In an environment where competition is unregulated - such as we unfortunately have on our roads - only large transportation companies still have a chance of survival in the medium term .
In any case it is becoming more and more difficult for small transportation companies as the competitive struggle is tough and sometimes it is at the cost of safety , and at the cost of driving and rest times , but also at the cost of proper employment relationships .
It is this that we have dealt with and resolved partially in this proposal .
The introduction of driver attestation is an initial response , and although it goes some way to solving the problem , it is still only a partial solution .
Let us not forget that many hauliers from adjacent third countries exploit the situation and certain authorisations - be it CEMT licences or bilateral authorisations - to operate with poor social conditions and low wages .
We are therefore called upon to go further than this report and deal with this issue if we are serious about transport , working conditions and especially if we are serious about road traffic safety .
The rapporteur has suggested limiting the scope of this regulation to drivers from third countries .
The opinion of the Commission - and I think this is very good - was that this should be extended to all drivers .
Perhaps the amendments before us are a healthy compromise , because we can include third countries in a first phase and extend it to all drivers in a second phase , as we consider this to be a general and useful measure for all drivers .
This also makes it possible to divide the administrative burden between two levels .
As someone who lives in a border municipality , I know personally that there is quite a lot of checking to be done in this sphere at the internal European level too .
And soon , when we have the new tachograph and the card , we can also introduce an integrated system of control that could take into account both social and safety aspects .
We therefore propose that we should work in these two phases and hope that the countries will recognise , as with all regulations , that any regulation is only efficient if the control mechanisms too are efficient .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr van Dam .
I think he has submitted a very good report .
Looking again at the explanatory statement , one realises that it contains a whole lot of arguments and material about what is happening on Europe 's roads .
What is happening on Europe 's roads can either be described as criminal or disgraceful , or both at the same time , and it is often simply unacceptable .
The fact that we are not solving all the problems with this dossier has been described in detail by Mr van Dam in his report .
However , I think that we are really getting to grips with at least one important matter , that of clamping down on social dumping by a few black sheep in the haulage sector .
One must always stress that the great majority , as I believe , do things by the book .
Here we are talking about a very few people , but their behaviour has devastating consequences .
Driving and rest periods are one thing , and these must be adhered to , there is no question about that ; the social conditions of the drivers are the other aspect of this .
All drivers have a right to be employed in accordance with the conditions that usually apply in the Member States .
The attempt to use two drivers from central or eastern Europe to comply with the driving and rest periods , while at the same time gaining competitive advantages by means of wage dumping , must be stopped , because if two drivers together earn less than a driver who is employed on the usual terms , then that is simply out of order .
It is a disgrace and must be denounced as such .
It is good , therefore , that we are starting with third countries first , as we have suggested .
We should not wait too long to extend this to the Union , and to the Member States , so that this regulation applies to everyone .
I hope that it will not take as long as the ERIKA package , but that we can arrive at a regulation speedily .
Eastward expansion is imminent and we need to have decent social conditions , but also fair conditions for competition , on our roads and in the haulage industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , thank you so much for all your efforts .
I can remember that these related to my first parliamentary questions , for I was rather unfamiliar with the mechanism for matters of this kind .
During the Christmas recess last year , I was reading something about the illegal deployment of Eastern European drivers , social dumping as it is referred to , and such like .
Probably like many others , I then thought that something should simply be done about this .
I am grateful for the fact that this issue was addressed reasonably promptly .
It is not just the trade union associations , but it was also the employers who sounded the alarm .
It was a joint effort .
I would like to make it clear at this stage that we are keen supporters of the free movement of labour .
Needless to say , there is an entire debate , specifically in Germany and Austria , with regard to border traffic , and there are all kinds of problems , but if work is done in the European Union - enlarged or not , as the case may be - it should be carried out under the working conditions and working hour regulations which apply here .
It is as simple as that .
That means that some countries should also consider whether , slowly but surely , they should start introducing minimum wages and minimum standards , for otherwise these areas would be difficult to verify .
I regret the fact that we are not focusing our attention initially on third countries .
The underlying reasoning for this is explained later on .
I would mainly underline the importance of evaluation , for it is not just this construction , but also the move to Luxembourg , along with a whole series of other measures , which have led to this .
We should make sure that we are not always lagging behind .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done .
In my opinion this is one of the occasions when the institutions fortunately show their support for a new measure intended to do away with practices that might endanger the working conditions of professional drivers and safety on our roads .
Parliament , the Commission and the Council all affirm the real need for issuing a uniform document , the driver attestation , which will help the competent authorities in the Member States to ascertain whether a driver is regularly engaged in the haulier ' s State of establishment .
Such a measure may help , of course , to ensure respect for working conditions in the EU and hence guarantee the level of road safety demanded by European citizens , and not just guarantee road safety but also put an end to unfair competition and therefore ensure that the internal market really operates properly .
The basic difference in position among our three institutions lies in the scope of this new measure .
The Commission proposed that all drivers performing international transport operations , regardless of their nationality , should be required to obtain the attestation , so as to preserve equality of treatment for all drivers and specifically to avoid social dumping .
For its part the Council is concerned about the administrative burden that issuing this document would place on the authorities in the Member States and prefers to apply the Regulation first to third country nationals and leave a broadening of the scope of the Regulation for future consideration .
I think this House has made a very constructive suggestion in this respect , and I should like to thank the rapporteur Mr van Dam and the rest of the Committee for this .
Thanks to this proposal , I believe we can perhaps meet the need for quick results as regards third-country drivers and at the same time attend to the difficulties that the Member States of the Union have , and the Member States can thus commit themselves straight away to taking on the considerable additional administrative burden that applying the Regulation to European Union drivers as well would mean .
The Commission believes that rapid progress in this matter would substantially increase the value of the measure itself .
The Commission has therefore already communicated its agreement in principle with the Council ' s point of view , even though it departs somewhat from the Commission ' s initial proposal .
In fact Parliament ' s position in favour of applying the Regulation to drivers from European Union Member States as well after a transitional period is interesting .
Above all I am convinced that it is important for the Council and Parliament to adopt this much-needed legislation as soon as possible .
Thus - I must make this quite clear - I think Parliament ' s idea of introducing a transitional stage may provide the basis for an agreement in the Council , and so I should like to accept its basic thrust in order to reach a solution ; I can therefore accept Amendment No 6 , which I believe may help combine the two problems .
With regard to the other suggestions made by Parliament , I want to declare my complete agreement with Parliament ' s valuable proposal , formulated in its Amendment No 7 , concerning the inclusion of certain additional driver details on the attestation , since in my opinion this will make the attestation itself clearer and more precise and will prevent or at least reduce the possibility of abuse .
I cannot , however , accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 since they have no effect on the achievement of the objective of this Regulation .
Neither can I accept Amendment No 5 , because I feel it could lead to confusion instead of improving the text of the Regulation .
I should like to thank you all for your productive cooperation in this matter .
I hope you can accept the position I am now proposing , by which I accept Amendment Nos 6 and 7 , and that on this basis we can at the forthcoming Council of Transport Ministers achieve a common position at first reading , if Parliament really does accept the Commission ' s position .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Madam President , you will be aware that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is currently meeting in our Brussels building .
You may not be aware that there are two representatives of the Burmese military junta taking part in that conference .
As you know , the European Union has a common position , supported by this House , not to grant visas to members of the Burmese military junta .
Yet here they are in our own building .
I understand that the Council has waived the ban for this conference , as it felt that this was necessary in view of its obligations to the United Nations .
If so , may I call on you , Madam President , to ask the Council or Mr Solana to issue a statement making it absolutely clear that this was an exception and that the visa ban and the common position are still in place .
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
I will indeed discuss this matter with Mr Solana .
I also assume , of course , that Mrs Lindh has listened to you very carefully and that she has taken note of what you said .
I do not know whether she wishes to reply .
Not at this moment , it would seem .
But we heard what you said Mr Corbett , and I , for my part , will take the appropriate steps .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I wish to draw attention to some other rather unwelcome visitors on our premises .
Yesterday there was a disgraceful Communist demonstration in the courtyard of the Tower .
This is very intimidatory , as far as Members are concerned ; it is an intrusion on our parliamentary premises .
Could you look into the circumstances of this : where are the limits of this Parliament and what rights do we have to exclude such people from our premises ?
I will give the floor to Mrs Banotti at once because I think she wishes to reply to your question , for which I thank her .
Madam President , you will be aware that I raised the issue at the Bureau last week about a grossly intimidatory and intrusive demonstration in front of the Parliament in Brussels , so I was equally surprised yesterday to see exactly the same thing happening again .
Apparently , the courtyard of the Parliament is a public space . It is under the control of the gendarmerie here in Strasbourg and apparently there has been some breakdown in communications .
They had not informed Parliament that this demonstration was going to take place yesterday .
I agree with Mr Van Orden .
Everybody is entitled to their democratic point of view , but certainly it was intimidatory to both Members and guests , hundreds of whom were trying to get into to Parliament at the same time .
So I very much hope that the administration in Strasbourg will ensure that we do not have to go through that again .
I make no comment on the issue that was being raised , but this is the second time that access to Parliament has been impeded by the same demonstrators .
Madam President , on Monday evening , after your statement about the Berlusconi business in Spain , I asked whether you could possibly let us have all the documents you had received from the Spanish political and judicial authorities .
You replied that yes , of course , you would see to it immediately .
It is now Wednesday morning and I have still not received these documents .
That is quite unacceptable , Mr Caudron .
I shall check what has happened at once .
I asked the departments concerned twice and they assured me that these documents had been transmitted to all the Members of this Parliament .
Believe me , I will look into this matter .
Madam President , I had the same observation as Mr Corbett .
We also received notification that a high-ranking Burmese delegation is in Brussels .
It is the official policy of the European Union not to admit any government representatives from Burma because of the shameful regime in that country .
No less a person than Aung San Suu Kyi , who received the Sakharov Prize here , is still in detention .
I consider it an absolute disgrace that these people are able to come here and speak in our very own parliament .
I should like to join wholeheartedly with Mr Corbett in asking for immediate action to be taken .
Madam President , some more points on the Berlusconi affair .
First a positive point .
I must tell you , and Mr Caudron , that the documentation you promised us was definitely sent by the secretarial services .
We received it yesterday - admittedly after 9 p.m. by e-mail in all languages .
This leads me to believe that a number of honourable Members have not yet checked their e-mail today .
But now a second matter , Madam President .
I have in front of me a telegram you sent to Mr Berlusconi , leader of Forza Italia .
You congratulate Mr Berlusconi , admittedly on a personal basis .
But I must say that I am amazed at the very warm way in which you express the wish that he will give Italy a new impetus with his election manifesto .
I must remind you , Madam President , and stress that Mr Berlusconi 's election victory does not place him above suspicion in regard to the allegations of corruption and abuse of power .
I should like to state clearly here that the origin of his fortune is surrounded by a lack of clarity .
Moreover , his monopolistic hold on the media constitutes a danger for Italian democracy , Madam President .
As you know , Berlusconi controls a large part of the Italian press .
I find this unacceptable .
In fact , I would hope that the Commission will quickly institute an investigation into this violation of European competition law .
Madam President , I had hoped that despite the warm words you have sent to Mr Berlusconi , you would lead the way in this campaign to make it clear that what is currently happening in Italy is really not really kosher .
Mr Staes , thank you for informing me that you received the documents last night .
I can only ask Mr Caudron to check his mail .
As for the telegram I sent Mr Berlusconi , I am sure you took note of the fact that I had made it quite clear that I was congratulating him on a personal basis .
Obviously I was not speaking on behalf of the European Parliament in this congratulatory telegram , but simply expressing myself on a personal basis .
Madam President , there is a limit to the patience even of calm , restrained people like myself .
We have witnessed a number of personal attacks on the leader of a political grouping , attacks based on information given in newspaper articles , none of which has been proved to be true .
We are an institution : well then , an institution demands that respect be shown for all its members , and I would argue that this has not been the case over the last two months .
The Italian people have made a clear , indisputable choice : we are in the presence of a Head of State .
Therefore , the Members are all free to have their own - quite legitimate - views , but in meetings of our institution would they kindly keep them to themselves !
Madam President , a few hours ago , a Basque journalist , Mr Landaburu , was the victim of an attack .
Mr Landaburu is well known for his professional work , his commitment to democracy and his opposition to Francoism . Fortunately , he escaped with his life .
Nonetheless , this is a disturbing incident , coming as it does just a few days after elections in the Basque country . Without going into the results , the 80 % turnout alone is worth mentioning .
It represents a very positive development .
Parliament is debating a resolution on freedom of expression this very week . My group will table an amendment on the harassment to which the free and independent media are subjected in the Basque Country .
I am confident it will receive the support of the whole House .
Madam President , I hope you will agree to send a message of solidarity to Mr Landaburu on Parliament ' s behalf .
Mr Galeote Quecedo , certainly I raised the matter of this new attack , here in the Chamber at 5 p.m. yesterday , deploring it in much the same terms as you did .
Naturally I immediately offered this journalist all our sympathy , on behalf of the European Parliament .
Madam President , on Monday I had the pleasure of reporting the release to the House of Mr Tsiakourmas , who was kidnapped by Turkish-Cypriot kidnappers and released following a resolution by Parliament calling for his release .
I said that I hoped that this might be the beginning of a change in Turkey 's behaviour , with the representatives of the Turkish-Cypriot community abandoning violence and provocation so that we can move towards reconciliation .
Unfortunately , events have quickly proven me wrong because another kidnapping has taken place - it appears that a kidnapping is always needed so that when one person is released there is another to take his place . This time it was a 75-year-old man , who was cycling along the green line and who was taken for being drunk in charge of a bicycle .
It is the first time I have heard that drink driving is not just a crime but the sort of a crime which can only be punished by violating borders .
I ask you and I ask my fellow members to take note of this incident and to repeat the position expressed by Parliament to the Turkish authorities last time , because if this carries on , there will be no progress or peaceful settlement .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I have the honour and the pleasure of welcoming to the public gallery a delegation from the Knesset , headed by its Chairperson , Mrs Dayan .
May I say that it is always with great pleasure that the European Parliament receives delegations from the Knesset , given our close and long-standing relations .
Since the joint visit in September 2000 by the Speaker of your Assembly , Mr Avraham Burg , and Mr Abu Ala , President of the Palestinian Legislative Council , a visit which had raised so many hopes , we all know that the outlook has , alas , darkened tragically .
The European Parliament is following the situation very carefully , as the debate we are about to hold will show .
Let me welcome you very warmly and simply express the keen hope that your visit will contribute to a resumption of the dialogue .
Situation in the Middle East
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in the Middle East .
I give the floor to Mrs Lindh , President-in-Office of the Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in the Middle East is deteriorating .
Distrust between the parties is growing .
Violence is claiming more victims every day .
A normal life has not been possible for the Palestinians for a long time and conditions are getting worse all the time .
The EU distances itself from the increasing amount of violence in Gaza and on the West Bank : Israeli encroachment and tank fire in Palestinian-controlled areas , firing on various roads , the killing of certain selected people .
Innocent civilians have lost their lives , including many children .
The economic situation is also difficult .
The Palestinian Authority is in deep financial crisis since the Israeli transfer payments were halted and normal economic activities ceased in the area .
In practice , the Authority is living on financial grants from Arab donors and the EU .
Israel is also suffering from the economic downturn as a result of the crisis , although to a lesser extent than Palestinian society .
The daily lives of Israelis are becoming more and more difficult .
Violence in the form of mortar fire , car bombs and suicide bombings is increasingly affecting Israel .
Israeli civilians and children are being killed .
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon was elected on the promise of increasing security .
Instead confrontation has been exacerbated , military interventions have increased and a readiness has been demonstrated both to enter Palestinian-controlled areas and to attack Syrian targets in Lebanon .
Quite simply , the security situation has got worse .
There is no long-term military solution .
The conflict will neither be won or lost .
The only solution to the conflict lies in negotiation .
Therefore the peace process must continue .
The Presidency and the EU are in close contact with the parties and we are encouraging them to continue the peace negotiations on the basis of the result of previous negotiations , seeking to reach a permanent status agreement on the basis of international law , including UN Resolutions 242 and 338 .
A crucial difficulty is the basic lack of trust between the parties .
Both parties harbour the misconception that it is the other side which is solely responsible for the violence and the halting of the peace process .
No one dares to show an example of reconciliation or flexibility as it is feared that this will be seen as weakness .
A diplomatic initiative is required to break the deadlock .
The European Council in Stockholm commissioned High Representative Javier Solana together with the Commission to also report to the Gothenburg Summit in June on how the EU can promote the peace effort .
Javier Solana reported the progress of this work at the Gymnich meeting in Nyköping on 5 May .
The EU welcomes and supports the Mitchell Commission ' s report and proposals , as it does the Egyptian-Jordanian peace initiative , which is based on agreements in which Israel took part .
Both proposals encourage the parties to immediately enter into cease-fire agreements , to confirm their willingness to respect agreements entered into and seek to reopen negotiations .
Measures to build trust are required if negotiations are to succeed .
One of the most critical issues for the peace process is the Israeli settlement policy .
Both the Egyptian-Jordanian initiative and the Mitchell Report demand a freeze on all settlements .
The Mitchell Report also suggests that the Israelis should consider withdrawing from controversial and vulnerable settlements .
The EU considers that these requirements are justified .
We consider that the settlement policy is in breach of international law and constitutes a serious obstacle to peace .
The EU has encouraged Israel to start to withdraw from its settlements .
We also support the Mitchell Report ' s proposal that Israel should cease using live ammunition against demonstrators .
Measures to build trust also include Israel repaying the taxes due to the Palestinian Authority .
A negotiated solution , or a step on the way towards one , must include the goal of establishing a democratic , sustainable and peaceful Palestinian state .
The EU has defined its positions on the issue in the Berlin Declaration of March 1999 and in the New York Declaration of 12 September 2000 .
It will remain the task of the EU in cooperation with other interested countries and players to help the Palestinians in developing such a democratic and peaceful Palestinian state .
Lasting peace in the region is impossible without peace agreements also between Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon .
Considerable progress has been achieved in negotiations between Israel and Syria .
These now have to be concluded and a solution found based on the principles of international law as stated earlier .
Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon in May last year was an important precondition for a future peace agreement .
Until such a peace agreement is concluded , it is important for all parties to avoid incidents and other action which may lead to continued violence .
The EU will actively contribute to the continued peace process in cooperation with other states affected and through High Representative Javier Solana , special envoy Miguel Moratinos and the Commission .
The Middle East is the original home of human civilisation .
It is an area of rare cultural riches and religious importance which is now increasingly associated with the long conflict into which the region is sinking deeper and deeper .
One condition for positive development in the region is the cessation of the current conflict .
The Swedish Presidency wishes to do all it can to contribute to this together with other EU partners to the best of our ability .
Madam President , I obviously very much regret that the situation in the Middle East which has been well described by the Minister has not improved since my last intervention in the House on this subject .
The violence continues , killings on both sides , including of children , also continue unabated , property is being destroyed , particularly arable land and shelters in refugee camps , and settlements in West Bank and Gaza are still expanding .
The European Union is regularly urged to play a stronger part in the Middle East .
The core principles of our position are that peace must be built on international law , on the relevant UN Resolutions including UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 and on the formula ' Land for Peace ' .
We , that is all the European Union institutions , should clearly restate these principles in all our contacts with the parties to this bitter dispute .
The European Union continues to support any efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict .
We support , as the Minister said , the Egyptian-Jordanian initiative as well as the recommendations of the commendable Mitchell Commission of Inquiry , including the settlement freeze and the swift and decisive cessation of violence and terrorism .
There has been too much bloodshed and fighting .
Violence must stop .
On the Israeli side there is no justification for the disproportionate use of force against civilians and the destruction of property .
On the Palestinian side , the Palestinian Authority must do everything in its power to stop attacks on Israeli civilians .
This includes preventing incitements for such attacks , and the Palestinian Authority must naturally control its security services effectively .
We cannot condemn violence on one side but not the other .
The Mitchell Commission seemed to me to point a sensible way , the only way , to ending the blame game , stopping the killing and the maiming and getting back to talking .
Talks have to resume , and the parties must honour their international obligations .
In the case of Israel , these obligations range from complying with international humanitarian law , that covers respect for human rights , as stated by the European Union at the Human Rights Commission meeting in Geneva , and also settlements .
It goes on to bilateral obligations regarding the Palestinian Authority , for example the transfer of tax revenues , and it also includes obligations under the EC-Israel Association Agreement .
In the case of the Palestinian Authority , we need to see the implementation of long-overdue reforms both in financial and political terms including democratic transparency , fighting against corruption and strengthening the rule of law .
I would like to refer to two concrete and practical points today about which I am regularly asked by Parliament : the effect of the economic blockade on the Palestinian Authority and the policy of settlements .
There has been some improvement recently concerning the movement of goods and people within and out of Gaza .
For example , a number of businessmen have received permits , but economic activities in the Palestinian territories remain severely restricted .
The Palestinian Authority is still facing financial and institutional collapse .
The international donor meeting in Stockholm on 11 April was a good step forward in bringing a solution to the Palestinian Authority 's budgetary crisis .
We particularly appreciate the commitments made by Arab countries .
Following the Stockholm meeting , the Commission is discussing with the Palestinian Authority the basis for our future assistance .
This includes measures intended to enhance financial management and complete the process of institutional reform .
Some of these measures , in particular those referring to institutional reform , constitute a clear confirmation of commitments announced in the past by the Palestinian Authority .
We have noted the steps taken by the Palestinian authority to adopt an austerity budget .
The Palestinian Authority is also working on other welcome reforms related to financial management , such as the consolidation of revenues .
The International Monetary Fund is monitoring this process , and our intention on the basis of this austerity budget is to make monthly payments of EUR 10 million during the next six months once we can get the agreement we all want , but I repeat what I said earlier and what the Minister said , what is important is to end the blockade and resume the payment of revenues .
Let me turn now to Israel 's settlement policy .
The European Union 's position on settlements is clear .
All settlement activities in Gaza , the West Bank , including East Jerusalem , and on the Golan Heights are illegal , under international law , and constitute a major obstacle to peace .
This includes the natural growth of settlements , a violation of international law that cannot be allowed to continue unabated .
I am often asked , particularly in view of the failure of our efforts to resolve the issue , what this means for the working of our Association Agreement with Israel and in particular for the question of rules of origin which is covered by the Agreement .
It follows from what I have said that the West Bank , Gaza and the Golan Heights fall outside the territorial scope of the Agreement .
This is not a new point I am making , it is not some political gesture .
Let me make that point crystal clear .
This point has already been made in the Commission 's communication in 1998 on the same issue .
The communication made it clear that preferential access to Community markets for exports originating in Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and in East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights , and I quote , " contravenes agreed rules of origin since these territories do not form part of the State of Israel under public international law " .
Therefore the communication indicated that , and I quote again , " preferential access to Community markets for exports originating in the West Bank and Gaza Strip as originating in Israel under the EC-Israel Interim Trade Agreement is a violation of the latter , given that it does not apply to these territories . "
The European Union must uphold the rule of law .
That was a point recently made very seriously in a similar case by the Court of First Instance which has stated that the existence of political tensions , and I quote , " does not exonerate the Commission as guardian of the Treaty and of the agreements concluded under it from ensuring the correct implementation by a third country of the obligation it has contracted to fulfil under an agreement concluded with the Community " .
The position is absolutely clear .
If , I stress the word if , Israel wants to declare goods coming from the settlements as being of Israeli origin , EU customs authorities would not be able to share this interpretation .
Customs is a Community competence and the implementation of this common policy is delegated to Member States , but the role of the Commission is to ensure coherence and to avoid divergent interpretations by different Member States .
A number of Member States have queried Israeli origin certificates over recent months , and replies are now being received by Member States ' customs authorities .
Our responsibility in the Commission today is to avoid uncoordinated action .
This is why I have suggested that customs authorities discuss the replies received urgently and any action they may be contemplating at the next meeting of the Customs Code Committee on 31 May .
So what are the technical steps that will be taken now ?
This issue will be signalled at the EU-Israel Association Committee on 21 May .
The item is on the agenda agreed with Israel and , as I have just mentioned , there will be a full discussion by Member States ' customs experts at the end of May on how to interpret Israeli replies and the common line on how to respond .
In the light of the conclusions reached at this occasion , this would be discussed in the Customs Cooperation Committee between the European Union and Israel which would normally take place in July .
I wish to stress that our decision will be entirely based on the law and its technical application case by case .
We can do no more but we should do no less .
As the Court judgment to which I referred argued , the Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and of the agreements concluded under it .
We cannot , nor should we seek to , resile from the duty .
I return to where I began : like others we wish to see an end to the violence .
We want to see a return to negotiation and we stand ready to help with the delicate and demanding work of building an enduring peace .
There is no other way .
Thank you , Mr Patten .
Madam President , as Mr Patten has just said , debates on the critical situation in the Middle East are becoming a regular feature of Parliament ' s sittings .
This is all the more distressing if we think back to the discussions we held a few short months ago . Then , as you have just reminded us , we were considering the content of various draft proposals which seemed to be bringing the prospect of permanent peace in the region closer .
Nowadays the agenda seems to be set by the most extremist elements on both sides . A permanent vicious circle of violence has been created .
I certainly do not wish to name names or apportion blame , but the fact is that rightly or wrongly , the feeling of insecurity in Israel is stronger than ever . At the same time the belief is gaining ground that the Palestinian National Authority does not wish to act in a serious and determined manner to bring an end to the conflict , or is simply not in a position to do so .
In the meantime , the rapid deterioration in living conditions in the Palestinian Territories is a cause for great concern . It creates fertile ground for the growth of the most radical sectors .
Faced with this turn of events , the Palestinian National Authority appears to be losing its grip on the situation . At the same time , the population ' s support for the Intifada and indeed for terrorist action against Israel is growing .
This should be categorically condemned and decisive action taken against it . President Arafat neglected to do so as recently as yesterday evening in his televised address .
In general , the Arab countries are becoming ever more demoralised and positions are hardening .
Consequently , appeals have been made from the area to the international community and in particular to the European Union , requesting greater involvement in the peace process . However , we need to establish whether the parties to the conflict are genuinely interested in returning to the negotiating table or whether anyone still believes in a military solution to the problem .
We have been pleased to welcome a delegation from the Israeli Parliament to the House today . I should like to assure them that the institutions of the European Union are more committed than ever to offering even-handed support , if both parties wish it , in order to rebuild the necessary confidence to allow peace negotiations to resume .
I am sure members of that delegation have felt this for themselves .
Unquestionably , the European Union has already made a significant effort to offer economic support , in line with its global political vision for the region .
Our political involvement is increasing as we hone the Union ' s foreign policy instruments . However , we still have a long way to go .
Nonetheless , neither the Community nor anyone else can replace the will of the parties concerned to negotiate .
We firmly believe that if the aim is to achieve genuine security and well being in the area , peaceful and negotiated settlements must be reconsidered .
Confrontation has to cease , and all parties must work together again , striving for peaceful coexistence and cooperation .
It is my heartfelt desire that this should come about at the earliest opportunity .
Madam President , with a death toll of nearly 500 since the resumption of hostilities in the occupied territories , the material situation of the Palestinian people is worse than it was before the Oslo Accords .
Unemployment has reached 50 % , the investments in peace are lost , the population is sealed off , i.e. , living under surveillance in its towns and villages , and the hopes of an entire generation have vanished into thin air .
In face of this disastrous situation , the European Union must raise its voice and call for respect for the law ; in other words , we must focus on essentials again , and I thank Mr Patten for having done that so clearly .
That means ending the illegal occupation , handing back the territories acquired by force , calling a halt to the settlement of the West Bank , Gaza , East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights and respecting the Palestinian people 's right to self-determination .
If the escalation of violence is to stop , if the problem is to be resolved once and for all and the just and lasting settlement everybody is longing for is to be achieved , surely the first step must be to respect the United Nations resolutions ?
That is precisely what the Pope said in his speech in Damas and I hope that this time the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats will not disavow it .
( Applause ) In any case , we welcome the fact that recital D and point 13 of the joint motion for a resolution recall that fundamental point .
Israel , like any other country , has the right to live in peace within secure and recognised frontiers .
But Israel , like any other country , must recognise its international frontiers .
That , however , is not the case .
During a recent interview , Mr Sharon spelled out his strategic thinking by stating that the war of independence was not over , and I quote " so long as we are not in possession of the entire territory of Israel " .
The entire territory of Israel ?
What territory ?
Faced with fait accompli after fait accompli , the international community stands by and does nothing .
Last Saturday , Israeli shells once again fell on a Palestinian refugee camp .
On Sunday , the army killed five Palestinian policemen whom it regarded as suspects .
And so the list goes on .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is now time to say , loudly and firmly , ' basta ya ! '
Enough is enough , Mr Sharon .
( Applause from the left )
Madam President , we must not allow anyone criticising Israel to be immediately placed in the pro-Palestinian camp or vice versa .
If Europe wants to make a credible contribution to this debate , we must not choose one side or the other , but always the side of peace , democracy and human rights .
That means that whenever these values are in jeopardy we must raise our voice , irrespective of who is responsible at that moment .
Europe is often vociferous about the possible influence that it might have in the Middle East .
From our perspective these are empty words , if we look at the lack of new initiatives from Europe and particularly the lack of coherence between the Member States .
That is why we call expressly on the Commission , the presidency and on Mr Solana , whose absence today I find a little odd , to do their utmost to bring the Union into line .
With regard to the possible violation by Israel of the rules of origin in the Association Agreement , I should like to express my appreciation for the unambiguous words of Commissioner Patten , and ask him , and at the same time the Council , to give an immediate answer to four clear questions : for how many products have Member States asked for verification from the Israeli authorities , what answers have they received , what steps are they considering and within what timescale ?
Let me make the position of my group on this matter quite clear .
If it turns out to be true that there are doubts about the certificates issued by Israel and the Member States and the Commission do not act immediately and firmly , Europe will be complicit in the policy of settlement that we all abhor .
In conclusion I am gratified that our text on the need throughout the whole region for education geared to tolerance and mutual respect , has found support in other groups .
Madam President , the European approach to the problems of the Middle East should be , and fortunately often is , a balanced one based on the analytical conclusion that there is no one guilty party responsible for the present escalation .
Having said that , it is crystal clear to my group that overwhelming responsibility for the present escalation lies with the Sharon government in Israel .
Two examples : my group considers the heightened strategy of the execution of Palestinians by Israeli security services a disgrace , unworthy of a democratic state and moreover a strategy with no hope of success , since it will only increase the fury and frustration among the Palestinians .
The rejection of the Mitchell Report is a lost opportunity for the Israeli government .
Bringing an end to further expansion of the settlements , not even to the settlements themselves , should have been a first gesture towards the Palestinians as a sign that the Israelis also want a compromise , but sadly the Israeli government was unwilling to make that gesture .
All this is a good reason for stepping up the pressure from the European Union on the Israeli government .
Consequently I should like very specifically to ask the Commission and the Council , with all appreciation for the words spoken on the products from the settlements : what exactly is the Commission going to say to the Israeli delegation on 21 May about trade with Israel itself ?
Will it be business as usual for products from Israel itself ?
Not in the view of my group .
The issue of products from the settlements must be addressed , but we also feel that normal trade should be scrutinised carefully and that the Commission should take initiatives in that direction on 21 May .
Having said that , I do not wish to suggest that Palestinians are acting correctly .
The Palestinians are waging a war that they cannot win .
I also believe that the Commission must take responsibility and spell out to the Palestinian Authority that it - however difficult that may be - must try to prevent attacks on civilians and must opt for a different course , because the Palestinian Authority has its own responsibility .
Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Patten and the President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Lindh , for their speeches .
Suffering and tragedy will continue to mark the days and nights in Palestine if Israel and the wider international community do not take action to restore international and human rights .
Yesterday was another day of tragedy : more than 200 people , including a French journalist , were wounded at the check points , although the Palestinians had not opened fire ; the evening claimed another victim , an Israeli settlement ; over 500 Palestinians were killed , 23 000 wounded and hundreds maimed for life ; bombings , the houses of the poor demolished by bombs , thousands of trees - the livelihood of the peasant farmers - uprooted , roads blocked , despairing men and women , prisoners in their own villages , going hungry and Palestinian leaders considered to be military targets executed .


Pacifists from the Israeli movement , Peace Now , and I myself wept at the murder of Dr Tabet Tabet , an old friend ; schools closed , land confiscated to make room for fresh settlements and further suffering : 80 Israelis , including children and adolescents , killed .
We must stop the cycle of violence , for every death , whether Palestinian or Israeli , reduces our humanity .
I understand the despair , the rage , the humiliation , the collective punishments , the retaliation , the need of the Palestinians forced to live under military occupation for 30 years for freedom ; I understand the historical fear of the Israeli people , the persecutions they have suffered , the unique experience of the Shoah , for which we Europeans are responsible ; I understand the fear that a bomb might explode under a bus or a shell hit a school , but these fears do not give anyone the right to occupy another people 's territory or to violate international human rights .
It is our responsibility not to allow any expression of anti-Semitism in Europe , guaranteeing to the Israelis that the safety of Israel is very important to us , just as the safety of the Palestinian people is very important to us .
We have been saying for too long that we must stop the cycle of violence .
What , then , is our policy ?
To urge the Israeli government to resume talks without delay and to put an end to the closing-off of the territories and the bombings .
International protection for the Palestinians must be guaranteed - this request has been made by over 400 Israeli citizens as well as by the Palestinians - but , above all , the expansion of settlements and roads must stop . The Mitchell Commission also says this .
Yesterday , in an article in the newspaper , Ha 'aretz , Daniel Bensimon condemned Mr Sharon 's false motives in respect of the natural population expansion of the settlements .
He cites sources of American intelligence which state that 20 000 houses have been emptied and that many settlers , even those who are most fanatical , are leaving .
He writes that , if the government genuinely had the interests of the country at heart , it would put a freeze on new settlements .
This would be a positive message to the Palestinians , the Arabs and the international community .
Stopping the escalation of violence : the Palestinian Authority must make every endeavour to prevent extremism from prevailing .
There are no military solutions .
The European Union - as Parliament has stressed - must play a political role : international law must be applied in real life and not just proclaimed in declarations .
In this sense , respect for the agreements signed by Israel must be ensured , including the agreement concluded with the European Union which lays down a ban on the exporting of goods produced in the settlements to Europe .
Commissioner Patten has made this very clear , as has Mrs van der Laan .
The resolution upon which Parliament is about to vote calls upon the Council and the Commission to consider whether collective punishments and the disproportionate use of force are not in conflict with the principles of the Association Agreement and to take the necessary action : our aim is not to punish , just to obtain respect for the rule of law .
There is no time to lose in the struggle for peace : it is necessary for Palestinians and Israelis , for the region , but also for us .
Madam President , I am deeply appalled by the latest , dangerous escalation of violence in the Middle East which must be ended .
The question that really has to be answered is : who is going to broker an end to the violence in the Middle East ?
I certainly welcome the active role the High Representative of the EU for the common foreign and security policy is playing in the Middle East .
I believe that the European Union can play a constructive role firstly in ending the violence in the Middle East and then putting in place structures whereby peace talks can recommence between the various factions .
I condemn without reservation violence from whatever quarter .
It is not only a question of seeking to prevent violence by different factions in the Middle East , it is primarily a question of guaranteeing that conditions can be improved in the hope that the violence ends and that negotiations can be reopened .
A peaceful solution in the Middle East can be achieved .
It was only last summer that the Israeli government and the Palestinian people were negotiating on what were bottom-line issues .
While I am disappointed that the peace talks in America last year did not culminate in a final peace settlement , they were not a complete failure either .
Issues , including the status of Jerusalem , the borders of the Palestinian State , the fate of Jewish settlements and the right of return of Palestinian refugees , were all being discussed between the two sides last year .
If violence can be ended in the Middle East and the conditions for the reopening of negotiations can be secured , we can once again come to a situation whereby bottom-line issues can be discussed .
The European Union has affirmed on a number of occasions the need to ensure that the security of the Israeli and Palestinian people , both collectively and individually , is always protected .
In the overall context , securing peace in the Middle East is going to take time .
The first step in the current peace process was taken when Israel and Egypt concluded the peace treaty at Camp David in 1979 .
It took another twelve years before a comprehensive peace process got under way at the Madrid Conference in October 1999 , which enshrined the principle of exchanging land for peace .
The permanent status negotiations resumed in September 1999 .
I would appeal to the key parties involved to strive in good faith to end the violence in the Middle East and to put in place a negotiated settlement , based on the principles of existing agreements .
Madam President , when I was in Washington on an EP mission last week , I was greatly shocked by the exceptionally cruel and vile murder of two Israeli schoolboys .
How can this spiral of violence in the Middle East be averted ?
What exact contribution can the Member States of the European Union make ?
With the noble intention of addressing these questions the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs , Mr Van Aartsen , travelled to the region at the beginning of this month .
The written account of his in-depth findings leads me to put a number of follow-up questions to the members of the Council and Commission present here .
For example , during his meeting with the Israeli prime minister , Mr Sharon , the Dutch minister encountered clear criticism of the Middle East policy of the EU .
Mr Sharon characterised it as ' unbalanced ' .
This judgement , though , did not apply to the Netherlands , the premier added .
I should like to hear the rebuttal by the Council and Commission of Mr Sharon ' s statements on the matter , since they imply divergent approaches to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by Member States .
In addition Mr Van Aartsen points to the dangerous radicalisation of the Palestinian camp .
Do the Council and Commission share this analysis and what opportunities do they see for combating this tendency from the European side ?
Thirdly , the Dutch minister argues for " a more effective international effort to promote a healthy institutional and democratic development of the Palestinian administration " .
For at this moment , says Mr Van Aartsen , the administrative weakness of the Palestinian Authority threatens to undermine its authority on two sides , with its own population and no less with the state of Israel .
And in that case what political prospects will there be for peaceful relations between Israel and Palestine ?
Are the Council and Commission , as donors of the Palestinian Authority , as aware of this lacuna and how do they propose to fill it in concrete terms ?
At any rate they can count on the support of the Israeli vice-premier Nathan Sharansky .
In last Monday ' s Wall Street Journal he argues for a direct link between concessions to the Palestinians and making Palestinian society more open and transparent .
Mr Sharansky hopes that such a society will give the Palestinians the rights they deserve , without threatening Israel .
Surely that Jewish dream demands a European effort too ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , just a few months ago , in this Chamber , in the presence of Israeli and Palestinian representatives , we discussed the possibility of Middle East peace process , at last , approaching its goal .
However , the TV news bulletins showing the Middle East are still full of bloodshed and despair this morning .
And yet the UN and Parliament resolutions have been reiterated for decades now to no avail , as have the calls for action from the whole world .
In this morning 's debate in this Chamber , we are repeating all the same things all over again .
I no longer have faith in resolutions which are treated like waste paper , often lying in some dusty corner of the archives of the Parliamentary committees .
Ladies and gentlemen , what we must do here is not dismiss the Palestinians , who are defending the right of a people to a homeland , as extremists .
What we must actually do here is ask ourselves why , despite the resolutions , the autonomous activities of a community are still subject to Israeli approval , why a recently-built airport cannot operate , why the extermination of a community of 4 million people which , since the beginning of the Yom Kippur war , has been reduced by almost 10 % by a subtle , insidious , treacherous , poisonous , cynical , cruel war which shows no mercy to women or children , is not considered to be genocide .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wonder how a people which has known such pain can inflict it on others so relentlessly .
I regret to say that it is since a certain right-wing party , the party of Mr Sharon , took control of Israel that , as a result of that appalling right-wing policy , the world has lost control of the overall situation .
Let us therefore set about introducing an initiative which will go beyond the paper-pushing games that have been played by the world 's parliaments for too long now and lead us to resolute , tangible , decisive action to save the innocent lives of women , children and the elderly with peace .
It is no coincidence that Jesus Christ was born in Palestine .
Madam President , unfortunately the names of European politicians have not been recorded in the annals of peace brokering in the Middle East over recent years .
The Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky was one of the first to urge Israeli politicians to start direct talks with Arafat .
What was then a Utopian ideal is now political reality .
But where are today ' s European Kreiskys ?
Where are the visions , the ideas , the creativity and the courage to go beyond standard , purely bureaucratic duties ?
Europe has endeavoured over recent years , besides financial and political activities in the Middle East , to leave political brokering to the USA and to focus on purely economic issues in this region .
Perhaps this was a reaction to Europe ' s chaotic , uncoordinated political stance in relation to the warring factions .
One of the biggest obstacles preventing EU representatives from assuming an active role in the peace process is what are , at times , incomprehensible and intolerable unilateral accusations and intrepid judgements .
For example , why on earth did the Swedish foreign minister issue such an aggressive , unilateral judgment of Israel ' s show of power after visiting Israel and the settlements during the Swedish Presidency , thereby scuppering any chance of brokering by the EU during the Swedish Presidency .
No one can seriously ignore Israel ' s desire for peace .
No Israeli politician has ever ventured as far as the last prime minister , Ehud Barak , did in his proposals .
The present catastrophic situation is the result .
Blaming new Sharon government for it , as has been done here , merely hampers the efforts of the EU representatives to broker an agreement .
Europe should understand , once and for all , that none of us looks on the Middle East merely in terms of friends or foes .
If Europe is to have any chance of being taken seriously as a broker , we need a consistent language in our foreign policy , a neutral attitude towards the warring factions and to work out and broker feasible peace proposals .
Simply stating ones support for the claims of one side or the other is several principles short of a peace policy .
Issues such as the Palestinians ' right to return , the division of Jerusalem and the Holy Mount , the problem of the settlement policy and Palestinian statehood and the Israeli people ' s justifiable demand for security must be discussed directly by the parties to the conflict .
Our opinions must take second place if we want to be taken seriously as peace brokers .
To do all this , we need high-profile , persuasive people to represent Europe , who will be taken seriously by all parties in the Middle East .
I arrived back in Strasbourg last night directly from visiting Israel .
My statements are perhaps coloured somewhat by my private connections .
But you can rest assured that this nation wants peace on both sides .
It is part of our job to engage in talks with both sides .
It does not always have to be the politicians currently in office .
Pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received six motions for resolution .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Madam President , as the Council and the Commission have recognised , we are witnessing an escalation of blind violence and indiscriminate hatred in the Middle East . It has reached its climax in the stoning of human beings and in the killing and murdering of children and innocent victims .
The international community ' s appeals for dialogue and peace have been ignored or sidelined .
It is therefore urgent to press ahead with the initiatives currently under way . I have in mind the joint Jordano-Egyptian plan and the Mitchell Committee ' s conclusions calling for an immediate cessation of violence and the resumption of dialogue aimed at a peaceful solution to this conflict .
If there is no response to these appeals , the international community must not remain unmoved by this display of violence , deep-rooted hatred and the ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' culture . Nor can we remain blind deaf and dumb to it .
In my view , Madam President , if the two initiatives now on the table fail to bear fruit , we shall have to come up with a formula to allow us to break the current deadlock .
The President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers - I refer to the Defence Ministers , who met informally on Monday prior to meeting with the Foreign Ministers - has stated that by the end of the year the European Union will be in a position to become involved in crisis management situations on a case by case basis . It should be borne in mind , however , that a large proportion of our resources is currently committed in the Balkans .
I believe we cannot afford to wait until the end of the year . If the initiatives now under way fail to bear fruit , we should consider other alternatives , such as a United Nations ' buffer force .
Alternatively , as Mr Patten rightly suggested , we could use the instruments available to the European Union , namely the association agreements .
We should not overlook other possibilities such as the International Court in The Hague , or the Human Rights Commission in Geneva . It would be best not to have to resort to them , however , because the parties do really wish to return to the negotiating table and seek a peace which must be based on justice .
Madam President , a great deal has already been said , and so I will attempt to make good use of the three minutes assigned to me and concentrate a little more on what needs to be done rather than going over the details of the situation . In any case , the President-in-Office , Mrs Lindh , and many other Members have stressed the severity and scale of the situation in the occupied territories and throughout the Middle East in their speeches .
There has been quite enough description .
I feel that Parliament 's role is coming into its own in this case as well .
There have been many debates but few resolutions , and Parliament is realising that resolutions and declarations have to have value and meaning .
As you pointed out , in this case we have a resolution which , I hope , will be adopted by a very wide majority , in which practically all the political groups undertake initiatives in respect of the Commission and the Council .
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten for the clarity and determination with which he has re-established international law and responsibilities in economic relations with Israel as well .
If we do not get back to international law , it will be very difficult to get away from the maze of violence and retaliation which have erupted in that situation .
However , I would like to stress to the Council that it may not be sufficient for Mr Solana to bring the matter up in Gothenburg .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has provided us with tools which have not yet been used in this field .
It is rather strange that the European Union should not have equipped itself with a common strategy on the Middle East , and it is rather strange that the 15 should have gone to the United Nations Security Council and the meetings of the Human Rights Commission in Geneva with different positions .
This makes no sense . It is appalling .
In my opinion , it is the duty of the European Union to strengthen the role of the High Representative and of Mr Moratinos through a common strategy laying down the direction to be followed .
We call for this to be done in Gothenburg .
What Mr Salafranca said makes sense .
The Mitchell Commission has made recommendations .
The first step could be to send observers , but this could be lead to the sending of a peacekeeping force .
If the violence does not cease , we will have to do something to assist the process from outside .
I feel that this debate has been useful and , above all , I call upon the Council to take the resolution into due consideration .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the latest wave of violence and terror in the Middle East must be roundly condemned .
It is high time that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict escaped from the impasse in which it is currently stuck .
I believe that both parties will have to make great efforts to achieve this .
To begin with both sides must immediately refrain from any unilateral act that may cause the conflict to escalate further .
In addition , we must insist on mutual respect and good will .
In this connection , I should like to point to the , in my view , very important statement made by the Israeli Foreign Affairs Minister , Shimon Peres , on Sunday 13 May that there will be no more new settlements .
As far as the European Union is concerned , it is our duty to strengthen our position in the peace talks , in view of all our humanitarian and geostrategic interests in this region as well as our important trading relations .
The Commission and the Member States must also be encouraged to support projects that can help in the building of understanding and partnership .
Of course , many unsolved problems and unanswered questions will remain .
Everyone knows that the peace process will be long and arduous , but I remain convinced that with the necessary trust , the indispensable political will and the necessary perseverance we can achieve our common goal , of a peaceful and prosperous Middle East .
Madam President , the most surprising thing about our debate is our surprise , for Israel 's expansionist policy is the inevitable and predictable result of the growing imbalance in the region , the stability for which we bear much of the responsibility .
Firstly that is because since 1967 most of our states , with the notable exception of France , have continued to give the State of Israel - a state that is growing increasingly self-assured and domineering - the impression that it can violate international law and UN resolutions with impunity .
In reality , here as elsewhere we have followed Washington and persist in closing our eyes to the theocratic excesses of this religious state whose governments are under the thumb of fanatical parties and minorities that are just as bad as the other groups of religious fanatics in the region .
That is why we should envisage imposing sanctions on Israel .
There is , however , another serious imbalance for which we are in part responsible , namely the imbalance of forces .
I have no hesitation in saying that we must consider giving the Arab side a large enough force , including a large enough nuclear force , to persuade Israel that it cannot simply do whatever it wants .
That is the policy my country pursued in the 1970s when it gave Iraq a nuclear force .
We have now destroyed it .
So we will carry on with our policy of imbalance and what is happening today is merely the annoying but inevitable result of our collective blindness and cowardice .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would have liked or would like to see many Members , as also the Commission and the Council , show the same determination in relation to Chechnya , where 100 000 people have been killed in less than two years , or to occupied Tibet , where there have been 1.2 million deaths in forty years .
Unfortunately , some people , both in the Council and the Commission and in our Parliament , seem to have short memories when it comes to these issues .
In reaction to this morning 's debate let me begin by observing that Mrs Lindh is taking rather a selective approach when she speaks of Israel 's retreat from Lebanon , while forgetting that Lebanon is still occupied by Syria .
I am surprised at such forgetfulness .
The policy proposed by Mrs Lindh , MEPs and the Commission is a formulaic policy .
It forgets that Mr Barak made proposals that no Israeli before him had ever made and that the Palestinians rejected his proposals .
I doubt whether putting the Israelis ' backs against the wall will persuade them to subscribe to a peace plan that even Mr Arafat does not seem prepared to accept .
We should take a more objective view .
We should also remember our own history of the past hundred years , perhaps show a little more generosity towards Israel and perhaps also begin to seriously consider the possibility of Israel joining the European Union .
That would respond to the Israeli people 's deep-seated anxieties , while certainly not denying the frustrations and extremely harsh living conditions of the Palestinians , and would also respond to the fundamental issue of the profound anxiety of the Palestinian people .
I think Europe should give proof of its generosity by offering Israel membership of the European Union .
That is a prospect that would allow the European Union to make greater concessions , even in territorial terms , and allow Palestine to develop and Israel to live in security in this part of the world .
This proposal has already been signed by thirty Members of the European Parliament and a number of members of the Knesset .
I invite Members to sign it as soon as possible so that we can hold a major debate on this proposal .
Madam President , the European Union is expected to do something in the Middle East .
It is already present there , far more so than in the past , thanks to the commitment of its High Representative .
Now it must play an even more active part .
The time has passed when it could confine itself to watching the drama unfold from its Mediterranean balcony seat .
It must play an active part because as history has demonstrated , in politics and in war , merely to play a passive role is ignominious .
If we are to have any prospect of being useful , we must act with absolute impartiality .
That is the first difficulty in this exercise , since each of the camps expects first of all that we side with it against its enemy , following the old adage that my enemy 's enemy is my friend , but my enemy 's friend is my enemy .
If we are to help break this vicious circle of bloodshed and revenge , here as elsewhere we do not have the right to be anyone 's enemy .
So what can we do ?
I sincerely believe that nobody will make peace in the Middle East unless the two parties are resolved to do so and unless the various proposals put forward in this Chamber just now , by Members as also by the Council and by the Commission , are taken into consideration .
If , as we must continue to hope , the wish for peace exists , and only if it exists , then we must also support the idea of deploying an international observers ' force , in which Europe could and should take part .
Like my friend Mr Salafranca Sánchez Neyra and like Mrs Napoletano , I want to stress that point to our counterparts from the Knesset who are here today , because I know that at present Israel is profoundly opposed to the idea .
The way to cool down a conflict as acute and heated as the one that continues to bathe the Holy Land in blood is to have impartial observers on the ground . Through their actions and their testimony they could prevent a new general conflagration from being sparked off by the growing number of incidents that are bound to occur when a real armistice is signed .
Like my fellow Members , I continue to hope that we will finally see such an armistice one day .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , friend of Israel , today I am preparing to vote for a resolution that in fact takes Israel severely to task .
Indeed , while I regret the fact that the Europeans all too often underestimate the tragedy of the repeated terrorist attacks on innocent civilians in the Israeli villages , while I reproach Yasser Arafat with not having had the courage to take the hand Mr Ehud Barak courageously extended to him within a few days of the elections - it would have been enough to say ' yes , but ... ' or ' yes , if ... ' . but he chose to say ' no ' - nonetheless Israel is a democratic , powerful , well-armed and well-equipped state .


That is why it is up to Israel not only to stop the pressure mounting , but also to take peace initiatives that are acceptable to the Palestinian people .
Let me add that although I understand the Israeli people ' s concern for their security , I cannot accept statements or acts by Mr Ariel Sharon that I personally would condemn on the part of anyone else .
Precisely in the name of my friendship towards Israel , let me say to the Israelis that they will not achieve the security they deserve by the use of force and that the settlements are a serious mistake .
Let me also say that the Palestinians have the right to a state .
Lastly , let me say that the Israelis and the Palestinians need us to make serious proposals for a solution . We know that a peaceful settlement will require sacrifices on both sides .
Europe can and must make its contribution and set out a balanced and active position to that end .
I have found such a position set out in the statements by the Council and the Commission .
I also hope that our resolution will be a contribution and I am sure the Mitchell Commission ' s report could form the basis for new negotiations .
Madam President , Israel and Palestine are two independent nations but they are not yet two independent states .
They are two peoples who must coexist as neighbours or offer their grandchildren the prospect of eternal feuding .
Sadly , there is provocation by people who should be showing leadership .
Provocation leads to violence , which is met by violence , which leads to revenge and a slippery slope away from a just and peaceful modus vivendi .
Much of the solution is in Israel 's hands , but Palestine and the neighbouring states must respond .
Of course I understand Israel 's nervousness about taking the first steps .
Lebanon , for example , has been in an impossible situation for years : it has been shelled by Israel and infiltrated by Syria , and both must help it now to provide stability in its own lands .
Israeli withdrawal was met responsibly by the Lebanese .
However , Israel still holds pockets of Lebanese territory in the south and has not yet provided maps of where the landmines are so that they can be cleared and , as a result , nine shepherds have been killed since the withdrawal .
Prisoners on both sides still have to be returned and the Shebaa farms on the Golan border belonging to Lebanon are still held , controlled and occupied by Israel .
The key area of provocation has been covered by the minister and by the Commissioner , including the issue of the sale in the EU of goods labelled as Israeli but coming from the settlements .
There are 145 settlements in the West Bank , 16 in Gaza , 9 in East Jerusalem ; 400,000 people live in them .
Only 42 % of West Bank territory is controlled by the Palestinians , 58 % is either in military camps or settlements and too often the military camps lead to the settlements .
Peace will not come from resolutions adopted here - although we can help .
Peace will come if , and only when , Israel , Palestine and the neighbouring states realise they want peace so much that they are prepared to live it .
Madam President , I would like to thank you all for an excellent debate .
It has consistently been shown here that it is important that the European Union has influence and plays an active role .
If we are to have any influence , there must also be unanimity within the European Union on the way in which we wish to influence the current process .
It is good to see that the Council is considerably more unanimous today than we ever have been before .
I also think this unanimity can be seen in this context too .
Although different resolutions have been proposed and although there are many different opinions , there are still fewer differences between us than previously .
I also think this is one reason why we have never before been able to see the EU being as greatly involved in the Middle East conflict .
However , unfortunately this is not sufficient , and on the contrary , as Mr Poos said initially , it is also about the willingness of the parties to negotiate and not least about the Israeli government currently bearing the main responsibility .
I can agree with very much of what Mr Poos said regarding the description of the current situation : the catastrophic economic situation , and the illegal occupation .
The problem is that this leads to Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s view that there is a risk of extremists setting the agenda .
The risk is that hate propaganda on both sides and Palestinian poverty will lead to violence increasing further .
Mr Lagendijk said that it is unacceptable for resistance fighters on the Palestinian side to be executed by Israelis .
I can only agree ; I brought this up in my initial speech .
This is completely in breach of both international law and international standards and of what most of us consider to be basic human rights .
We have brought this up several times with the Israeli government .
We have also received guarantees that this is to cease , but unfortunately this has not hitherto been the case .
Regarding the meeting of 21 May , addressed by several of the speakers , the Council is providing every support to the Commission for the course of action which Commissioner Patten has described and which means that we must now follow the rules and clearly show that the EU cannot accept Israel continuing to break them .
Several speakers have addressed the allocation of the burden of guilt , where we lay the blame and how much of an intermediary the EU can be .
I would like to say to Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , and many others who have brought up this issue , that even if the EU clearly is to make requirements of both parties , today it is natural for us to make more stringent demands of the Israeli government and Ariel Sharon .
Ariel Sharon actually bears the main responsibility today for reversing the trend .
As many of you have pointed out , the current policy increases the risk of benefiting extremist groups .
Mr Sharon must acknowledge his political responsibility .
For its part , the Council will naturally also make demands of the Palestinian side : that the Palestinians are to have a more open budget , that they should work more on the basis of democratic , open principles , that they should do everything in their power to stop terrorism .
So what can the EU do further ?
Just as Mr Napolitano said , it is important that we also act .
So I can guarantee that we will not passively sit waiting for the report from Javier Solana to the European Council meeting in Gothenburg .
We will address the Israeli government and demand that it stop the violence , cease to close off Palestinian areas and immediately halt its settlement policy which is illegal and constitutes illegal occupation .
As I said , we have also demanded that the Palestinian side do all it can to prevent terrorism and to reduce violence .
We support the proposals of the Mitchell Report and it was good to see support for the report here in Parliament too .
We also support the Jordanian-Egyptian initiative .
In particular , and the Commission has also played a part in developing this , we assume a major financial responsibility today for the Palestinian areas and for ensuring that the situation does not become even worse in these areas .
Precisely as General Morillon said , the EU is currently more active than ever before .
However , I believe that we all feel the need not only to take on more responsibility than we have done hitherto - the major financial responsibility which has been taken so far - but also the need to take even greater political responsibility which also actually corresponds to the financial responsibility we are taking on the region .
By commissioning Javier Solana to draw up a roadmap for the Gothenburg Summit , we anticipate that the EU will be able to provide a further substantial contribution to the peace process and achieve a better , more long-term strategy for the EU ' s involvement in the Middle East .
Finally , it is still the parties themselves who must come to their senses , who must break the spiral of violence , who have to refrain from the ever increasing conflicts and return to the only possible road to peace ; cease-fire , a freeze on settlements , a return to the negotiating table .
I would like to say both to the Israeli side and the Palestinian side that this is not a question which concerns only you . It is of major international interest .
It is crucial to the future of us all and therefore we demand that the parties also take their responsibility .
As Mr Caudron said , in this situation it is not about being a friend to Israel or a friend to Palestine . Instead it is about all of us in the EU having to do all we can to contribute to the peace process .
I just want to try to answer three questions that were put during the debate by honourable Members and I hope I can do so in a way which is moderately satisfactory .
First of all , Mrs van der Laan asked about the rules of origin , and if there are points which I do not cover in what I am going to say , I will take them up in correspondence with the honourable Member .
What I would like to do is rehearse exactly what has happened so far .
The issue of rules of origin was raised in the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament to which I referred earlier .
The General Affairs Council at the end of June 1998 took note of our communication and asked the Commission to resolve these issues on a technical level .
A great deal has happened since then .
Technical contacts at different levels with Israel took place immediately after the communication .
On 16 December 1999 the Commission informed COREPER on the outcome of these meetings .
In early 2000 concrete information on specific imports from Israeli settlements was supplied to the Commission .
On the basis of this information , at the Customs Code Committee meeting on 6 April last year , the Commission reminded Member States of their obligation in this respect , namely to apply the provisions of Article 32 of the Protocol on Customs of the Association Agreement to consignments for which information had been received that they originated in the settlements .
After this meeting Member States returned around 2000 EUR1 certificates to Israel for verification .
In some cases , goods were only released for free circulation in the European Union subject to the payment of a guarantee against liability for customs duties .
Replies to the letters of verification are coming in as the ten month deadline for Israel 's reply is expiring .
All along there has been a notice to importers which was first published in the Community Official Journal of 8 November 1997 warning exporters of doubts regarding EUR1 certificates from Israel .
The notice is still in force , although of course references to the orange juice case , which honourable Members will recall , no longer apply .
That is all the information that I have at hand on the history of rules of origin .
I am determined , as I said earlier , to conduct this issue by the Agreement and entirely according to the law .
Mr Lagendijk asked what we would be saying to the Israeli side next week at our meeting on 21 May and he said that what we sought , or should seek , in the Middle East was a balanced approach .
I do not think , and I do not think he thinks either , that means we should search for some point on the political agenda where neither side will disagree with us .
That is not what is meant by a balanced approach .
I happen to think that the Mitchell Commission report was an extremely balanced and sensible document .
The Mitchell Commission - and I hope we will do much the same - in my judgment supports those who are still committed to working for peace on both sides of the argument .
That is a sensible , balanced approach .
As for what we will say on 21 May , we can discuss human rights under the essential elements clause of our Agreement , we will certainly discuss for the first time this summer rules of origin - that is already on the agenda - but I want to be scrupulous in sticking to the letter and the spirit of our Agreement .
To go beyond that would risk putting us on a very slippery slope indeed . So as far as I am concerned we stick to the letter of the Agreement and do not go beyond it with any other political gestures .
Mr Belder asked about the remarks of our colleague and friend the Dutch Foreign Minister about the Palestinian Authority in particular and the importance of ensuring that it operates in a more transparent and democratic way .
I have to say that what our colleague Mr van Aartsen said during his visit to the Middle East was not just wholly in line with our views on the development of democracy in the Palestinian territories , but an extremely eloquent and effective exposition of our view , as one would expect from him .
Even in these less than perfect circumstances we need to press the Palestinian Authority to be more open , to be more transparent , to be more pluralistic , to protect people 's civil liberties and human rights and to become increasingly democratic .
That is , I think , what the Minister was saying and he has our total support .
I thank Mr Patten for his replies to Members .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
State of the transatlantic dialogue
The next item is the declarations by the Council and the Commission on the state of the Transatlantic dialogue .
Mr President , relations between the EU and the US are of vital importance both for Europe and the US and for the rest of the world .
Transatlantic relations are good .
Today , we are working closely together within a number of areas , and our dialogue by and large comprises all the important issues .
We have a shared responsibility to meet global challenges and contribute to a more peaceful and more democratic world as well as to work for a dynamic multilateral trade system .
We also have differences of opinion in various areas but conduct a close dialogue on these .
Since our dialogue was formalised in 1990 with the adoption of the Transatlantic Declaration , it has been constantly deepened and broadened .
In 1995 , we also adopted the New Transatlantic Agenda .
At its meeting on Monday , the General Affairs Council welcomed the Commission ' s report on how we can further strengthen the transatlantic dialogue and charged the Presidency and the Commission to ensure , together with the US , that the dialogue becomes more efficient and action oriented .
The Council would like to see the dialogue , which comprises regular summits , focusing on a number of strategic themes and prioritising the issues which are important for promoting continuity .
The Council has particularly demanded that " the environment " and " climate " constitute one of these strategic themes .
At the Gothenburg Summit on 14 June , the EU and the US will jointly stake out a clear structure and focus for continued cooperation .
At the Summit , all the issues which have been prioritised during the Swedish Presidency will be raised in one way or another .
The EU and the US have coordinated the initiatives designed to help Russia implement disarmament and non-proliferation agreements , particularly regarding the Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme and the destruction of chemical weapons .
We have also worked together within the framework of the EU ' s Northern Dimension initiative .
In close consultation with the forthcoming Belgian and Spanish Presidencies , we have begun multiannual cooperation on justice and home affairs , focusing on combating drugs , combating child pornography on the Internet and supporting Russia ' s fight against organised crime and its consolidation of a society based on the rule of law .
We have worked together on issues related to the new economy .
We have worked together on the fight against HIV / Aids and other infectious diseases in Africa .
In the field of trade policy , the Swedish Presidency has given high priority to seeking unanimity between the EU and the US on a platform which will make it possible to launch new WTO negotiations in the autumn .
In addition , we have emphasised the importance of concrete progress being made to solve the bilateral trade disputes which constitute a serious cause of irritation in our relationship .
The theoretical solution to the banana dispute that was recently achieved is one example of this .
However , as I said , there are also differences of opinion .
The new administration ' s stated opposition to the Kyoto Protocol is a source of great disappointment to us .
It is highly worrying that the US , which is responsible for 25 % of the world ' s carbon dioxide emissions , is choosing to stand aside from an international agreement negotiated over a decade .
The new administration has justified its opposition to the Kyoto Protocol by the fact that it does not require the same undertakings of developing countries and is also damaging to the American economy .
We do not accept these reasons , and above all we do not accept the US thereby distancing itself from the agreement .
The EU ' s reaction to the actions of the US has been swift and powerful .
Prime Minister Persson and Mr Prodi , President of the Commission , have criticised the decision in a letter .
At the informal meeting of the environment ministers in Sweden , the Swedish chairman , Mr Larsson , stated that no individual country has the right officially to declare a multilateral agreement dead , and he expressed his hopes that the US would return and take part in the ongoing Kyoto Process .
The EU Troika , headed by the Swedish Minister for the Environment Mr Larsson , travelled to Washington in April to continue nevertheless to attempt to maintain the dialogue with the US on the global problem of climate change .
In these talks , it emerged that the US does not question the problem of climate change .
The US admits the importance of finding global solutions to the problem .
The EU considers that the solution is to be found within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol , while the US insists on the need to find alternative solutions .
The EU ' s goal is to make the Protocol ratifiable within the next year with or without the US .
However , without the participation of the US , the Protocol will be considerably weaker .
We therefore welcome the US attending the environment meeting in Bonn in July and hope to see a constructive dialogue with a fruitful exchange of views .
I would like to emphasise that both the EU and the US bear a heavy responsibility for global problems and challenges such as the threat posed by climate change .
We will never get the countries of the Third World and developing countries to take action if no joint responsibility is taken by the EU and the US .
To conclude , a few words on the areas in which the EU and the US are taking , and have succeeded in taking , joint responsibility .
In this context , I would particularly like to highlight our joint efforts to promote peace and stability in the Balkans , as well as our consultations on the situation in the Korean peninsula and the Middle East peace process .
Links between the EU and the US are vitally important in today ' s world .
It is only through cooperation and dialogue that we can meet global challenges and create the preconditions for a world of peace , democracy and economic development .
I therefore see with great satisfaction that the European Parliament is taking action to develop and strengthen the dialogue with the American Congress .
I would also like to point out that a meaningful dialogue must also address issues on which the EU and the US disagree .
Constructive dialogue is based on sincerity , and sincerity means not hesitating to voice criticism .
This means that , in the future too , the EU will direct criticism at , for example , the US ' s use of the death penalty .
Mr President , I now look forward to hearing the opinions of the Members of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I am pleased to have this opportunity to discuss transatlantic relations with the European Parliament .
There is a lot of talk about EU-US cooperation .
There are quite a few critical voices in that chorus and we read frequently about this or that cloud casting a shadow across the relationship .
But in all this , I would argue , we fail to recognise the unique nature and the unique strength of the transatlantic bond , so this is an excellent opportunity to put the record straight .
This debate also gives me an opportunity to set out in a few words why the Commission recently presented a communication on reinforcing the transatlantic relationship and how we would hope to see that initiative followed up in Parliament and the Council .
The 1995 new transatlantic agenda shifted the focus of our relationship from one of consultation to joint action .
Since then EU-US cooperation has broadened enormously and now embraces virtually every area of EU activity , and rightly so .
We share so much with the US in terms of vision , history and values .
With no one else do we have such a wide range of common interests and such a strong economic base to build on .
We do not , as I shall go on to say , agree about everything , but the fact that we agree about so much means that there is always a distorting focus on the minority of issues where we do not see eye to eye .
I do not want to launch here into an inventory of EU-US cooperation .
My point here is different . It is that we have an interest in virtually every area of activity of the Union to establish close and cooperative relations with the United States .
I have no sympathy for anti-Americanism or anti-anyone-else-ism for that matter .
I feel under no compunction to define my Europeanness in terms of my attitude to the United States of America .
That sort of attitude betrays a terrible lack of self-confidence in what it means to be a European .
In my specific area of responsibility , the added value and positive results are obvious in our close partnership with the Balkans .
The Minister also spoke , quite rightly , of the Middle East and Korea , and we could have continued like that and mentioned many other parts of the world .
The European Union and the US are also principal partners in addressing the new cross-cutting issues on the international agenda .
Communicable diseases , organised crime , drug and people trafficking , money laundering : all these manifestations of the dark side of globalisation require our concerted action and they get our joint attention .
Access to medicines , for example , has been lifted to the top of the agenda in EU-US relations as well as in multilateral fora .
That brings me to another important point about the transatlantic partnership .
It would be sad , serious and a terrible irony if the emergence of Europe as a global actor in a multilateral world coincided with the turning of some American minds towards unilateralism .
I hope that will not happen .
It would be the reversal of the trends of the last 50 years .
I had been greatly encouraged by the new Administration 's commitment to maintaining America 's vital role in world affairs .
President Bush chose to emphasise the point in his inaugural speech , when he said , and I quote " America remains engaged in the world by history and by choice " .
Obviously these hopes were somewhat deflated , as the Minister said , by the subsequent statement indicating that the Administration has no interest in implementing the Kyoto Protocol .
This rightly met with dismay in Europe and elsewhere , including in parts of the United States , but clearly we must not let disappointment turn into fruitless confrontation .
It is vital that we persuade the United States to embrace and maintain its multilateral commitments and we in the European Union can best help to do this , not by finger wagging and moralising , but by facing up to our own responsibilities and following through our own commitments with our financial assistance and other policy instruments .
When the United States and the European Union work together , we set the international agenda .
If we are divided , the opportunity for international progress is often lost .
I will be brief because I know there are some time constraints , but one could , of course , speak at length about security and defence cooperation as an important element of our partnership .
The time has come for Europe to shoulder its fair share of the security burden .
That is all we are seeking to do , to respond to American concerns that we have not been pulling our weight .
As the Secretary-General of NATO , Lord Robertson , put it very succinctly last year , this is not about Europe going it alone , but about Europe doing more .
A properly resourced and effective ESDP will allow the European Union to make a much larger contribution to transatlantic security .
My main concern in this area is that we might fail to deliver , not that European success in delivering would antagonise the United States .
Let me go back for a moment to the communication on reinforcing the transatlantic relationship , which we tabled before Easter .
In many ways the method of working together which we devised in 1995 was ahead of its time , but we are not resting on our laurels and would certainly be discouraged from doing so by those who have added such an important parliamentary dimension to our relationship .
It would be fair to say that over the years the machinery of cooperation has grown rather more complex than we intended .
So we need to look over the structures and processes of cooperation , the architecture if you like , and the plumbing of our relations , in order to ensure that the whole machinery is geared as much as possible to action and the delivery of results .
The architecture is described in terms of strategic themes forming the core of the transatlantic agenda .
It is a big core , because the relationship is so very wide-ranging .
We identified eight such strategic themes , ranging from the emerging international security challenges , globalisation and the multilateral trading system , through energy issues and consumer protection , to the digital economy and the fight against crime .
These strategic themes should not be seen as a selection of priorities , but rather as overarching principles which will remain valid over several years and provide a framework for specific issues and priorities to be tackled over a shorter time period .
The plumbing part of the communication looks at the so-called NTA structures and the multitude of meetings which take place within them at political and official level .
Our message is simple : fewer meetings , more substance and more political leadership .
The first two are related to the latter , but we want political leaders on both sides of the Atlantic to set the priorities and challenges their respective administrations should meet and to set deadlines for meeting those challenges as well .
This will only happen if there is real business to be done and that will only be the case if we make the meetings more focussed .
It is an ambitious goal .
The new transatlantic agenda process is like a supertanker , or maybe it is better to call it a mixed-bulk carrier .
It can carry a large and varied cargo all at once .
We need to ensure its design is streamlined , simple and robust to ensure smooth passage and minimum maintenance .
As the honourable Members can tell , I have been thinking much about the Korean shipbuilding industry recently and its impact on global trade .
At the helm you should not spin the wheel widely from side-to-side , but adjust the course with small , but well-measured turns .
Let me end where I started .
The transatlantic link in my view is our most important relationship .
It is important for the European Union and for the United States and indeed for the world .
Of course , we will not always agree on everything .
I am not thinking just of trade issues , which should always be put in the wider perspective of the colossal trade flows , more than a USD 1 billion a day , which benefit both our regions , but also of more fundamental issues like environmental protection , on which the minister spoke , and capital punishment .
There are no easy answers , no magic wands to make our differences disappear .
However , on the larger range of issues , where the United States and the European Union work together , we do set between us the international agenda .
By working together across the Atlantic we can advance our interests , those of our countries and their citizens , and contribute to global security more generally .
Mr President , this is an important debate to hold at this juncture , after the first few months of the US administration , with the visit of President George Bush to Göteburg in June and the Commission 's initial thoughts on the common foreign and security policy .
So where are we today ?
We have a timely communication before us , which points to the breadth and growth of the transatlantic relationship from the declaration in 1990 to the new transatlantic agenda in 1995 .
The number of subjects it covers will continue to grow and we will probably see a consolidation of ideas on the monetary dialogue and other aspects .
Secondly , the communication contains ideas on how to make the process more effective .
Thirdly , it underlines the importance of engaging civil society and building parliamentary links .
But I think it is wise for us to ask whether these perspectives are really sufficient for the next five years .
Common economic interests and concerns are increasingly global and not bilateral , while regionalisation is increasingly seen as an alternative to the WTO and multilateralism .
US security interests are shifting towards the Pacific , even if NATO and EU enlargements will demand transatlantic political management in the months ahead . It is difficult to focus together on defining common strategic interests like , for example , the Ukraine .
In view of these aspects , my group considers this communication a disappointing one .
It is more a stocktaking exercise than one that will encourage a broader transatlantic partnership .
In other words , it does not match up to the requirements of the developing transatlantic partnership in the future .
Why , for example , have fewer summits if there are going to be more rather than fewer issues to discuss ?
How do you prioritise the agenda if you have already set eight strategic themes ?
How do you include the US Congress and the European Parliament in the framework without setting out any ideas for its inclusion ?
The communication refers to an Interparliamentary Assembly .
That is not what it is .
It is a delegation which has converted itself into the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue .
So we need broader thinking to develop the transatlantic partnership before 2004 .
It is time to get away from the humdrum bulk-carrier idea ; something rather more visionary , I suspect , would be required at this stage .
First , we should stake out the ground for a broader transatlantic partnership .
Why not make sure we can re-energise the transatlantic business dialogue ?
It is in some difficulty .
Why not think of an annual Atlantic Summit , which would bring together the EU , the US and NATO , because politics , economics and security policy are increasingly interlinked .
Secondly , we should follow the ideas of the Houston Declaration of the US Congress and the European Parliament and involve the parliamentary community more in the summit process .
Last and not least , we should use the summit with George W. Bush to draw up an agenda for the period until 2004 , to establish a deeper transatlantic partnership and to fulfil the aims that both the Council and the Commission have said they want to achieve .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ever since the end of the Second World War the transatlantic relationship has been of crucial importance .
It has proved essential for peace and stability in Europe and the wider world .
I understand President Bush will be attending the Gothenburg Summit . Together with my group I hope Mr Bush will be made aware that obviously , we believe our relationship should be one of equals .
Our dialogue must be frank and sincere . We need not be brutal , but we do have to make our concerns clear , as they have been outlined in both speeches .
In a world where globalisation in constantly increasing , it is worrying that the Bush Administration is glorying in unilateralism .
The first sign of this was the United States ' decision not to ratify the Kyoto Agreement on climate change .
There have been other more recent moves such as the threat made by the United States to withdraw from the OECDs common actions regarding tax havens .
In our view , this type of policy runs counter to the quest for a stable and secure international order .
Secondly , I also believe that we must convey our disquiet at the level of unilateralism currently demonstrated with regard to certain issues which concern us both . These include the peace process in the Middle East , and also the way in which America has put the brakes on the process of detente between North and South Korea .
I would like to comment on the missile defence shield plan , a product of the Star Wars programme . This is extremely worrying as it could affect our security .
I think that we must tell our American colleagues quite clearly that the way to increase global security is to combat poverty and combat instability in poor countries . We must not build new barriers between the rich and the poor .
The creation of a missile defence shield will only lead to an increase in the number of missiles . This would go against all the efforts made since the ABM Treaty to reduce the number of missiles in the world .
There is also another issue we feel we should discuss with our United States ' allies .
We believe we should act together in relation to the UN , not adopt unilateral measures . In the specific case of the Human Rights Commission , we should start from the premise that all countries stand for election .
Sometimes one is chosen , sometimes another . There is no scope for the introduction of retaliatory measures such as the suspension of a debt which has already expired and been unilaterally reduced .
Lastly , I would like to say that a fortnight ago I had the opportunity of leading a visit by my group to Congress in Washington .
We feel we need to make direct contact , regardless of what we are told .
It was a very positive visit ; we were able to address the House of Representatives ' Sub-Committee on European Affairs .
The dialogue was as it should be : frank , direct and sometimes tough . Nonetheless , we believe that this should become part of our future .
I would therefore like to conclude saying that my group regrets that at the eleventh hour the authorities in the United States have been unable to confirm a meeting that is important both for establishing and for maintaining mutual trust . This affects you , Mr President , as rapporteur for the Echelon Committee .
Mr President , I listened with great interest to the long and sustained shipping metaphor of the Commissioner , who can now lay claim to be a master mariner of sorts .
Whether it is his bulk carrier or the speedboat version that is commended by Mr Elles , I certainly think that the Commissioner 's focus on deepening the relationship and on being more strategic - even if there is argument on detail - is , in broad terms very welcome .
My group subscribes to the broad detail of the resolution , so I will not rehearse the issues .
I agree with the observations of colleagues about fears of a drift in certain cases towards unilateralism , some of the points about bilateral versus multilateral trade and issues about Kyoto , the Echelon Committee , the death penalty , and so on .
I want to speak a little about what our role as parliamentarians should be .
We have developed both informally and formally a considerable dialogue with aspects of the legislative process in the US , but as a parliamentary process it remains sub-optimal .
We need to do a lot more work on that .
Our unique contribution as parliamentarians to the quality of this dialogue will be in establishing a better quality of relationship , in particular with our counterparts in the US Congress .
It seems to me that our mission in this regard is , both in Washington DC and in Strasbourg and Brussels , to create the playing field in which the Lamys and Zellecks - or others , depending on whether we are dealing with security and defence , or whatever - can actually play .
Because it is clear , certainly in the case of Congress , that they are a major influence on the role of the US executive , and we here are a growing influence on the executive , although we still regret the pillar system that marginalises us in areas of foreign policy or in fighting crime , and so on .
But there is a role here , and we need to do more work on that as a unique parliamentary contribution to the playing field in which executives can deliver the goods .
In that sense , I would like to pledge my group and my time to working on that .
The second point I would like to mention concerns globalisation : we have noted the sclerotic effect of either Congress or ourselves legislating first and discovering that the ends do not match .
We need in the global context to insist on appropriate regulation , but to try to discover as parliamentarians what it is .
Is it soft law or hard law ?
Self-regulation or co-regulation ?
We need now to look for some degree of legislative creativity , so that there is no sclerotic dysfunction : wanting to do the right thing , but by chance arriving at another dispute .
Finally , we should put disputes in perspective , as the Commissioner has sought to do .
Even bananas , Boeing , beef , etc. represent no more than 2 % of the flow of transatlantic trade .
Of course , they have a high priority , but they are not the whole story and we must focus on the whole story .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , transatlantic relations seem to have drifted into quite a difficult situation .
In my opinion , we could even speak of a sort of crisis .
I welcomed Mrs Lindh ' s suggestion that we can also express criticism when there is cause to do so .
We can undoubtedly learn from the United States some other time , when there is occasion to do so , so this is not a question of anti-Americanism , but one of factual discussion .
It would seem to me that what unites the European Union and the United States above all is the fact that together we are responsible , to a considerable extent , for global development , as together we make up the world ' s largest trading blocs .
I believe that in future , transatlantic relations should ensure that solutions to problems that are caused by the social inequality in the world are evolved and that together we seek the right tools to promote sustainable development .
In this regard the Council and the Commission are also to be praised for the fact that during the Stockholm Summit Prime Minister Persson and President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , sent a letter to the President of the United States that emphasised the importance of the Kyoto Protocol and stated in particular that its policy on climate is an essential ingredient in our understanding of transatlantic relations , and no minor issue .
This is my free interpretation of the matter at least .
The Commissioner ' s excellent comparison with a super-tanker is something I would like to take up on more or less the same lines .
I might imagine that this tanker of ours ought to have the world ' s best environmentally friendly technology , and , as Mr Cox said , it should at least have a double bottom , its engine should be very powerful and its fuel as clean as possible - preferably solar energy , if possible , Commissioner .
I would also like to say that if the United States wishes to become the world ' s last open-air museum of old technology - and I stress the word ' old ' - as it is refusing to start developing climate-friendly solutions , something we cannot do anything about , the European Union must , despite that , become the world ' s leading region in this regard , and we can nevertheless invite the United States to join us in implementing this climate policy , which is one that also makes for good business .
I would finally like to say a few words about security policy .
My group is very concerned that in the United States there is an intention to use global resources for a missile defence system .
We think that is likely to increase the threat to peace worldwide and that the European Union should have no part in it . Instead , try and convince the USA that security in the world is to be furthered by means of solutions based on the worldwide promotion of socially and ecologically sustainable development .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we seem to have reached a turning point in transatlantic relations .
First there is the legacy of the Clinton era .
Even if we leave aside the serious trade differences , the emblematic banana dispute , the beef hormone dispute , the GMO dispute and a dozen others that are being or have already been examined by the WTO , we can see that in recent years , Washington had already shown growing signs of unilateralism , one of the stigmata of the superpower complex .
Opposition to the Treaty banning anti-personnel mines , opposition to the Charter on the Rights of the Child , opposition to the establishment of an International Criminal Court that might , one day , have to judge an American citizen , a casual approach to politics and financial blackmail of the United Nations , an economic blockade , in fact a military operation that violates international law , the Echelon affair , the Colombia plan - the list is endless .

Moreover , we have hardly had a chance to hold a dialogue with our transatlantic interlocutors about certain decisions that Europeans regard as shocking in a civilised society , such as the death penalty and the refusal to grant universal access to medicines to combat AIDS .
Yet we have to admit that the Bush Administration ' s first decisions have a more serious impact than anything we have ever seen so far .
We were concerned enough when we heard the new President ' s advisor on security , Mrs Condoleezza Rice , describe her vision of the new distribution of labour between Americans and Europeans for the maintenance of peace in the Balkans , when she pointed out with as much perspicacity as elegance that it was not the GIs ' job to take children to nursery school .
Frankly , we can only describe the refusal to sign the Kyoto Protocol and the promotion of the missile defence shield as irresponsible , not only towards Europe but towards mankind as a whole .
In view of this escalation , are we condemned to pro forma protests before settling for realism ?
I think not .
A Europe that is open to dialogue but adheres firmly to the principles of a civilised and responsible international community will find allies among the public opinion of the five continents and even in the US Congress and among a number of states .
Commissioner , of course we are not trying to promote a sense of anti-Americanism or indulge in aggressive rhetoric towards a partner who is indispensable in today 's world .
We simply want to set out the clear political resolve of the Fifteen and their united front towards objectives that could meet the expectations not only of Europeans but of all those , in whatever part of the world , who wish to free themselves from the unipolar system in which they are increasingly being confined .
We must approach the issue of transatlantic relations between the European Union and the United States in the context of the U.S. administration having redefined its strategy .
This is to be expected , since elections there have put a new president and a new administration into office and our obligation is to closely observe the signs reaching us from across the Atlantic .
The basic feature that , I think , distinguishes the present administration from the previous one , in terms of foreign policy , centres on a return to the priority of consolidating and developing systems of alliances with those countries that show a desire to act in harmony with the Americans . This replaces the previous model , which consisted of acting on the basis of a multilateral approach sustained through a process of ongoing negotiations , intended to establish and define multilateral and universal rules , standards and values , taking the lead , of course , from the American institutions .
This is not the right time to analyse the practical military , diplomatic and economic consequences that this return to more traditional geopolitical concepts by the United States may involve .
We should , however , bear in mind that the concept of democratic administration led to a proactive type of action , one consequence of which was the U.S. administration taking greater responsibility for and greater involvement in the details of almost daily crisis management in some part of the world .
This is a concept which we feel is being abandoned . Now that this interventionist approach is being reviewed , we are beginning to agree with the Commission and the strategic direction of its document " New impulse for EU-US Relations " .
What the European Union must now do is take advantage of the arrival in office of a new US administration to review the way in which transatlantic relations are conducted and to set strict priorities to ensure that the new transatlantic agenda is more productive and constructive in terms of achieving practical results .
Just like the Commission , we also feel that the Union ' s leaders must reach agreement on a limited number of strategic themes .
They must also ensure a high level of political engagement , in order to prevent the relationship ' s processes becoming too bureaucratic and cumbersome .
It is amazing how often holding frequent meetings and summits with heavily laden agendas has achieved nothing but the dilution of interests and a lack of vision and clear objectives .
Let us commit ourselves , then , to a renewed transatlantic cooperation , in which the European Union and the United States are able to work effectively , together and to their mutual benefit , on the various global challenges that we inevitably have to face .
Mr President , dark clouds are gathering over the Atlantic and they are storm clouds .
I am not thinking only of the spiral of violence that American society feeds on and of which the string of capital punishments is only one symptom among others .
In fact this society , which is based on genocide and whose values constantly give way to the law of the jungle that has been christened ' liberalism ' , can only survive by violence ; that , in the end , is something that does not concern us .
What does concern us , however , is the custom of American policy to do what it wants where it wants in the world and to disregard all the international rules , including those it imposes on others .
I am thinking here of the Kyoto agreements .
Nor should we forget Washington 's refusal to sign the agreement on nuclear testing , which the United States regards as applying to all states except itself , and a whole range of other agreements that show that Washington wants to tie down every state in the world without being bound in any way itself .
Let us also remember the scandalous Echelon affair , which shows that Big Brother intends to keep watch over the entire planet while not accepting any right of inspection itself , as proved also by the insolent and scandalous reception recently given to our committee of inquiry into the network that brought his imperial highness to power .


Worst of all , we are behaving like a rabbit fascinated by the boa constrictor or snake about to bite it and we are obeying this imperial policy ; my last hope is that France will resist this general tendency of the world to grovel .
Mr President , I think that today we are making history , and that the European Union and the United States are the two leading characters in the play unfolding before our eyes .
There is much more to unite us than to divide us .
Clearly , however , our opinions do differ in a number of areas .
Both the Commission and the Council recognise this . The purpose of the Transatlantic Dialogue is precisely to provide an opportunity to tackle these .
We must discuss the Kyoto Protocol , and also the missile shield , which will affect our finances as well as our security . We ought to talk about the death penalty , and consider the issue of drugs too .
In tackling this problem we must assume shared responsibility and comply with international law .
We must also consider the subject of globalisation , as the Commissioner has mentioned . I think it is incumbent upon the United States and Europe to ensure that the outcome of these discussions proves positive rather than negative .
We should also stress the importance of developing trade .
We must welcome the initiative taken by the US at the Quebec Summit with a view to creating a free trade area for the Americas . We should be delighted that they reached the conclusion that this trade initiative should have a democratic basis .
We have enshrined this in our cooperation agreements with third countries . As was made clear yesterday in the Committee on Foreign Affairs in Mr Patten ' s presence , these agreements include a democratic clause and have already been in existence for ten years .
Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to pose one single question , and that is whether the Bush Administration is going to continue the Clinton Administration ' s practice of exempting European companies from the application of Article III of the Helms-Burton law . I should like to know if this matter is to be discussed at the Transatlantic Summit .
The Bonn Declaration was most welcome in that it committed the European Union and the United States of America to a full and equal partnership , and of course the EU and the US are both partners and competitors , particularly in trade matters .
It is important to stress the scale of the economic relationship currently worth USD 2 billion a day , but where there is competition there will inevitably be some areas of conflict and friction , and part of the nature of the relationship is to try and contain that friction .
I would like to quote from a Commission document about how to avoid or minimise new trade disputes .
It says that we should consult before legislating , negotiate before litigating , compensate before retaliating and comply at any rate .
That might be a lofty target but one worth aiming for .
I want to comment too on Commissioner Patten 's very welcome statement that he did not see any connection between being European and anti-Americanism .
He is absolutely right .
To be European is also to encompass a generous inclusivity about people 's notions very different from our own .
There are of course important outstanding trade disputes , the foreign sales tax one in particular , and it was worrying , to say the least , that President Clinton 's last speech before he left office contained some barely veiled threats about the future of the Airbus deal and a possible dispute .
Finally I want to commend the part of the resolution that welcomes the Transatlantic Legislative Dialogue on which this Parliament has set such great store , and I very much hope we want that to continue and be strengthened as part of a constructive and good-tempered dialogue .
Mr President , the starting point for this debate was the US rejection of the Kyoto Protocol .
So I welcome the strong language in our compromise resolution on this .
But we need more than words .
We want the Commission to look at possible EU actions in response to a continued US refusal to respond to climate change , including action at the WTO , on the grounds that by not internalising its external energy costs , US goods are receiving an unfair government subsidy , which is against the rules of world trade .
But it is not just Kyoto .
Let us look as well at this intent to tear up the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty .
This " Son of Star Wars " system threatens a massive new arms race .
Asking the US to consult before proceeding is not enough .
We need to state very clearly that the EU calls on the US to give up this initiative and pledges itself and its Member States not to take part in this project on any level .
If the US spent just a fraction of the resources it currently spends on missile defence on defending itself against climate change instead , the world would be a much safer place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the American trade representative Bob Zoelleck made this House an unequivocal but positive offer in the competent committees via the Kangaroo Group , namely that we jointly devise an open trade policy for increasing prosperity throughout the world , including in developing countries .
I think that we should take up this offer and start looking at trade policy as a way of broadening transatlantic relations as a whole .
We all know that NATO will still need to play a major role in the collective defence of Europe for a long time to come .
We seem , understandably , to have lost all awareness of common security since 1990 , which is why we need to ensure that relations between the United States of America and Europe are strengthened in every other political field .
We should take up this offer by the US Administration .
In doing so , we should also further the opportunity for relations between our House and the American Congress , provided that we can make our contribution here .
You only need look at the difficulties we have experienced with data protection over recent years , because we have no jointly agreed legislation for global economic areas , to see just how far the transatlantic legislators ' dialogue needs to go .
I should like , if I may , to address one last point : the United States are now the only superpower in the world and they approach foreign policy problems as such .
Their relations with Russia are predicated on this global position , while Europe defines its position from a regional standpoint and sees it in the context of the enlargement process .
But that should not mean that we pass up the opportunity to pursue a joint strategic approach in this region .
I have a feeling that we have not pursued a joint policy in connection with Ukraine over recent weeks .
Now that the westward looking government has been ousted and Chernomyrdin has taken over as governor with the title ambassador to Kiev , it is obvious that we have made strategic blunders which we must not underestimate and which - to my chagrin - we have not discussed even once in the General Council this week .
Madam President , in addition to what the leader of our group , Barón Crespo , said , I should like to make some observations in the context of the equal transatlantic dialogue on matters of international security .
Firstly , our Socialist group is concerned about , and opposed to , the unilateral plans of President Bush to invest trillions in the high-tech weapons industry via a missile defence system , hence both jeopardising the ABM Treaty and possibly provoking a new arms race .
It is of fundamental importance that we should oppose the arms race .
We want multilateral cooperation and agreements , and support for a reformed UN .
We want Europe and America to work together to that end .
Unilateral action by either Europe or the US is an anachronism in an age when we are jointly responsible in our global village .
It is precisely that joint responsibility which will lead us in Europe to share and take responsibility within NATO , via the rapid intervention force , via the payment of some 80 % of the costs of reconstruction in the Balkans .
Conversely we therefore ask the US to cooperate in conflict prevention and development aid , and to pay its contributions to the UN , because as Social-Democrats we see that some 100 conflicts in our global village are being caused by poverty , underdevelopment and ethnicity .
The best security shield is the battle against poverty .
That battle is the best guarantee of security against fundamentalist terror of an ethnic or religious nature , warlords and rogue states .
We need a new , wide-ranging attitude to security and we hope that at the forthcoming meeting in Gothenburg , the Commission and the Council will make that attitude a central item on the agenda , in the open , frank , free and confident dialogue with President Bush .
That is the route we should like to take .
Mr President , the EU-US partnership is of crucial importance .
We are each other ' s largest trading partners and by cooperating the EU and the US can play a decisive role in tackling international trade issues .
Now that Europe is on its way towards greater unanimity in the foreign and security field too , the necessity of working together will grow even greater .
In fields like environmental protection and limiting CO2 emissions cooperation will be decisive .
In the Dutch press , there was an appeal to President Bush in letter form from what the author himself called " the profitable part of American industry " asking the president not to listen only to inefficient companies when environmental decisions were involved .
Robust environmental legislation makes companies more innovative , more technology-oriented and more efficient .
At yesterday ' s Kangaroo Group lunch , Mr Zoellic said that in his view and that of his government not every problem in the private sector needs to be solved by the government .
If I combine both things , it may be possible to reach new agreements with the US .
Whether an agreement is called Kyoto or New York is a matter of supreme indifference to us . But we must get down to work together .
My final point concerns parliamentary relations .
For some years , we have been enjoying better relations .
The Legislators Dialogue has gained momentum and has begun to bear fruit .
However , since a new Congress has taken office with all the changes in personnel that that involves , it seems difficult to make real contacts .
The collective memory on the US side appears to have been erased .
We are starting completely from scratch .
That is all the more regrettable since our trade disputes could have been effectively prevented by the " early warning " system within the TABD and the Legislators Dialogue .
It is still too early to express real concern .
See my observation as part of a European " early warning " system .
A light is on , but it is not yet red .
But what will happen in a world where the word of a superpower is no longer worth the paper it is written on ?
Mr President , I will focus on the single area of environmental issues .
There is cause for concern over the EU-US partnership in this particular area .
I appreciate the clarity with which the Swedish Presidency addressed these issues in the introduction .
Experts are increasingly unanimous on the problems of global warming and its consequences .
In addition , it is clearly the responsibility of the richer countries to reach an international agreement by ratifying the Kyoto Protocol .
The US has particular responsibility , as the country has by far the largest emissions .
The question is how we react .
Should our reaction lead to a strong anti-American position ?
No , of course not .
However , we should continue adopting a clear and frank stance in our dialogue with the US on these issues .
The fact that the US has not undertaken ratification must not prevent us in the EU from making progress .
We have to take the lead in the world with regard to ratification and continue the dialogue with the US in order to bring the country on board in the future .
That must be our position .
The Summit in Gothenburg is an excellent opportunity to bring up the issues - in addition to the visit by President Bush , the Gothenburg Summit also has sustainable development as its main theme .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , the transatlantic dialogue must be extended to encompass global transport policy because both the USA and we Europeans bear a special responsibility for greater safety in the air and at sea , better environmental protection and fair competition and fair trade practices .
Our primary objective must be to adopt reasonable harmonised provisions in order to develop a transatlantic transport market - be it in air or sea transport - and to work towards global regulations based on harmonised regulations between the USA and Europe , for example in the area of air traffic noise .
We do not want to end up at loggerheads with the Americans again over hushkitted aeroplanes ; on the contrary , we must endeavour to regulate environmental protection and safety standards in advance , jointly and proactively .
This is not just a task for the Commission and the US Administration . We must try , as part of the transatlantic parliamentary dialogue , to organise specialist debates between transport experts in the American congress and the European Parliament so as to avoid political pressure between the administrations or , as the result of pressure from lobbyists , by the administrations .
We must fight together for greater environmental protection and greater safety .
This will greatly benefit our people , avoid conflicts between the USA and Europe and could form the basis for an overall joint solution .
Mr President , I think that our debate on the transatlantic dialogue has come at a very good moment .
I need not remind Members how crucial this dialogue is with a view to achieving cooperation between equal partners , between the United States of America and the European Union .
The dialogue allows us to deal with our differences and to settle some of our old trade disputes ; here I am thinking in particular of bananas , an issue we finally resolved a few weeks ago .
I want to emphasise the importance of the question of European defence , an issue I regard as extremely important , in particular now that we are dealing with a new American Administration that has already openly advertised its defence projects .
It is quite clear that President Bush 's Administration is far more distrustful of the ESDP than President Clinton 's was , but that does not surprise me .
It took the Union several years to explain its objectives , define its means and convince its American ally that a European defence system could be developed alongside NATO .
Today we must at all costs protect this achievement of the transatlantic dialogue .
The concept of an ally must not be a one-way road .
I believe that the Union has shown itself to be entirely transparent in the way it has presented the CESP , followed by the ESDP , to the United States and I think it should make it just as clear that the United States must consult its allies on all major projects , of which the anti-missile shield project is one .
Regarding European defence policy as such , we must continue to state firmly what we want , as we always have done , and not systematically look at every European defence question in terms of NATO 's reaction .
The Union has always emphasised the importance of complementarity between European action and Alliance action , especially in relation to the Petersberg tasks .
The issue here is neither competition nor disengagement , but simply a united approach .
Mr President , I will be extremely brief as I am aware that Parliament has other business to attend to .
I agree with Mr Barón Crespo that the EU and the US have a joint global responsibility to combat poverty , reduce tensions and promote disarmament .
Discussions on US missile defence should continue .
The Gothenburg Summit will be an ideal occasion to demonstrate the points on which we agree , e.g. regarding the Balkans and the Middle East , and those on which there is no agreement , be it unilateral action within the UN , contributions to the UN , the Kyoto Protocol or environmental issues .
However , if we are to influence the US on those areas in which there is no agreement , making contact with the new administration is not enough .
Instead , we also need contact with the US congress .
I wish Parliament success in this area .
I should like to inform you that I have received six motions for resolutions under Rule 37 paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
VOTE
There are two amendments that we are concerned about regarding port state control .
We can partly accept both Amendments Nos 1 and 2 with the qualifications which were set out in the plenary session .
Mr Watts has requested the floor .
Mr President , I am grateful to the Commissioner for indicating the support of the Commission , in principle , for both amendments being tabled in plenary today .
But I seek clarification on Amendment No 1 .
Whilst in principle the Commission is saying it supports our demand for " black box " voyage data recorders to be fitted to all ships , can it confirm that relates not just to new ships , but also to existing and old ships ? It is an important clarification .
I would appreciate a statement from the Commissioner on that particular point .
The next item is the vote on the Conference of Presidents ' proposals on the European Parliament 's calendar of plenary part-sessions in 2002 .
Madam President , I appreciate the tactics , but would it not be more democratic if you waited until everybody came in , sat down and took part in this vote ?
It is the last one on our schedule today and it is not a coincidence that it has been taken out of turn .
No , Mrs Doyle , it is not the last vote this morning .
And I am indeed sorry that Members did not all feel it necessary to listen to Mr Schuster 's excellent speech .
But that does not matter now and they are welcome to join us again .
Before the vote on block 1 by Mr Posselt and others :
Madam President , this vote is extremely important because , now that we have done away with Fridays , mini part-sessions are illegal .
If we do not need Fridays , then we do not need extra part-sessions , which is why we really must hold these votes separately and reject each mini part-session separately .
Before the vote on block 2 by the Technical Group of Independent Members :
Madam President , whenever amendments are tabled , the name of the author is given .
With regard to the Technical Group of Independent Members , I would like to make it quite clear to the House that these two blocks of amendments were tabled by the seven radical members of the group .
Thank you for that clarification .
After the vote :
Madam President , since it has now been established for two years in succession that a majority of Parliament does not want Friday to be included on the calendar of part-sessions for Strasbourg , I would ask you next year to submit a calendar on which Fridays are not included .
I think that that would be consistent with the democracy we practise in this Chamber .
Thank you , Mrs Thorning-Schmidt .
The Conference of Presidents will act as it sees fit .
I now have to join the President of Slovakia .
The voting , however , will continue .
. ( FR ) The only reason we voted for this proposal for a regulation was because if we had voted against it that might have suggested agreement with those who are opposed even to this minimum aid to poor countries .
Having said that , these proposals are inadequate , cynical and hypocritical .
For anyone to pretend , for example , that this aid can ' contribute to world food security ' and ' respond to emergency food situations and other food needs ' when several hundred of millions of people in the world find themselves in emergency situations , if not in extreme distress , mainly because the European powers represented here in Parliament plundered them in the past , is a cheap attempt to salve their conscience .
Ludford recommendation ( B5 ­ 340 / 2001 )
Although this proposal is merely a statement of position and does not set out the means of imposing its recommendations , we voted for it because racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism are some of the worst forms of barbarism still alive in society today .
Our vote is also the expression of our solidarity with all those who are fighting this scourge , as also with its victims , in particular on the territory of the European Union , which has the sad privilege of having produced its most despicable forms and is still affected by it today .
Area of freedom , security and justice ( B5-339 / 2001 )
The proposal for a recommendation on the position of the European Union at the World Conference against Racism , Racial Discrimination , Xenophobia , and Related Intolerance contains a number of positive points .
But there is , indeed , ' no room for complacency ' in Europe .
In fact , 50 years after the Holocaust , certain member countries played an active part in the genocide in Rwanda and many European minorities , such as gypsies , are still being persecuted today .
The centuries of slavery and colonisation weigh heavy in the history of the member countries .
However , many countries continue to be pressurised and remain dependent and immigration policies give cause for concern .
We have expressed our views on this before .
The criminalisation of immigrants is a real scandal against people who are fleeing from political or economic oppression .
If we are actively to combat racism and xenophobia , we must respect the right of asylum , formulate a policy for regularising the status of all those without the necessary papers in Europe and grant nationals of third countries the right to vote and stand at all elections .
Those are a few of the measures with which we can fight racism and xenophobia effectively .
If it wants to satisfy the citizens ' needs , the European Union must finally decide to cancel the debt and impose the Tobin tax .
The World Conference against Racism , Xenophobia , Anti-Semitism and Intolerance can and must be seen as a unique opportunity to undertake an in-depth examination of these disturbing phenomena and to adopt measures that could put an end to them .
It is nevertheless crucial that we do not conceal the fact that many of the intolerant attitudes seen in our societies are caused by feelings of insecurity resulting from situations created by the collective redundancies of thousands of workers , by the increasing lack of job security and by the loss of rights .
Nevertheless , given the reduction in funds that the European Union and the Member States give to the LDCs and the general lack of support for their development , we might easily conclude that the only chance of survival for many men and women from these countries is to emigrate to the ' rich ' countries .
Furthermore , given that barriers to the movement of immigrant workers in the European Union are being continually erected , and this is a situation that could now be changed to some extent in order to attract the technical specialists that we are lacking , and that problems are systematically created for the family reunification of these citizens , it is hard to believe that we are contributing to their integration .
We shall be voting in favour of this resolution , but we feel that , in addition to declaring politically correct intentions , we must take action .
This is why the European Union must set an example .
I abstained on the vote because no mention or condemnation was made of the recent attempt of the French Parliament to brand and outlaw certain Bible Protestants in France as sectarian .
The intolerance of the State and the courts of France against these Protestants should have been mentioned and condemned .
The EU Parliament too often closes its eyes to the persecution of such Protestants within its bounds .
In the resolution it has just adopted on questions relating to the police , justice and the free movement of persons , the European Parliament is once again calling for the complete ' communitarisation ' of immigration policy and all related policies , such as asylum and temporary protection .
Meanwhile we must once again repeat the point that although European coordination is obviously essential , the people of each country must have the sovereign power to make the final decision determining who may remain on its territory .


The Treaty of Amsterdam had already transferred these matters to a Community framework by taking them away from the national parliaments , but with two vital derogations from the usual procedures : the Commission must share its power of initiative to propose texts with the Member States during a transitional period fixed at not more than five years after the entry into force of Amsterdam ( i.e. until 1 May 2004 ) ; the Council will take its decisions not by a qualified majority but unanimously for at least five years , which means that for the time being each country retains its sovereign decision-making power .

These are the two derogations to which the European Parliament 's resolution for which we voted today is most strongly opposed : it disputes that the Member States have any right to propose texts , on the pretext that they would exercise this power in an uncoordinated manner ; it wishes the qualified majority system to apply more widely ( or perhaps totally ; this is not made quite clear ) , a wish that would largely be granted by the Treaty of Nice if it is ratified .

We take the opposite position : if it came to the point that immigration questions were decided by a majority , that would take the power away from the countries and put it in the hands of uncontrollable lobbies , or perhaps even to one member country that was better placed than the others in the decision-making procedures .
For the good of Europe these powers , the power of proposal and of decision , should remain among the sovereign competences of each nation .
In particular , direct decision-making power should be returned to the national parliaments .
The motion for a resolution itself recognises that ' the Member States and the Council are not succeeding in implementing a common policy in the areas of asylum and immigration ' .
As for national policies , instead of becoming more flexible they are more and more restrictive .
Within the European Union , capital has been able to move freely for a long time now , as have goods .
But not people .
That is tantamount to admitting that this European Union was not made for people but for capital and those who possess it .
Obviously , we voted against this motion for a resolution .
We repeat our demand for the total freedom of establishment and movement for all those who live and work in one of the European Union countries and their entitlement to the same political , legal and social rights as citizens of the Community .
- ( SV ) I have voted against the motion for a resolution .
This initiative and its classification are , in my view , the wrong way for the European Parliament to handle such a fundamental constitutional issue as the entire EU decision mechanism , including the proposal to abolish the pillar structure in the area of justice in favour of the Community method with full co-determination for the European Parliament .
The Posselt report has not been before the Standing Committee on the Constitution , which is a clear omission .
In point 33 , for example , the wording is very unclear and also poorly supported on such an important issue as whether the European Union should establish its own force for European border protection .
González Álvarez report ( A5-0133 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I would like to address Mr González Álvarez , if I may , for , last night , the great Italian fashion designer Valentino phoned me .
" Hello .
Is Mr Fatuzzo there ? "
" Speaking , " I replied .
" Mr Fatuzzo , " said Valentino , " we Italian , French and European fashion designers are extremely concerned .
" What about ? " I asked him .
" We are concerned about Mrs Laura González Álvarez ' report on product safety because , you see , our products , our clothes are dangerous .
We consider them dangerous because they are sexy , provocative and fascinating . "
" That is true , " I said , " but why are you phoning me ? I am the representative of the Pensioners ' Party . "
" Because , " Mr Valentino replied , " as you know , pensioners sometimes suffer from heart problems and so your votes are even more dangerous for them .
Please help us ! "
I therefore voted for the motion in order to prevent safety criteria being applied to clothes .
The removal of borders and the achievement of the single market on 1 January 1993 highlighted the existence of a market of more than 370 million consumers , for which accompanying rules had to be drawn up to guarantee them a number of rights .
Directive 92 / 59 / EEC on general product safety ( DGPS ) was drawn up to that end .
Although the general approach of the directive adopted in 1992 proved satisfactory , the objectives set out in it were not all achieved because of the lack of clarity or gaps in some of its provisions .

The proposal is interesting overall , but several highly important amendments that Parliament had adopted at first reading , in particular the amendments on the safety of services , the precautionary principle , product monitoring and the European product safety network were not incorporated .
The responsible parliamentary committee therefore decided , justifiably , to table them again .
Conversely , the common position does include Parliament 's amendments on charity shops in a recital that stipulates that , in relation to charitable activities , it may prove impossible to provide information on the origin of a product and the risks it might contain .
The Council has also introduced certain innovations in relation to the Commission 's initial proposal , in particular :
Modification of the definitions of ' product ' and ' safe product ' to clarify the scope of the directive , especially in regard to services ;
Introduction , again for the sake of clarification , of additional definitions relating to ' serious risk ' and ' withdrawal ' ;
Introduction of a three-stage procedure , with the right of appeal to the regulatory committee , in order to define European standards ;
Additional provisions to encourage producers and distributors to become more involved in the voluntary sector .
These proposals go in the right direction .
Product safety must be taken into consideration when the rules governing the single market are adopted .
That is a vital condition for restoring consumer confidence , which has been somewhat shaken by the scandals of all kinds that have blown up recently .
It is vital to the sound operation of the single market .
Amending this directive is , therefore , a step in the right direction .
The Council common position , adopted on 12 February 2001 , accepted 21 of the 30 amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
Nevertheless , it left out important issues which the rapporteur has referred back to the European Parliament for second reading , and for which we have voted .
First and foremost , the introduction of the precautionary principle in the marketing of products and in measures to be taken in risk management .
This is a general principle , used by public authorities and must be referred to explicitly with regard to the powers and obligations of Member States .
Furthermore , the Council common position abandons the idea of a total ban on exporting products that present serious risks , despite clarifying the concept of partial bans or no bans whatsoever , without presenting any criteria for choosing which ban to apply .
We should , therefore , reinstate the European Commission ' s original proposal .
Lastly , another important issue is safety in the field of services .
As the rapporteur says , the Commission must present rapid proposals for the safety of services .
The Commission must identify the needs and priorities for Community action in this field , and the responsibilities of service providers , taking account of the clarifications of the common position on the scope of application of the present directive .
On this topic the interests of industry continue to clash with those of the consumer and the environment .
Most companies no longer oppose the idea that protecting consumers against unsafe products is desirable .
In the single European market they are prepared to withdraw products that damage their good reputation .
On the other hand , when it is a matter of concrete measures by government , they are quick to complain that these restrict their freedom excessively , and exert pressure on Parliament to reject them .
Initially the Commission quite rightly claimed the right to decree a complete export ban on dangerous products .
It is madness that companies based in our countries should try to earn money from products that we consider unsafe for European consumers .
The Council seriously curbed those powers , probably under pressure from protesting companies who lobby their own national governments to protect the country ' s exports .
I support the rapporteur in her aim of maintaining those powers and in addition of taking more safety measures before 2003 .
It is reprehensible that good decisions by Parliament require 314 at second reading and as a result can often not be maintained in the face of opposition by the Council .
.
As a British member I was very concerned when the proposed directive was first discussed in the Environment Committee that it would inflict severe financial and bureaucratic damage on the flourishing British and Irish charity shop industry - largely unknown elsewhere in the EU - which raises so much money for good causes , and is also extremely sound environmentally by recycling and reusing large quantities of second-hand goods , which it then makes available cheaply to the consumer in its retail outlets .
I was therefore delighted that the common position of the Council returned to this House for a second reading incorporates the exemptions required for charity shops , inspired by my original amendment , from the need to keep records of the identity of purchasers of , in particular , second-hand electrical and electronic goods which constitute only a small part of their overall business .
This was a victory for common sense and has pleased the industry and my London constituents , and I thank the rapporteur and Commission for this derogation .
. I welcome this report on general product safety which offers yet further proof of Europe working for our citizens .
People across Europe are becoming increasingly worried about the safety of consumer products , such as children 's toys .
We in the European Parliament are addressing this concern in a sensible , common-sense manner .
There were fears that the British tradition of charity shops would be threatened by these proposals .
I am pleased that Labour MEPs worked to prevent these from being affected by this directive .
It is ludicrous to think that the average charity shop , flea market or car boot sale can provide the authorities with information about product risks and product origin for second-hand goods acquired from the general public .
Overall , this directive is an enormous step forward in ensuring a consistent and high level of consumer protection .
It also creates the efficient functioning of the single market to benefit people , not just business .
We must not allow hidden dangers to consumers to creep in unseen through the back door .
I urge this House to move ahead from these proposals to look at the safety of services and the liability of service providers and to adopt the precautionary principle .
Public confidence in the safety of products has taken a real knock in recent years following a number of scares , especially in children 's toys .
Only by taking a safety first attitude - and being seen to take a safety first attitude - can public confidence be restored .
Watts report ( A5-0140 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , with regard to Mr Watts ' report on shipboard living and working conditions , I received a ' phone call from an old friend , the purser , Mr Augusto Fazio , who used to sail with me - and still sails - between New York and the Bahamas .
He complained : " Working conditions on board ships are hard and tiresome .
We have to work during the day and at night and we are poorly paid .
I would like Europe genuinely to concern itself more - it is already taking an interest but not enough - in our pay and also in our pensions , for I am approaching retirement age " .
I therefore welcomed Mr Watts ' report and was happy to vote for the motion .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of improved European rules governing safety at sea .
We have voted in favour of increasing the number of inspections , of refusing all ships sailing with blacklisted flags access to EU ports and of requiring all new ships to be fitted with black boxes , as they are called .
Many accidents involving pollution could have been avoided by means of better safety .
We have seen all too many accidents in the last couple of years .
There was the loss of the tanker , Erika , off the Brittany coast in December 1999 , resulting in considerable oil pollution , and the loss of the Italian chemical tanker , Ievoli Sun .
Most recently , we have seen an extensive oil spill in the Baltic .
The oil spill in the Baltic could have been avoided .
Better European rules were needed .
The ship owners do not think that a black box has anything to do with safety .
However , that is not the case .
A black box is very useful in the investigation after two ships have collided , as happened , for example , in the Baltic .
If we become better at discovering the causes of accidents , we also become better at preventing them .
We cannot wait for international rules in the IMO .
The EU must take the lead in the IMO by adopting better rules .
We cannot compromise on safety .
We must have safety so that fish , birds and people can use the sea without being covered in oil and chemicals .
Even though the Commission 's proposals aim to strengthen port state control by increasing the number of inspections and adopting more rigorous procedures , we wonder what has become of the governments ' political resolve to prevent further oil slicks , 16 months after the shipwreck of the Erika .
The legislation must be applied by all the Member States , including Belgium , Portugal , France , Ireland and the Netherlands .
Moreover , adequate resources must be earmarked for these controls , which in concrete terms means hiring more inspectors , widening their powers and areas of control , especially in regard to respect for social security rules and the living and working conditions of the crews .
The proposal to equip as many vessels as possible , from oil tankers to bulk carriers and passenger ships , with VDRs or ' black boxes ' is a positive one , but this must not exempt the states from carrying out the necessary inspections .
It will also be necessary to create as soon as possible a team of European inspectors and coast-guards and allocate them adequate financial , human and material resources .
Furthermore , the Council 's proposals on ' black-list ' flags are still too timid .
It must take a much firmer stance against flags of convenience , especially those from Member States and from the islands of Kerguelen and Wallis and Futuna Islands .
We must require their suppression and ban all vessels that do not respect these rules from sailing in Community waters .
Eighteen months after the shipwreck of the Erika , need we remind anyone of the distress , the suffering , the anger of the people living along our Atlantic Coast , whose maritime and tourist activities have been so hard hit ?
Need we remind anyone how long it took to pay out compensation , which in many cases has still not been received , and how inadequate that compensation was ?
The day after this tragic accident , speaking in this Chamber , I proposed adopting the following broad policy guidelines :
The ' polluter cleans up ' principle : will we leave it to the communities , to the citizens who are the victims , to clean up our coast ?
The ' polluter pays ' principle : we must underline the liability of the ship-owners and operators in this type of disaster .
Rapid and complete compensation of the victims .
Maintenance of the Community fleet and shipyards at an acceptable level , rather than allowing fleets to develop in our seas and our ports over which we have no control , which fly flags of convenience that are quite untraceable .
Strengthening the Community legislation providing for the inspection and classification of ships operating in Community waters and a ban on dangerous ships .
Eighteen months later , what has become of the measures we called for ?
We welcome the proposals on which Parliament voted today and which go in the right direction .
The Watts report is concerned with strengthening port state control and with rigorous inspections and procedures .
We support the rapporteur 's calls for the use of voyage data recorders .
In the Ortuondo report , we welcome the more stringent legislation on ship-classification societies .
We also note with interest the progress of the ' Erika II package ' , which we await impatiently .
Yet we are still far from taking the necessary measures in regard to compensating the victims , applying the principle of the ' polluter cleans up ' , restoring the balance of sea transport between the various Community ports and encouraging the maintenance and development of our merchant fleets .
The overcrowding of European ports , especially in the Channel and the North Sea , makes these measures all the more urgent .
Ortuondo Larrea report ( A5-0144 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , with regard to the Ortuondo Larrea report on the safety inspection of ships , I have to say that , although I voted for the motion , I would have preferred the classification societies appointed by the governments to inspect ships and to give the ships that sail our seas and the seas outside the Mediterranean free reign , to be assisted in carrying out these inspections by pensioner sailors , pensioner quartermasters , pensioner engine room officials and pensioner chief stewards , who have a wealth of experience and are highly qualified to assess whether ships are truly safe .
President .
At last , I understand what is going on !
In fact , I was wondering whether there was a plant in the audience that was not really a plant !
Now I understand !
Today we are voting , at second reading , on the Ortuondo Larrea report on classification societies .
Some of the amendments are heading in the right direction by proposing a strict ban on the Administration employing recognised organisations if they have economic interests in the management or properties of ships , or by reaffirming the need for coherence between the European standards and the IMO .
We cannot accept some others , which seek to reduce the financial liabilities .
They only aim to ensure that for the rules of competition between states , regardless of the scale of the consequences due to errors or negligence of the recognised organisation .
Liability must be full and complete and the court or tribunal must judge and decide freely , on the basis of the real nature of each disaster .
As often happens , the report proposes improvements in transparency or harmonisation , but limits their actual scope by not making provision for adequate financial sanctions .
This package to increase safety at sea is a reaction to the accident with the Erika on 12 December 1999 .
Despite the fact that a plethora of Parliament 's proposed amendments have been adopted , such as the exclusion of classification societies with some form of business , personal or family links to the shipowner or operator , greater transparency by requiring classification societies to ensure that all relevant information is made available to all interested parties on their websites , scrutiny of classification societies where the accident rate recorded by the ships classed is excessively high , the Council and Parliament still disagree on two very important points , which is why a conciliation procedure would appear to be in order if the recommendations before us , which we support , are accepted .
Firstly : the European Parliament proposed that ceilings should be placed on the financial liability of classification societies in the event of an accident caused by wilful act , omission or gross negligence in their survey work .
The Council was in favour of a regulation which allowed the Member States to set the maximum amounts payable , with the amounts set by Parliament here as minimum , not maximum amounts .
Secondly : the Council has not accepted that there should be regular , mutual consultations between recognised organisations with a view to guaranteeing that their technical standards are equivalent to the provisions of IMO Resolution A.837 ( 29 ) and that the Commission should be provided with regular reports on fundamental progress made on these standards and their willingness to cooperate with port state control administrations .
As my group is positive that a common standpoint can be found for both outstanding problems , we feel that a conciliation procedure would be in order .
van Dam report ( A5-0151 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , as you can see , sometimes the Pensioners ' Party gains fresh support from people as important as the Members of the European Parliament , even if only for explanations of vote on individual measures .
I hope that Mr van Dam 's report will receive just as much support .
I voted for this report , which establishes a regulation on the safety of the carriage of goods by road and the safety of drivers who drive international heavy goods vehicles in Europe .
The report also says that it is essential for the salaries and working conditions of drivers in Europe to be standardised , so as not to distort competition .
However , that means that , in order to prevent distortion of competition , the rules governing pension contributions should also be standardised , and drivers ' pensions should be standardised too .
Therefore , what is stopping us from giving the European Union the competence to regulate the salaries and pensions of all Europeans ?
The report on which this proposal is based ' shows that a number of EU transport firms use a variety of underhand means for using cheap vehicles and staff from third countries .
The costs of both equipment and staff are significantly lower than in the EU . '
That means that a number of road transport firms employ underpaid drivers , working in precarious conditions , for transport outside the country in which they are based .
What worries the rapporteur most , however , is not the situation of the drivers , their excessively low wages or unacceptable working conditions , but the resulting ' distortions of competition ' .
The proposed solution is the compulsory introduction of a ' uniform driver attestation ' in all the EU Member States .
It would have been preferable to make the hauliers pay the same wages , whether or not the driver is an EU national .
The best way to combat ' social dumping ' would have been to impose a minimum wage aligned with that of the country where it is highest .
Yet the European authorities prefer to impose a uniform administrative document throughout the European Union , rather than making the hauliers pay decent wages and provide decent working conditions for all their drivers , whatever their country of origin .
This shows that the envisaged reform is not concerned with the workers , which is why we abstained .
The Van Dam report on the eventual introduction of a uniform attestation for all drivers engaged in road transport within the territory of the Community is a positive step .
However , we do not take the same stance as the rapporteur , who is in favour of ' fair competition ' in this sector .
The single market liberalised the carriage of goods by road .
The companies then used a variety of underhand means for using cheap equipment and staff from third countries .
A certain complacency has arisen in this field , similar to that found in transport by sea .
The road hauliers ' search for profit at any price leads to the over-exploitation of labour , which seriously increases the risk factor of this mode of transport .
We emphasise the need to harmonise labour law for drivers travelling within the Community territory at the most favourable levels achieved , beginning with their training , working hours and working conditions , pay and pensions .
Moreover , it is imperative for the Member States to recruit enough monitors and inspectors to ensure respect for existing legislation .
It is mainly for these reasons that we are voting for this report .
Calendar of part-sessions
Since we have no special preferences regarding the duration of part-sessions , we abstained from the vote on the proposed calendar .
Yet we do believe that whatever the majority that emerges from Members ' votes , the employees of the European Parliament , officials and others , must not be made to suffer in any way from this decision , and in particular must not have their salaries reduced .
There is no reason to penalise the staff simply because of the way the Members choose to work , i.e. their own convenience .
. ( NL ) On behalf of the Netherlands delegation I wish to report that we have voted in favour of abolition of Friday sittings , on the assumption that a thorough reform of our parliamentary work is necessary , to allow more time for legislative work .
We hope that our decision will be seen as a pragmatic and not a moral one .
Stihler report ( A5- 150 / 2001 )
Madam President , this was an extremely important report .
Right across Europe , the abuse of alcohol by children and adolescents is a growing problem .
In Ireland the level of alcohol abuse by young people has grown dramatically over the years .
One of the things we need to look at is the whole advertising campaign by the alcohol industry .
The alcohol industry portrays alcohol as something that is necessary to enjoy life .
It portrays the abuse of alcohol as something that is acceptable in society .
Yet when you look at what happens in society - not just to young people but also to older people - one of the major problems we have is the abuse of alcohol , which contributes to violence in the home , violence on the streets and to serious crime .
We have to address this issue .
One of the best ways of addressing this is by looking at the advertising industry .
For example , there is a restriction on cigarette advertising on television , yet there is no restriction on alcohol advertising on television .
There is something seriously wrong here .
Yes , smoking damages health and causes major problems for the smoker and for passive smokers .
But alcohol causes major problems throughout society , from health problems , to violence , to abuse against other people and the persons themselves .
We need to consider whether it is acceptable that the alcohol industry can advertise in such a carte blanche fashion .
It is completely unacceptable .
We need to address this .
We need proper restrictions on the advertising of alcohol .
It is a drug and should be accepted and recognised as such .
It should not be promoted as something that is necessary to enjoy life , because it is not .
Mr President , I fully support the report on the recommendation on drinking of alcohol by children and adolescents .
Who would not do so ?
What is important is that recommendations are not issued for reducing the alcohol consumption of elderly people for , it is well-known , when taken in moderation , alcohol is beneficial to health .
The report proves conclusively and extensively in its introduction - inter alia - that : a ) the probability of adults ' developing an addiction ( alcoholism ) increases significantly if they start drinking as children or adolescents , b ) the use / abuse of alcohol by children and adolescents is increasing continuously in all the countries of the ÅU , c ) many countries in the ÅU produce " alcopops " , i.e. refreshments containing alcohol , which are freely sold to children and adolescents , d ) there is a direct and worrying link between violence and antisocial behaviour and between road traffic accidents ( deaths , disabilities ) and the use of alcohol by children and adolescents .
The rapporteur is therefore quite right to raise these major issues .
However , just when you would expect fundamental proposals to combat this very serious problem , all you find is a series of amendments urging awareness-raising and recommending and encouraging producers to stop producing alcopops and bar waiters and owners to avoid selling alcoholic beverages to children and adolescents and include cheap , non-alcoholic drinks on their menus .
Advertising should be directed solely at adults , inexperienced drivers should avoid having more than 0.2 % alcohol in their bloodstream and parents , associations and sports personalities should persuade children and adolescents to resist the massive onslaught by manufacturers , retailers , bar and club owners and advertisers .
At the same time , we should rely on these people to act altruistically and to stop selling or advertising alcohol to children .
In other words , trivial , anodyne , fragmentary proposals which , at best , are ingenuous , in that they are a long way from dealing with a problem which claims the health and lives of millions of minors .
Nowhere did we find any reference to the causes of the problem or any proposal to deal with the huge financial interests which use all means , fair and foul , to manufacture , market and promote alcohol to children and adolescents .
Obviously , unless these issues are addressed , any proposal will just be an " aspirin " , a simple wish list which merely perpetuates and exacerbates the problem .
Finally , we note that the introduction to the report stresses that , under no circumstances , will even these anodyne proposals - which will run off the back of economic interests and profiteering - become binding proposals or legislation ; they will simply remain as recommendations to the Member States .
- ( SV ) We believe that the focus of alcohol policy should be decided at national level .
Issues of taxation , retail monopolies , advertising , import restrictions and age limits should all be decided by the individual Member States .
The Stihler report addresses a recommendation from the Council in this area .
As it is not a matter of legislation for Member States , we have voted for the proposal , as we share its main political stance .
We all know that alcohol consumption is high , with all of the unfortunate consequences that this entails , specifically when young people are concerned .
As a recent survey of fifteen- and sixteen-year-old adolescents revealed , the highest levels of excessive consumption are seen in Ireland , the United Kingdom and in Denmark .
It is these last two , however , together with Finland , France and Sweden , that have the highest percentages of young people who have been drunk at , or under , the age of 13 .
Studies that have been carried out show a strong link between alcohol consumption and anti-social behaviour such as violence , and that immoderate consumption of alcohol is a proven factor in unwanted pregnancies , sexually transmitted diseases , crime and road traffic accidents .
Furthermore , consumer habits acquired in youth can also affect health and set longer-term consumption patterns , which means that we must not only give a commitment to health promotion , education and information policies , but also to measures limiting alcohol consumption by children and adolescents and structural actions in the field of treating young people and helping them to better adapt to society .
The Commission ' s proposal , however , is extremely superficial and starts from the premise that those who stand to benefit from alcohol sales will work to prevent greater consumption amongst children and adolescents , which is quite a utopian idea , as is well known .
The rapporteur goes somewhat further in her proposals , and tries to lay down certain rules and stresses the need for more precise codes of conduct , but what is really needed is for the Member States to pay greater attention to this problem .
If we are to pursue a responsible policy we must concern ourselves with the health of Europeans , particularly the youngest among them .
Therefore , we need to be very vigilant in face of the rising alcohol consumption by children and adolescents .
That is why I voted for this recommendation of the European Parliament , which calls on the Member States to take measures to protect young people .
Action should therefore be taken in the European Community countries to raise public awareness of the dangers of excessive alcohol consumption and persuade children , adolescents , but also parents , to be more responsible for their actions .
Children and adolescents are particularly receptive to the messages transmitted to them and the appropriate educational action could therefore produce practical results .
We must remember that young people are the main victims of the murderous road accidents caused by alcohol abuse .
Furthermore , if the appropriate messages were disseminated to make even the youngest children aware of the dangers of excess alcohol consumption , that could prevent some of the tragedies we have seen .
At the same time , we have to distinguish between different drinks .
We know , for example , that the moderate consumption of wine can have beneficial effects on health .
That is why we certainly do not wish to condemn the producers .
Our aim is to put a stop to the excessive consumption of alcoholic drinks among young people .
Yet the producers do have a role to play .
They should not target their commercial and advertising campaigns specifically at adolescents .
We know what an impact these campaigns can have on young people , so this temptation must be suppressed in favour of preventive measures .
Lastly , we should give some thought to whether it might prove effective to affix warning labels to the products , as France is doing in relation to advertising .
The consumption of alcohol by adolescents and , alas , more and more often by children , is a real cause for concern and we must do our utmost , we who are supposed to be responsible adults , to protect young Europeans against the abuse or , as the rapporteur calls it , the harmful use of alcohol .
That is why we will vote for Mrs Stihler ' s report and for most of her amendments .
I would add , however , that the protection of children and adolescents against certain abuses must be absolute .
Yes , we must protect the youth of Europe against alcoholism .
But we must also protect it against drugs , including the drugs some people dare describe as ' soft ' .
We must also protect it against the actions of perverts , against the sexual practices that some left-wingers advocated in the 1970s in order to ' shock the bourgeoisies and justify their shameful paedophilia .
That is why I am surprised that a report such as Mrs Stihler ' s can coexist , within this Chamber , with militant speeches in favour of decriminalising the use of cannabis or against the death penalty .
We cannot have two weights and two measures when it comes to the health , the stability and the future of our children .
Swedish alcohol policy differs from that of many other EU Member States .
The restrictive sale of alcohol , the ban on alcohol advertising and the high age limits are vital tools for limiting the damage caused by alcohol , both in young people and adults .
We want to retain this system .
Mrs Stihler ' s report on drinking of alcohol by children and adolescents is very detailed and an example of extensive meddling .
We are convinced that European level is not the right level at which to decide on such detailed regulations for issues such as how alcohol may be displayed in shops .
The work on reducing the damage caused by alcohol among children and young people must be adapted to the various regulations on alcohol sales of each Member State .
Therefore , we are voting against this proposal .
While I fully agree with the objectives and the measures proposed in this legislative proposal to restrict the consumption of alcohol by adolescents and young people , I cannot endorse the rapporteur 's proposals that , directly or indirectly , assimilate alcohol , tobacco and drugs , or the proposals that are of a repressive nature .
The fight against alcoholism among minors should be based on education towards healthy living , information , persuasion and the active participation of the producers and retailers of alcoholic products .
The Commission 's original text was more consistent with that objective than some of the amendments that were finally incorporated .
For these reasons , I preferred to abstain .
Sturdy report ( A5-142 / 2001 )
Mr President , we are constantly calling for environmentally-friendly , ecological production methods in multipurpose agriculture .
We already have a long tradition of this in Austria , where the rethinking process started in the minds of farmers and consumers a long time ago , unlike in many other countries of the EU .
We farmers in Austria are at the vanguard here and I am convinced that this approach is also the right approach for European agriculture .
I therefore support the Commission proposal , which could be integrated into a European agricultural model .
That is why I voted against the proposed amendments which seek to exceed the 90-animal limit for premium payments - I refer to Amendments Nos 1 , 10 , 2 and 12 - and I am sorry that they attracted a majority during the vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in amending the common organisation of the market in beef and veal , we have taken an urgently needed step in the right direction , i.e. towards extensifying cattle farming .
Apart from reducing beef production , I am also in favour of safeguarding a minimum wage for small holdings and increasing animal premiums .
However , the European Union still needs to be prepared for any sudden crises in the future .
It is not yet clear if the funding for this regulation from the savings made from reforms under Agenda 2000 will last .
Promoting agriculture with no upper limits and arbitrarily shifting money from the organisation of the market into rural development will upset any budget planning in the long term .
This problem has yet to be resolved .
Mr President , the matter at hand is the measures adopted as a result of the fight against BSE .
Well then , in the middle of a chat , Daisy cow says to Buttercup cow : " Have you heard ?
Isn 't BSE a good thing !
Maybe we will not all have to end our days as beef steaks ! "
" You 're right , " says Buttercup to Daisy , " but I bet that all these actions and studies of the European Union governments will just lead them to say : ' These cows live too long , they receive a pension for too long and we do not have enough money . '
I bet that , when all is said and done , we will end up as steaks after all . "
" I do hope not , " replied the other cow .
I also hope that this will not happen .
I therefore voted for the motion .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted against the Commission ' s proposal concerning the organisation of the market for beef .
We have also voted against Parliament ' s report .
Both proposals are along the wrong lines .
The crisis in the beef sector must be used to reform the organisation of the market , not to introduce still more aid .
We have therefore voted against all amendments aimed at increasing aid .
The proposal is all too short-term .
It does not limit the production of beef .
Instead , the proposal will introduce still more bureaucratic and expensive premium schemes .
Instead , the opportunity should be taken to reform the organisation of the market .
That mainly means reducing prices .
The crisis in the beef sector is not only about structural inequality in the market for beef , but undoubtedly also about a lack of consumer confidence in food safety .
The crisis is therefore a good reason for embarking upon a fundamental reform of agricultural policy .
For a long time the European institutions encouraged , thanks to subsidies , the kind of intensive farming and cattle rearing that suits the interests of the agro-food industry .
Intensive breeding and the massive use of animal and bone meal led to the outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy .
Even after it was clearly established that animal and bone meal was responsible for propagating this disease , the European institutions continued to conceal this evil and to hand out subsidies to promote consumption and marketing .
Faced with the scale of the disaster , the European authorities eventually and belatedly changed their approach .
Under cover of financing measures to make up for the errors of the preceding period , they rushed into a policy of ' purchase for destruction ' , which it is difficult to reconcile with the European budget .
Now , after having encouraged intensive farming , they are trying to ' boost ' extensive rearing and ' organic farming ' .
We abstained on this report , which in effect asks for a full discharge for a chaotic ' agricultural policy ' , in which the only factor that remains constant is the payment of substantial amounts in the form of subsidies that are often only of limited benefit to the small farmers and are of far greater benefit to the beef and veal industry and the capitalist firms that are prospering in the sector of animal feed and meat processing and marketing .
The beef and veal sector was heavily penalised in the last CAP reform because the fall in prices was not fully compensated through direct aid , which only compensates for between 30 % and 50 % of the fall in produce prices .
Furthermore , the BSE crisis , followed by the crisis of foot-and-mouth disease , caused a fall in consumption and a further fall in produce prices .
Portuguese producers are still suffering from the ban on beef and veal exports .
Given this crisis scenario , the Commission presented a plan of 7 proposals designed to redress the imbalances in the sector . Instead of presenting a well thought out and coherent proposal , the Commission presented a proposal that is loosely defined and whose sole aim is to make budgetary savings .
Whilst the Sturdy report shares the Commission ' s reasoning , it nevertheless puts forward some interesting ideas , for example on the slaughter of calves and increasing aid .
Nevertheless , it rejects the Commission ' s proposal for strict compliance with the limit of 90 animals per holding and the future creation of a system of individual premium rights , which are positive proposals that might not only combat the tendency towards more intensive farming , but also support the implementation of a system of aid adjustment .
In any event , if the current system remains in place , we must guarantee that if rights are bypassed , the proportional reduction of the premium will not affect producers owning fewer than 15 animals .
Furthermore , the Commission ' s proposal on reducing stocking density from 2.0 to 1.9 Livestock Units per hectare of forage area would , in Portugal , cause annual penalties totalling ESC 300 million to be imposed - for 9000 premiums - which would mainly affect small and medium-sized family holdings .
On this issue , the rapporteur goes even further than the Commission , recommending the creation of new premiums for greater reductions in stocking density .
For all of these reasons , we did not vote in favour of this report and chose to abstain .
The European Commission is still clearing up after BSE .
Having failed to deal with the root cause of the disease in 1990 , which is what Jacques Delors and his gang refused to do so as not to interrupt the triumphant march , firstly towards the single market and then towards the euro , we have since adopted numerous financial and technical stop-gap measures to ward off the never-ending effects of what has been a disaster in health , trade and financial terms .

This is the case of the new measure for the COM in beef and veal , which is the subject of Mr Sturdy ' s excellent report .
In order to save the market which it brought to the brink of collapse , the Commission is going back to its ideological Malthusianism .
The special premiums for male cattle and suckler cows would once again be limited to 90 animals or 1.8 LU per hectare .
The supply of beef would thus be limited in order to adapt to the drop in demand .
Every Member State will set an individual ceiling for each of its farmers .
Mr Sturdy is proposing a series of amendments to maintain farmers ' income , particularly for farmers involved in extensive farming .
The report recommends , for instance , that the premium for steers be increased , and there are also calls to promote beef and veal by proposing an increase in the current budget of EUR 10 million , which is insufficient .
To cap it all , a ' Special Purchase Scheme ' is proposed for cattle over 30 months old , so that they can be stored and sold off at some point , like the terminally ill who have themselves frozen , in the hope that they can be resuscitated when a cure has been discovered .
When we know that public stocks are increasing by 50 000 tonnes each month , that the Commission had already bought back 175 000 tonnes in April and that the beef sector used appropriations worth EUR 7 billion in 2001 , you can see the scale of the financial disaster that Jacques Delors ' team made inevitable when it turned its back at the first signs of the BSE crisis .
And the new measures proposed by Brussels , which are , moreover , completely ineffective , are seeking to further increase the debt by EUR 1 million .
The matter is still not over .
We voted in favour of Amendments Nos 1 , 10 , 2 and 12 , not so much because we agree with a policy of highly intensive production under the CAP , which must be reviewed for the sake of farmers , consumers , environmental protection and food quality , but because we think that loosely-defined restrictions , in this case on the number of male cattle that can benefit from the beef special premium , imposed in isolation from an overall and coherent reform , make no sense and create unfair situations in comparison to the premiums established for other types of agricultural and animal production , which remain unchanged .
I have voted against the Sturdy proposal .
The reason is that the proposal is based on the continued false principle of patching up and mending a non-transparent agricultural policy in the EU instead of taking a joint and radical hold of the issue .
Problems are moved to new areas or are not addressed at all .
The report is also based on increased economic commitment for the EU and the taxpayers in the area of food production , in this case in order to promote increased sales of beef to consumers .
The Doha summit is approaching and is due to take place in November 2001 .
After the failure of Seattle , Doha must be a success for the WTO , and if this is to happen , the United States is not to be counted on .
Never in history has the hub of an empire conceded its hegemony to its far-flung outposts .
The American superpower is giving up none of its claims , especially now it has the Texan , Mr Bush , in office , the man who perpetrated genocide on the children of Iraq .
Who , apart from Europe then , can give in ?
And this is exactly what is happening .
First of all , we have reformed the CAP in order to cave in to the demands of the US Administration in the Uruguay Round negotiations .
As consensus must be reached at Doha , however , giving in to the United States and the Cairns Group by abandoning our farmers to the productivist and ultraliberal global market is not an adequate approach .
We also need the agreement of the poorest African and Asian countries , which also opposed consensus in Seattle .
This is the whole point of the new Council regulation , which concedes our customs duties on bananas , sugar and rice for the 48 least developed countries .
Between 2006 and 2009 , these three products will become entirely duty free .
In the meantime , customs duties will be reduced by 20 % , 50 % and 80 % by 2009 .
Sudan will , therefore , be able to send us its sugar , free from customs barriers , by virtue of the fact that it is a poor country .
Sudan is nevertheless able to find the resources to bomb its own villages that stand in the way of its oil wells and is also choosing to starve its inhabitants in the south of the country .
The Council regulation , based on the slogan ' everything but arms ' , is therefore , the height of hypocrisy because the additional income that Sudan , for example , will make as a result of the additional exports that we are giving it the opportunity to make , will buy it additional arms with which to fight the Christians in the south of the country .
The real problem , however , is the generosity of the socialists and the Christians , as combined in the person of our Commissioner , Pascal Lamy .
Christian Europe is offering fundamentalist Sudan , which is of symbolic importance , the financial means to increase the martyrdom of its Christians in the south of the country .
This is all the more shocking because the 48 LDCs will act as intermediaries , flooding Europe with bananas , sugar and rice from countries other than those benefiting from a wide range of preferences .
A precedent has already been set with garlic from China , for example , which is appearing in Europe via Malaysia , Jordan and other Trojan horse countries .
If we understand , however , that European integration is itself nothing more than a Trojan horse , in place to establish the ideological and trading empire centred on the United States , with outposts in every corner of the world , then we see that Mr Miranda has produced the report of a loyal servant of that country ' s blueprint for the world .
The beef and veal sector has been doubly hit by disaster .
' Mad cow disease ' was followed by foot-and-mouth disease ; the fall in domestic consumption as a result of much exaggerated consumer fears is now joined by a serious decline in our exports to third countries .

While millions of animals have gone up in smoke , the slaughterhouses are running idle and the stock-farmers are suffering severely , both from the loss of outlets and from the falls in prices and morale in face of this crisis that has turned their world upside down and given rise to unjustified consumer distrust .
Two types of measures can be identified in the ' seven point plan ' presented by the Commission to deal with this crisis .
First , there are the emergency measures to manage the markets and to try and restore the balance between supply and demand .
One example is the proposal to set up a special purchase scheme and not to apply the ceiling for buying into intervention .
We approve of these measures , while recommending avoidance of buying into intervention for storage purposes , which would merely defer the problem to a later date .
It would be better to provide food aid whenever this can be done without destabilising the beneficiary countries ' markets .
Secondly , there are long-term measures to rather radically amend the COM or even to change the nature of the CAP .
These measures are not all bad , but they should not be decided too hastily .
Some of them , however , are quite frankly bad , such as the introduction of a system of individual rights for the special premium for male bovine animals , which would introduce a cumbersome and bureaucratic quota system , or reducing the density factor , which would probably not produce the desired extensification but would certainly reduce the income of farmers , something they certainly do not need .

We endorse most of the amendments tabled by our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which fortunately rectified the Commission ' s regrettable tendency to amalgamate emergency measures to deal with the turmoil in the beef sector with the surreptitious reform of the COM , contrary to the Berlin agreement .
We do not deny the need for reform , but this reform must not be improvised in this way or brought in on the sly .
. ( NL ) We voted against the whole Sturdy report and most amendments to it , including those of the ELDR and the Green group , because they are in favour of an increase in subsidies and promote intensive , animal-unfriendly husbandry .
The collapse of the beef market is not the fault of external causes , but is directly connected with the way in which production and trade are organised in the livestock sector and with the way in which crises such as BSE and foot-and-mouth disease are being combated in the EU , with the support of the sector .
The sector is therefore now experiencing the consequence of what we regard as the normal operation of market forces .
There is no reason for further increasing subsidies .
Mr Sturdy ' s proposal to take the pressure off the market by organising subsidies in such a way that instead of beef more veal is produced - from crated calves , that is - is the height of cynicism .
Langenhagen report ( A5-0129 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I was the only person to vote against the Langenhagen report , which regulates approves the Agreement on fisheries with Greenland .
Why did I vote against the motion , Mr President ?
I voted against the motion because the Pensioners ' Party does not approve of the fact that the States of the European Union go and fish other waters .
We should let every State catch its own fish !
I do not agree with the system whereby we pay in order to receive authorisation to fish the waters of other States .
This is not just because , as is well-known , I uphold the rights of fish and I have a good relationship with fish from all over the world , but , indeed , because I feel that the European Union should change its policy on fishing in the territories and seas of others .
Miranda report ( A5-0128 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , as usual , Mr Poettering had a wry smile on his lips when he came into the Hemicycle .
How , therefore , could we not smile the smile of Riley while we talk of rice , the subject of Mr Miranda 's report ?
It is precisely the treatment of rice in this report that concerns me .
I voted against the report because , while I fully support the opening-up of European markets to underdeveloped countries , I do not feel that this should apply to the rice markets .
In Italy , particularly in the provinces of Novara , Vercelli , Pavia and Milan , rice is the basic source of income of a great many farmers .
I therefore totally oppose the opening-up of the rice markets to all the world markets .
And now , " Bon appétit , " Mr President . I hope there will be a good risotto on the menu .
We are not against the decision aimed at ' giving unrestricted access for all LDC products except arms and munitions to EU markets ' because there is no reason to impose customs duties at the European Union ' s borders on products from the poorest countries .
It is clear , however , that this measure , which is presented as benefiting the poorest countries , will mainly benefit the multinationals established in those countries , which are generally the only companies to produce and sell on the international market .
It is a sign of the hypocrisy and pretence in this field that there are only three products for which implementation of this decision is deferred : bananas , sugar and rice , i.e. the three products for which production and marketing is in the hands of powerful trusts , each fighting the other for control of the international market .
That makes it all the more clear that the implied suggestions that this measure may help the poorest countries to ' develop their technological capability so as to be able to export finished products as well ' , in other words that these countries have a chance to develop , are simply a con .
That is why we abstained .
The report rightly notes that the gap between the 48 poorest countries and the others ' grew even wider ' .
The development of these countries , in which a large section of mankind lives in indescribable conditions , would require a distribution of wealth at international level that is totally incompatible with a world economic system based on inequality , exploitation and the plundering of the poor countries for the profit of the capitalists in the rich countries .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Situation of Turkish prisoners
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation of Turkish prisoners .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council welcomes this opportunity to discuss the situation in Turkish prisons and notes with satisfaction that the European Parliament , like the Council and the Commission , is heavily engaged in this issue .
The visit to Ankara from 30 April to 1 May by members of the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee showed that the European Parliament has an important role to play .
The Council , the Commission and Parliament should continue their joint efforts to stimulate the Turkish government into continued political reform in order to meet the Copenhagen Criteria and take measures to bring the hunger strikes to an end .
The Council deeply regrets the fact that these hunger strikes in various prisons across Turkey continue to lead to the loss of human life .
This is a major human tragedy .
Therefore , the Council has pressed the Turkish authorities to take suitable steps to avoid further deaths .
We have also encouraged Turkey to make changes to the law and take concrete action to follow the recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture .
Discussions with the Turkish government are ongoing , particularly within the framework of our deeper political dialogue .
Meetings took place in Stockholm on 14 March and in Brussels on 26 April .
The coming Association Council with Turkey on 26 June will also cover human rights issues .
In addition to these contacts , a dialogue is underway with the Turkish government through the local representatives of the Presidency and Member State representations in Ankara .
Meetings have been held with the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Justice , with the prison situation high on the agenda .
The Council notes with satisfaction that the Turkish government decided at an early stage to co-operate with the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture , which has visited Turkey three times so far due to the current situation and the hunger strikes .
Changes to legislation have entered into force , or will do so shortly , aimed at reducing the isolation of prisoners .
It is necessary for these reforms to be generously and correctly applied in practice , in accordance with the recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture .
The Council strongly hopes that these measures now being carried out by the Turkish government will bring the hunger strikes to an end .
In this confusing situation , it also feels necessary to appeal to the hunger strikers and their families to react so that no human life is lost .
The Council will continue to monitor the development carefully in dialogue with the Turkish government and voluntary organisations .
In this context , the Council would point out that the Accession Partnership for Turkey , which was adopted by the Council in March , contains prison reforms as a priority area which Turkey needs to address to meet the political Copenhagen Criteria .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes today 's debate on the situation in Turkish prisons .
Parliamentary representatives , the presidency and the Commission have all endeavoured over recent weeks to resolve this serious humanitarian problem .
The forthcoming visit of the prisons by a delegation from the European Parliament will give new impetus to the reform of the criminal justice system in Turkey .
The Commission deeply regrets that 22 people have already died during the hunger strike in Turkey , while many others are suffering terribly .
Their condition is worsening day by day .
Many will be staring death in the face if no way is found of ending this hunger strike .
Quite apart from where the organisers stand politically , the Commission feels that the current situation gives serious cause for concern on humanitarian grounds .
The situation in Turkish prisons was one of the main topics of conversation between me and the Turkish foreign minister in Brussels yesterday morning .
It was clear from what was said that the Turkish government feels that action is needed in order to avoid more deaths .
In this respect , the Commission welcomes the fact that the Turkish parliament has already passed an amendment to Article 16 of the Turkish anti-terrorist law .
The main point of this new regulation is that it allows prisoners to take part in social activities while serving their sentence .
We must call on Turkey today to ensure that the new regulation is implemented as quickly as possible , so that the conditions of detention in the prisons actually improve .
The Turkish foreign minister also informed me that two other bills are being drafted which will guarantee that sentences are properly executed .
One of these two laws makes provision for a new penal monitoring committee made up of representatives from Turkish NGOs .
The second law requires that a judge oversee the execution of sentences .
Both laws have already been adopted by the committee on legal affairs of the Turkish parliament and are due to be debated in the Turkish national assembly very soon .
I should like to stress that the Commission attaches great importance to further judicial and penal reform .
The Commission supports the recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture , as we set out quite clearly in the accession partnership .
The situation in Turkish prisons was a cause of concern to the Commission even before the unrest broke out and the hunger strike began .
The Commission repeats the call it made to the Turkish government on 21 March 2001 , i.e. that it take all appropriate measures to prevent further deaths .
Suitable medical care must also be provided .
The Turkish government and Parliament should continue to work together to speed up the reform of the criminal justice system in Turkey .
We expect human rights to be respected everywhere in any country wanting to become a member of the European Union , including in its prisons .
The Commission also urges the organisers of the hunger strike to distance themselves immediately from any action or demands which might lead to further loss of life .
Those who have taken it upon themselves to represent the interests of detainees should prove first and foremost that they no longer intend to risk the lives or welfare of the detainees .
In every situation , care must be taken to avoid endangering human life or health for reasons of political expediency .
The Commission is certain that further loss of life can be prevented and that the conditions of detention in Turkish prisons can be improved if everyone involved , including the organisers of the hunger strike , acts with restraint and a sense of responsibility .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , I want to thank the Council and the Commission for agreeing to update us on this delicate and painful issue of the Turkish prisons .

The situation is highly critical and , as the President of the Council pointed out , it has already cost 22 lives and may cost many more .
At the same time our Parliament does not want to intervene too hastily .
Several initiatives , from different sides , have been taken with a view to resolving the situation : by the President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , the Presidency of the Council and the European Commission , as Mr Verheugen pointed out , and , on a personal basis , by the chairman of our parliamentary delegation that visited Ankara and met all the actors involved in this singular conflict .
Our objective is to support these initiatives ; we do not want to interfere to no purpose but to demonstrate the European Parliament 's enduring interest and vigilance in relation to human rights and everything that concerns our Turkish partner .
Turkey has been going through difficult times since the beginning of this year .
The very serious financial crisis put paid to some extent to the economic recovery plan that was already under way .
The European Union is supporting and underpinning the IMF action to promote the implementation of the vigorous measures that Minister Kemal Derviº resolutely adopted .
At the end of the summer we will have an opportunity to look at the results of this policy and to evaluate the national programme to adapt the Community acquis , which the Ankara government recently adopted .
Over the same period of time , however , the Turkish prisons have been the scene of riots that were suppressed by particularly bloody means , followed by hunger strikes that turned into death fasts .
We are aware that this creates an extremely difficult situation for the Turkish authorities .
The leaders of the movement belong to fanatical extremist organisations that do not hesitate to play with the lives of their militants , or even their families , for political propaganda purposes .
Oddly enough , this movement sprang up when the prisoners concerned were about to be moved from the overcrowded prisons into which they were crammed under shameful conditions into modern prisons that complied with the Council of Europe 's recommendations .
During the 1970s and 1980s , similar events occurred in our own democracies , although on a lesser scale .
While we do not underestimate the difficulties we do , therefore , emphasise the importance of rapidly finding a solution to the humanitarian aspect of the crisis , to bring an end to the daily deaths , without giving in to what is plainly an unacceptable form of political blackmail .
A delegation from our Parliament will be visiting the Turkish prisons in early June to try to evaluate the situation on the ground objectively and make recommendations on a longer-term prison policy .
It is very much to be hoped that this humanitarian problem can be settled in the meantime .
As Mr Verheugen said , this could be helped by speeding up the modernisation of the Turkish penal code and penitentiary code as also by adopting measures to calm down the situation in the new prisons .
At the same time , I am convinced that these would be regarded as a significant expression of Turkey ' s resolve to move closer to the European model .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as the Commissioner and President-in-Office have pointed out , we are dealing here not with a country which is far flung from Europe , but with a candidate country with a whole host of serious problems .
It has economic problems which people are trying to resolve - and good luck to them - and we in the European Union shall support the reforms .
To all intents and purposes , Turkey is still both unwilling and unable to reform the political system - as the president of the republic and the military have both pointed out .
Hardly any progress whatsoever has been made on the so-called Kurdish question , i.e. the question of minorities , and the situation in the prisons is horrendous .
You would think that a government with so many problems would at least try to resolve the most pressing and urgent problems .
I recently made a short visit to Turkey with Mr Cohn-Bendit .
I personally was only there very briefly , but it was time enough to see that this is a dialogue between two people who are either hard of hearing or stone deaf ; I refer to the organisers of the hunger strike on the one hand , who should end or at least suspend the hunger strike , and the Turkish government on the other .
If the European Parliament delegation just announced is to make any sense or have any chance of success , then both sides need to be willing to find a compromise or , at the very least , to stop what they are doing .
We all know that reform is needed in the Turkish prisons .
But the various proposals made - and this is a mild criticism of the work of the Council of Europe and its anti-torture committee - must not lose sight of the underlying problem .
Turkey is a country which , because of its laws , still generates a lot of political prisoners ; that is the problem .
There are not so many political prisoners because there are so many assassination attempts , there are so many political prisoners because the laws in Turkey make political prisoners out of so many people - and that should be the starting point .
Secondly , even where people become prisoners or political prisoners as the result of terrorist activities - which I do not condone but which I cannot deny - solitary confinement must be abolished or at least reduced to what is humanly bearable .
The Commissioner announced a series of measures which Turkey intends to implement .
I spoke with the Turkish justice minister in January and these issues were already being discussed .
But the point with the monitoring system , with Article 16 and with the system of a judge to oversee how sentences are executed in Turkey is , how is all this going to be implemented ?
The same law can be applied in a humane manner , with due respect for human rights , or it can be applied in a way which tends towards isolation and solitary confinement .
I call on Turkey to give us , the European Parliament , and Europe a chance to help it overcome this problem , but Turkey must also show willing .
Those of us who have studied the matter closely are certainly able to welcome the real progress that is nevertheless being made by Turkey to reform its prison system .
We also share something of the suffering of the political prisoners and their families who have chosen to starve themselves to death .
The Turkish judicial and penal system is in transition from a regime of retribution and oppression to a more western approach , where prisoners are penalised but not persecuted .
The European Union should assist this reform process by supporting financially and also technically certainly carefully selected confidence-building measures , without which the fasting will not cease .
These measures include training of judicial officials , prison officers and gendarmes , ensuring first-class medical services , improving conditions for prison visits and installing the independent scrutiny of the prison system and protecting lawyers .
Solitary confinement must be the exception and not the norm .
Prison rules must be applied scrupulously and the arbitrary treatment of all prisoners must stop .
Mr President , allow me to start by making a basic observation .
Prison reforms are the hardest reforms of all to implement , not just in countries like Turkey , but in our own countries as well .
We all know that .
Prisons are always the Achilles heel , the weak point of a democracy .
Even in the highly developed democracies of the European Union , the situation in the prisons is far from rosy , let alone democratic .
Applied to Turkey , this means that the situation in the prisons in a country which , culturally speaking , still has to find its democratic feet , is a mirror image of this contradiction in terms .
That is why I think it is very important to establish one thing : I do not know if it was the Council or the Commission which said that it called on Turkey to be generous in its application of the law .
I think that , legally , this is the wrong approach .
The law is one thing and generosity is another .
To my mind , what is contradictory about reform in Turkey is that , basically , it leaves reform up to the prison administration , which then has the opportunity to apply it as it sees fit .
With the situation as it is , this does nothing to inspire confidence in prisoners with painful experiences of the prison administration and the prison guards .
That is the problem .
How to create trust ?
Which his why I think - and we established this on our trip - that we need to find a solution quickly because the prisoners have changed their standpoint .
They are not making so many incredibly complicated demands .
Isolation cells to be opened at once , new arrangements to be made for visits by relatives and lawyers at once , medical attention from doctors of their choice , these are more or less their immediate demands in order to call off the hunger strike .
That is why we call on Turkey , first , to be generous in implementing what is yet to come and to start by opening cells and doors so that the hunger strike can end .
Secondly , to instigate a dialogue with the prisoners so as to clarify exactly what they want .
It is important to recognise that .
Thirdly - and essentially in my view - Turkey must make it clear that it is ready in the dialogue to acknowledge these people as people .
On the other hand , we say to the organisations organising this strike that the decision to end the strike must be taken by the prisoners , not by some party leader or other .
That is our demand because it is these people who are risking their lives , not the leaders in Brussels , who still have plenty to eat and drink .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the hunger strike by Turkish prisoners and their relatives has been going on for months and has cost many people their lives .
The European Union must stop standing by in silence as more and more people die .
The European Parliament must take a decisive stand if it is to be taken seriously as a negotiating partner .
We must not be indifferent to the massive violations of human rights in Turkish prisons .
We must not forget human values .
The European Union must insist that human rights are respected .
The Turkish parliament recently passed a law relaxing conditions of solitary confinement .
Now prisoners sentenced under the anti-terrorist law are to be allowed to take part in cultural and sporting activities .
My criticism of this law is that it does not allow all prisoners to take part in group activities .
All prisoners must be treated equally .
I cannot stand by while prisoners are tortured and maltreated in solitary confinement and exposed to the arbitrary treatment of the guards without witnesses .
People in solitary confinement are totally cut off from the outside world .
And yet everyone needs human contact and interaction .
We urgently need to find a way of preventing further deaths .
On behalf of the GUE / NGL group , I therefore call on the Turkish government and the prisoners ' organisations to reach an agreement through political dialogue .
Dialogue will allow a social consensus to be reached , while force will only be answered with force .
My group cannot regulate Turkey 's internal affairs .
But we would all like to help put an end to this situation .
If Turkey wants to be accepted in the European Union , it must stand up for democratic , humane values in the penal system .
Human rights must apply to everyone , including prisoners .
My wish is for agreement , for internal peace and for an end to hatred which opens up deep wounds .
That is why we must speak out .
Mr President , in my group " Europe " , in quotation marks , quite often stands for a meddlesome attitude .
However , that does not apply to the item on the agenda on the situation of Turkish prisoners .
Quite rightly the Council , the Commission and Parliament are jointly examining the issue , since the Republic of Turkey after all enjoys the status of a candidate country .
In order to actually join , such a candidate must meet the Copenhagen criteria .
An important European demand in this connection is that there should be a constitutional state .
In view of the continuing serious accusations about the Turkish prison system , this thorny national problem therefore demands European attention .
The recent introduction of the new F type prison in Turkey forms an extra complication .
It led to a veritable deluge of complaints and even mass hunger strikes .
On the basis of my Christian belief I certainly reject the final political weapon of voluntary death by starvation .
This view of life , however , also requires a humane treatment of prisoners within a constitutional framework .
The above considerations lead me to agree wholeheartedly with the institution of an ad hoc delegation of Parliament on the Turkish prison system .
As a member of this delegation , I trust we shall receive the full cooperation of the Turkish authorities on our visit at the beginning of June , in the hope that the European Parliament by applying the principle of hearing both sides of the argument can contribute to ending the tragedy of the hunger strikers .
Mr President , my contribution to the debate concerns the Christian groups in Turkey which are punished disproportionately severely and are detained in Turkish jails precisely because of their ethnic origin and their faith .
There they experience many difficulties .
They are badly treated , not only by the management of the prisons , but also by their fellow-prisoners and are scarcely given any protection .
Turkey has some 62 million inhabitants , 99 % of whom are Muslims and less than half a per cent Christian .
The largest group of Christians are citizens belonging to the Armenian Orthodox Church , the Syrian Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church .
Then in Western Turkey there are the Greek Orthodox Christians . And although the Turkish constitution respects freedom of religion , courses run by the Armenian and Greek Orthodox churches have been closed on a massive scale , as have the courses of the Syrian Orthodox Church .
The Armenian Christian community particularly is constantly subject to new attacks .
Not so long ago , a Christian bookshop in Eastern Turkey was besieged by armed soldiers , as a result of which one person was killed and 26 wounded .
The only crime was the selling of Bibles .
According to the spokesman of the Armenian patriarch in the last few years 40 plots of land belonging to the Christian Armenian church have been confiscated by the Turkish state .
Anyone protesting is imprisoned and as a non-Muslim treated badly in the prisons .
The Syrian Orthodox Church is treated even more harshly and as a result of the intimidation more than 100 000 Syrian Orthodox citizens have left Southern Turkey , some of them to Western Europe .
In the province for which I am politically responsible , there are 9 000 Syrian Orthodox Christians and they have lost over 800 villages in Southern Turkey .
Those people who have stayed are intimidated , imprisoned and badly treated .
I am not an opponent of Turkey ' s accession into the European Union , but I must say that if this mistreatment of Christians in Turkey continues , I may yet come out against Turkey ' s membership .
Mr President , may I start by thanking the Council and Commission for their information because I assume that they are doing a great deal , even though the newspapers have very little to say on the subject .
Today I spoke on the telephone with a journalist from a Bavarian newspaper in Istanbul .
Unfortunately , she told me that not only was the Turkish government ignoring some of the deaths in the Turkish prisons , but that Turkish society was barely interested either .
In these circumstances it is , of course , very difficult to make people in Turkey understand why we debate these problems here in the European Parliament .
But the Turkish public needs to know that it is unacceptable in a state under the rule of law for people to die in its prisons without anyone doing anything .
Therefore , because we take Turkey seriously , because we want Turkey to have a chance in the future in the European Union , we also want Turkey to behave as we would expect our own Member States to behave .
Having said which , it is really very , very sad and disturbing to note that ...
( Demonstrators forced their way into the Chamber chanting loudly ; protests from numerous members )
Mr Ceyhun , it is fair to say you do not usually create so much excitement with your speeches .
Mr President , I shall not take advantage of the situation by taking up more time .
I assume that I have about half a minute left and shall wrap my speech up straight away .
Naturally , I regret this incident .
I have no problem with any sort of demonstration , but people could at least show some respect for Parliament 's work , rather than obstruct it , just when we are trying to end the situation as peacefully as possible and stop people from dying .
I shall say no more .
As far as the problem itself is concerned , this incident just goes to show how difficult things are .
I can only appeal on Turkey , as my fellow member Daniel Cohn-Bendit has already done .
It would be possible to induce certain people to stop what they are doing if Turkey showed willing on the three points listed by Daniel Cohn-Bendit .
I hope that Turkey will , at last , take these efforts seriously and show a little willing and stop being so stubborn , because otherwise no-one in Europe is prepared to tolerate Turkey 's behaviour .
And it is Turkey 's reputation that stands to suffer most .
Mr President , could you please find out how these three people even got in here ?
We have such a strict security system , that we have trouble gaining admittance for our own citizens who come here with good intentions .
These people could not have got in without being let in .
The fact that the Communists stood up when they came in shows where they came from .
Please look into this very carefully and check who signed the slip .
Well , the Members remained admirably calm when the demonstration was taking place .
Let us not have a row now .
We do not know how they got in but it will be fully investigated .
The President will , of course , be informed and an investigation will be held .
As luck would have it there was a discussion at the Bureau meeting on Monday on tightening security .
Unfortunately no action has yet been taken .
Mr President , with all due respect , I cannot subscribe to your view .
It is not the political aspect which bothers me .
I should like to point out that when my press officer wanted to step into the Chamber , he was stopped straight away .
And rightly so .
But I fail to understand how three or four people who have absolutely nothing to do with this Parliament can simply walk in .
Secondly : when foreign minister Cem was with us in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we had a similar incident which only just stopped short of an actual attack on the minister .
Irrespective of the country involved , it is no laughing matter for Parliament when the security bureaucracy in this House - and I use the word bureaucracy advisedly - stops members at every turn but is unable to prevent this sort of incident when Turkey is the subject of debate , when you would expect them to , given that there has already been one such incident .
It is a scandal .
This needs to be taken more seriously , not the political aspects but what can be done here .
Next time it will a president who is interrupted or attacked while making a speech .
I should like to know what that will do for the European Parliament 's reputation .
You must have misunderstood me , Mr Swoboda .
Of course , I take the incident extremely seriously .
I just do not think there is any point in getting excited in the Chamber .
The matter will be reported to the President , and the appropriate authorities will be asked to take action .
As I said , we had a discussion about our security system in the Bureau on Monday and the Secretary-General is currently preparing a report on how it might be .
There is , however , one problem .
I happen to be a member of the Committee on Budgets but if I may use this platform for propaganda , the Budgets Committee is blocking the release of resources for the security services .
We have about 15 posts blocked . So , if you want to know why we are short on security staff , ask the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Members who have taken part in the debate for a useful discussion .
I think it shows great , constructive involvement in the situation in Turkey .
I believe that the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission must continue their joint efforts .
Our central message to the Turkish government must be extremely clear on this point : immediate measures are required to avoid more casualties .
In this context , I would like to take this opportunity to give the visit to Turkey by Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Swoboda at the end of April / beginning of May the recognition it deserves .
I believe it is exactly this type of initiative which is needed to focus attention on the acute nature of the current situation , to clearly and objectively report to the people of Europe what is happening .
On behalf of the Council , I would like to thank you for this work .
I also agree with what Mr Swoboda said about the importance of looking at the political system which produces a prison system of the kind found in Turkey .
Of course we have to tackle the practical issues and examine the harsh prison conditions , but we also have to look at the bigger picture : the political system and the economic situation .
This is why I , as President-in-Office of the Council , have become involved in supporting the IMF and World Bank ' s work to help the Turkish government achieve economic recovery , as we believe that this could also create the basis for advances such as better conditions in Turkish prisons .
I therefore look forward to continued close dialogue with Parliament .
The Council will continue to present itself very clearly to the Turkish government .
The Swedish Presidency , and no doubt the next countries to hold the presidency , will be very clear in their dealings locally with the Turkish government .
Hopefully , we will soon achieve concrete results in what is an important issue for us , namely the unacceptable situation in Turkish prisons .
The debate is closed .
Situation in FYROM
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of February Albanian extremists took control of the village of Tanusevci on the border between Kosovo and the Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) , which caused violent clashes between extremists and FYROM ' s army and police force .
In the middle of March , unrest spread to the town of Tetovo in western FYROM when uniformed men took the villages to the north of the town and then fired on the town at random .
The FYROM army launched a counter-offensive against the occupied villages which ended on 1 April .
However , later that month , the extremists renewed fighting in villages north-west of the town of Kumanovo , and the fighting is still continuing .
There is clearly a risk of out and out civil war , and the European Union has worked hard to prevent such a development .
The European Union reacted almost immediately to the fighting around Tanusevci and Tetovo by issuing declarations condemning the violence and urging all the parties involved to cease the violence immediately .
Intensive diplomatic activity commenced in Skopje to support the FYROM government , the country ' s sovereignty and its territorial integrity .
At local level , the EU Presidency set up close contacts with the key players .
The FYROM government was urged to act with restraint against the extremists , and the leaders of the major Albanian parties were urged to openly distance themselves from and isolate the extremists , while the Slavic-Macedonian opposition parties were urged not to exploit the situation to whip up nationalistic feelings against the Albanian minority .
From the outset , efforts were also made , through the country ' s media , to get over to the general public the EU ' s message of distancing themselves from the extremists .
Then , intensive shuttle diplomacy was also started .
Foreign Minister Kerim was invited to discussions with the EU ' s President-in-Office and High Representative Solana in conjunction with the General Affairs Council of 19 March .
The following day , an EU Troika of political directors travelled with Dr Solana to Skopje , and at the end of the same week the EU Troika of foreign ministers travelled with Dr Solana to Skopje and Pristina to emphasise their support for the government and their condemnation of the extremists ' actions .
One result of the visits was that the Troika got the Albanian leaders in FYROM and Kosovo to sign declarations publicly distancing themselves from the violent methods of the extremists and instead urging them to put forward their demands in political forums and in accordance with democratic procedures .
As a further sign of the EU ' s support for FYROM ' s political leaders , President Trajkovski was invited to the European Council in Stockholm on 23 March .
Here , he had the opportunity to present his views on the vulnerable position of the country to the entire European Council .
In order to underpin the political support financially , a review was carried out of the EU ' s aid to FYROM for this year .
Intensive work was done by both the Commission and the EU Member States to , for example , make up the financial deficit for the new university in Tetovo , offering teaching in Albanian , and to try to rapidly implement measures to rebuild houses destroyed in the villages north of Tetovo and support other projects to strengthen inter-ethnic cohesion in the country .
As everyone is no doubt aware , on 9 April , following almost a year of negotiations , FYROM was the first country in the western Balkans to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU .
The agreement is a key step in FYROM ' s rapprochement with the EU , and the signing was also an important symbol of the EU ' s support for the country .
Like other countries in the western Balkans , FYROM is currently seen as a potential candidate for EU membership .
However , the unrest in FYROM has made it clear that there is a real need to improve the position and rights of the Albanians and other minorities in the country .
In conjunction with the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , the FYROM government launched an action plan for reforms to speed up the comprehensive adaptation required by the agreement , but also to intensify the inter-ethnic dialogue and strengthen the position of minorities .
Unfortunately , we have to say that the practical reforms have made slow progress .
So far , all that has been achieved is avoiding a declaration of a state of war , postponing the public census until October and setting a date of 27 January 2002 for new parliamentary elections .
However , the main success is that , after intensive negotiations and pressure from the international community , a broad coalition government has been set up which will function as the political basis for the difficult but necessary decisions which have to be taken in the near future .
The Council believes that there are measures which the government should and could implement immediately .
These include starting a third TV channel for minority languages , introducing the long-overdue act on strengthening local self-determination and ratifying the European Charter on Regional and Minority Languages .
In the medium term , and ahead of next year ' s election , the government must also make the necessary constitutional changes to even out the differences between the position of the Slavic-Macedonian population and that of other minorities in the country , and also take the action necessary to strengthen the representation of the minorities within the administration .
Today , the Troika of EU foreign ministers is returning to Skopje to promote this message .
Foreign Minister Mrs Lindh travelled straight from this House to Skopje .
At this meeting , the new coalition government will be invited to report on its progress and ongoing action plans in conjunction with the General Affairs Council of 25 - 26 June .
In other words , FYROM is facing a difficult but necessary process of reform , and time is running out if a new civil war is to be avoided .
It is important to point out that the main responsibility lies with FYROM ' s leaders .
The EU has an important supporting role to play , and the Council , along with High Representative Solana and , especially , the Presidency at central and local level , intends to continue its support for this process .
We also believe that there is a vital role for Parliament and its party groups .
In the period up to the end of June , the coalition government will need support and encouragement , as well as the exercise of pressure , to be able to implement the necessary reforms and , at the same time , keep the fragile government coalition intact .
The Council believes that it would be invaluable if Parliament ' s party groups could contact their partners in FYROM and support them in this process , if this is not already happening .
It is still possible to avoid all-out civil war in FYROM .
We must ensure that we make the most of this chance .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the efforts of the Macedonian leadership , which culminated in the formation of a larger coalition government on Sunday , and hopes that this new government will achieve tangible results in the dialogue between the parties .
As you know , this dialogue started a few weeks ago in cooperation with the European Union .
We shall also continue to support the new government in promoting tolerance and restraint and applying the principle of " dialogue not force " in order to settle differences of opinion .
My colleague Chris Patten and the presidency will transmit this message to the new government and the president of the country when the troika of ministers of the European Union visits Skopje today .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and Macedonia was signed in Luxembourg on 9 April .
This was a very important and , without doubt , an historic step towards stability in the Balkans as a whole .
Macedonia is the first country in the region to sign such an agreement .
The second agreement with Croatia was initialled in Brussels last month .
The agreement is symbolic of the close relations between the Union and Macedonia and will provide a basis for fast rapprochement with the European Union .
The most important aspects of the agreement are the creation of free trade zone between the Community and Macedonia within ten years of the date on which the agreement enters into force , the start of political dialogue , provisions on regional cooperation , an undertaking by the Macedonian authorities to harmonise their laws with EC law , especially provisions relating to the internal market , and cooperation on justice and home affairs .
The agreement makes it quite clear that Macedonia has European prospects .
These prospects now need to be given tangible form .
The agreement does not therefore represent the end of a process , it represents the beginning of a difficult process for this country .
It is now up to Macedonia to prove to the European Union that it has the will to fulfil the underlying criteria and , most importantly , this country must now show that it is in a position to resolve conflicts between ethnic groups through political dialogue rather than by force .
The EU shall continue to give its unrestricted support .
The Commission condemns the renewed acts of terrorism in northern Macedonia and urges all the members of the Albanian minority to leave it to the two official Albanian parties to explain the demands of this ethnic minority within a democratic forum , either with the new government or with the special committee chaired by President Trajkovski .
The European Union is already doing its best to facilitate this dialogue .
As the members of the European Parliament know , we are in an extremely critical phase in the history of Macedonia .
The European Union shall continue to express its solidarity with this country and its confidence in its people .
As far as we are concerned , the major objective of stabilising the Balkans cannot be achieved unless the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of Macedonia are guaranteed .
However , the basic effort needs to be made by the people themselves and their political leaders .
They themselves are responsible for the future of their country .
In all events , we shall promote continuing dialogue leading to tangible results .
We are positive that a peaceful and democratic process which attends to the legitimate concerns of the minorities is the only way to set Macedonia on course for Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group welcomes active support for the peace process in Macedonia .
For the very first time over recent months we have seen the Council and Commission starting to act in concert in the case of the former Yugoslavia ; everyone has the same take on the situation and we have joint action as a result .
We just have to bear in mind that we cannot turn our back on this country once the fighting abates and the shooting stops .
On the contrary , we must monitor the situation continuously and closely , by which I mean on the ground .
The European Parliament has acted consistently since 1993 .
We have constantly discussed all the problems with our Macedonian counterparts and the Macedonian government .
We have called on them time and again not to underestimate the simmering ethnic conflict and to do everything to prevent such conflict from breaking out .
For years little was done and that is a pity .
If the truth be told , this problem was criminally neglected for years .
But now this last government has got down to business over the last two and a half years and has done much to help the Albanian people and get things moving .
And then , just when we have important ministers of Albanian origin with important portfolios , just when a real solution has been found to the question of Albanian education and the problem of Tetovo University , at that precise moment , hostilities break out .
And we simply have to concede that they have been imported from outside .
I am surprised that none of the previous speakers , from either the Council or the Commission , reminded us that these hostilities were imported from outside .
That is why we now need to look at the situation outside the country .
Elections were held in Kosovo last year .
If elections had been held in Kosovo this spring , we would probably have been able to prevent this unrest in the neighbouring country .
But we have no proof of that .
Now we have a situation in which Mr Hekkerup , without talking to us here in Parliament - I do not know if he has spoken to the Commission , but he has certainly never spoken to us ; we pay for the administration of UNMIK , we are the main payers , but no-one asks us what should be done down there - is designing a constitution which neither the Serbs nor the Albanians support 100 % .
It may well be a very good constitution .
But if a constitution is announced in May and a vote is held on it in November , that gives seven months for the extremists to again find plenty of cause for unrest .
It is just not on .
You have to learn from your mistakes .
Perhaps they should have asked their counterparts in the European Parliament .
We could have told them .
So I think that mistakes were made .
We must just hope that the elections can still be brought forward .
Now back to Macedonia .
The visitors in the gallery will have noticed that it says " Situation ARYM " up there .
In English it would be " Situation FYROM " .
This is none other than the country of Macedonia , whose neighbours are refusing it its name .
It is the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
FYROM and ARYM are in fact temporary aids and should soon be consigned to the dustbin of history .
We welcome the formation of the all-party coalition and hope that it will succeed in moving towards ethnic cohabitation .
We hope that none of the parties will pursue separatist or nationalistic agendas .
So I think we are on the right course here .
I take up the Council 's suggestion .
We shall try to take a delegation to Skopje before the summer .
Mr President , as the President-in-Office and the Commissioner said , we are still in a very difficult , delicate situation when it comes to Macedonia / FYROM .
I still cannot see that there is the will to find a compromise and for understanding on both sides .
But we must be clear on one thing : the KLA should not dictate events , developments and the pace of solutions in Macedonia .
Nothing would please the KLA more than to parade the Albanian parties and dictate their demands and nothing would please the KLA more than overreaction on the part of the Slav-Macedonian parties .
With all due respect for what Mrs Pack said - and I nearly always agree with her - I do not see the connection with Kosovo in the same light .
Because the badly needed elections in Kosovo are elections for democracy , not for terrorist organisations like the KLA .
So what is to be done ?
First there are thoughts of changing the constitution and there is much to be said in favour of that .
It is just that I think it should be determined with as few ethnic considerations as possible and geared to the rights of each and everyone under the rule of law .
Secondly , the Albanian minority definitely needs more judges , more policemen and more officials in the administration .
Here again the primary concern must be qualification , with the ethnic principle coming second .
Thirdly , more certainly needs to be done in the area of education and training .
In the medium to long term , we must assume that Tetovo University which , most importantly , has been substantially funded by the international community - with almost nothing from the Albanian diaspora , it must be said - will , at long last , become a public university .
I think this is the right step to take .
I should like to address one more fundamental point : both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner mentioned the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
In fact , just such an agreement has also been initialled with Croatia .
However , we must think one step ahead .
I think that the region as a whole needs to be able to feel at home in Europe .
Perhaps we should consider whether , as a matter of principle , we could check every two years after a Stabilisation and Association Agreement has been signed , if the country is willing and able to acquire candidate status for the European Union .
Because when I look at Bulgaria and Romania on the one side and at Turkey on the other , there is a certain restrained - one might almost say unfair treatment of the Balkans .
What was done in Zagreb was a good thing .
But I think we should go one stage further and say to the region loud and clear : if you are willing to resolve all your economic , social and political problems , then you have a real chance of obtaining candidate status for the European Union .
We in the European Union are prepared to check this with the countries with which we have already concluded agreements at regular intervals .
Only the road to Europe , the vision , the realistic vision of belonging to Europe can bring about stability in this region .
Not in the short term , but in the medium and long term . And this vision , this Utopia must be very a specific vision .
Mr President , I support what Mr Swoboda said about Macedonia and at the same time , wish to contradict him slightly .
I think that we must definitely view Macedonia as a potential member of the European Union .
But we cannot of course say that it is in fact already a candidate , for the simple reason that the Copenhagen criteria are just not being met in Macedonia .
Therefore those political criteria must be fulfilled .
For that reason , I think - and I should like to make a minor correction to what Mr Swoboda says - we should offer the prospect of possible membership , but only if , for example , that dreadful concept of a state-constituting nation disappears from the constitution and statutes of Macedonia .
It is a huge obstacle , often in other countries too , to reaching a reasonable ethnic understanding between citizens .
Surely we must be able to make Macedonia into an ordinary secular state and there are enough indications that the president of the country with his American experience understands that .
Secondly , we as the European Union can do something ourselves .
I remember very well from a previous period that a departing Danish Foreign Minister , Uffe Elleman-Jensen , surprised the House by exclaiming that the whole Council was sick of Greece ' s behaviour towards Macedonia .
That caused a row .
But I believe it was an extremely salutary expression of feeling , particularly since the Council could after all exert some pressure on Greece as a fellow-member and say : conclude those negotiations , ensure that there is a reasonable solution , do not persist with measures that are in fact humiliating for Macedonia .
We can also ensure from outside that destabilising effects which were in fact at issue in those negotiations , are removed .
Mr President , I would urge the Council to look into its own heart and say to its own members : friends , what can we do ?
Stop going on endlessly about that name , that flag , etc .
We can also ask the Macedonians to achieve a European approach to their own constitutional structure .
Otherwise it will be impossible for them to become normal members of the European Union in the future .
Mr President , I do not wish to hold up the debate , but Mr Oostlander must have misunderstood me .
I do not assume that Macedonia can now be seen as a candidate .
It should merely be given a chance to attain this status through regular monitoring .
The Representative of the Council is quite right to say that we may well face a civil war or perhaps a more widespread Balkan war unless developments are contained .
As regards the name and Greece 's responsibility , which Mr Oostlander touched on , the only thing I have to say , yet again , is that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia only exists thanks to continuous material and moral support from Greece .
Leaving aside the name , without this support , you can be sure that Milosevic 's Yugoslavia would have broken it up long ago .
As far as the present situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is concerned , we have a clash of two political philosophies : the political philosophy expounded by the Representative of the Council , whereby two different nations live within the same borders , cooperate and live in friendship , and the philosophy which says that the rights of the Albanian nation can only be secured by armed struggle and bloodshed .
May I say to the Council representative that this is a philosophy - and I know because I come from these parts and I have lived through a civil war - which is deep rooted in the psyche of a nation which still has various atavistic responses .
If we want to avoid civil war , someone has to gainsay this philosophy of armed struggle , but not , of course , the government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , because if it undertakes to disarm the KLA , there will definitely be civil war .
It is our duty to disarm the KLA , it is our duty to prohibit the KLA from using the security zone , it is our duty to tell the leadership in Kosovo not to incite the KLA to do these things , especially as we hold their purse strings - by the way , you could say the same to Turkey , that we shall stop all payments until they do something about the disgraceful state of their prisons - and , finally , we must use policing measures to prevent money from being collected in western Europe and sent to the KLA .
Unless we do these things , the whole civilised approach argued by the Council representative - which of course we want - will be a waste of time .
It is not just the responsibility of the Macedonians .
Unless we do these things , we too shall be responsible for what happens .
Thank you very much , Mr Katiforis .
The debate is closed .
Statute and financing of European political parties
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0167 / 2001 ) by Mrs Schleicher , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the statute and financing of European political parties [ COM ( 2000 ) 898 - C5-0081 / 2001 - 2001 / 0011 ( CNS ) ] .
We will adjourn the sitting for five minutes as neither the rapporteur nor the speakers who need to take the floor on this item are present .
( The sitting was adjourned for five minutes )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to raise an issue that has come up before , pursuant to Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure . In other words , I wish to question the admissibility for debate and voting of the report and regulation which we were about to debate .
I wish to contest their admissibility on a purely legal basis .
I should simply like to quote from another report by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which is currently under consideration , which will reach the plenary at the end of the month , and which , and I quote from the text in English , " welcomes the fact that the Treaty incorporates a legal basis that will enable a statute for European political parties and rules governing their funding to be adopted under the codecision procedure " .
In other words , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs itself is aware that only after the Treaty of Nice , at the earliest , could there be a legal basis that would cover this matter .
This , however , is not enough and is even questionable from a legal point of view .
The Treaties make no mention of European political parties .
The Treaties talk about political parties at European level and consider all political parties acting at European level to be of equal standing .
This is clearly what Article 191 of the Treaties says , before Nice and following Nice , and this is also stated in Declaration 11 annexed to the Treaty .
Now , establishing a legal framework , as well as funding , for a tiny category of parties , the so-called " European political parties " and others which fall within its definition , would lead to discrimination , which is unacceptable in the light of fundamental rights and in the light of the Treaties .
This discrimination would not only affect certain political parties , but also , in particular , the European public , since it is the voters , in accordance with electoral law and procedures , who determine the power and the representativeness of the parties .
I therefore call on the House to declare this report and this regulation inadmissible .
Thank you , Mr Ribeiro e Castro .
Pursuant to Rule 141 of the Rules of Procedure , one speaker may speak for Mr Ribeiro e Castro ' s motion and one against . The rapporteur may have the floor too .
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of Mr Ribeiro e Castro ' s motion ?
Mr Dupuis has the floor .
Mr President , I fully agree with the motion tabled by Mr Ribeiro e Castro .
I think that Parliament has already , on several occasions , put itself in difficult and ridiculous situations in terms of respect for the law .
I think that this motion is extremely timely and I ask all Members to allow Parliament to take another look at this matter , to go into it in greater depth and , therefore , to vote in favour of this motion .
Mr President , the motion before us will sink our work without trace .
Thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Schleicher , we had a full debate in committee and now we want to report on it to the European Parliament .
My group is holding a special meeting right now but I feel this debate is so important that I wished to attend in person .
We need this debate now so that the Swedish Presidency can bring this matter to a close .
Because if we do not debate it now , this party statute , this regulation will not come to fruition under the Swedish Presidency .
That is why I ask all the honourable Members to show willing and debate this today so that we can vote on it accordingly tomorrow , when the time comes .
So I am most decidedly against this motion .
I am also sorry to have to say as much to my friend and colleague Mr Dupuis .
May I ask you in a spirit of friendship , Mr Dupuis , perhaps to reconsider .
Mr President , we debated this matter in committee .
It has been discussed .
The legal basis is such that we can take the article which the Commission used as a basis .
Whether we want to or not is a political decision .
The committee decided by a large majority that it would take this article as a basis .
Mr President , I would like to request that we check we have a quorum before proceeding to the vote .
We have been asked to check that we have a quorum .
This request by Mr Barón requires the support of thirty-two Members .
Ladies and gentlemen , as the request does not have sufficient support , we cannot verify a quorum .
We must therefore proceed to the vote on Mr Ribeiro e Castro ' s motion .
( Murmurs of dissent )
Ladies and gentlemen , we have acted pursuant to all the relevant Rules , and Mr Ribeiro e Castro ' s motion is approved .
Mr Poettering has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would imagine that certain honourable members are delighted .
It is a most interesting coalition which we have here .
I hope that you will always feel at home in this alliance .
But I must say on behalf of the large majority of my group that we shall not allow ourselves to be discouraged by the result of this vote , which is of course in keeping with the Rules of Procedure .
I shall apply on behalf of my group to the President - and I say this here openly - for this matter to be discussed at the next mini session in Brussels , in the hope that it can be brought to a conclusion during the Swedish Presidency .
For the rest , I would point out that we were notified internally earlier that the debate on this subject would not start until 4.45 , which is why we were surprised that things got off to such a fast start .
As a good democrat , I do of course respect this result and I trust that those who snatched such a chance victory will be equally good democrats in the future .
I should like to make perfectly clear on behalf of my group that we shall do everything we can to obtain a party statute because it is both good and necessary to the unification of and democracy in Europe .
I merely think that there is another interesting coalition to which attention must be called , namely the coalition between the European parties which , over the heads of the people of Europe , are deciding to enrich themselves through this project .
Mr President , the Commission and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs considered the question of the legal basis extremely carefully .
This regulation is drafted as a temporary measure before the Treaty of Nice comes into force and I find it absolutely shameful that the nationalists in this Parliament are seeking to suppress the growth of proper , credible and legitimate transnational political parties .
Mr President , as group coordinator in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I just wanted to point out that there are differing views on this subject in our group , something which I intended to point out in my speech today .
I personally take the view that , given the criticism of the Court of Auditors , it is in fact fitting that we find a solution to the problem before us and this matter should also have been dealt with politically on this basis today .
Mr President , I simply wish to make a point of order .
I do not wish to comment on the matter in detail , or on the nonsense I have been subjected to today .
I call on you , as President and pursuant to Rule 111 of the Rules of Procedure , to put a proposal to the House , namely that the agenda be amended to allow this item to be reintroduced . If it is not possible to do so today , then it should be done tomorrow .
Mr Barón , as you are aware , this cannot be done at present . However , we have taken note of your suggestion .
Mr Dupuis has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , perhaps it should be pointed out to Mr Barón Crespo that he often confuses his visions with reality .
I would , however , like to warn Mr Duff about the work of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
As all honourable Members know , this committee has , on various occasions , produced in-depth studies on the legal basis of our reports , which have not been considered to be such by the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
I think and fear that this is the case with the study we are looking at today .
Mr President , I regret the fact that some groups in this Parliament obviously prefer that party financing should remain in the twilight zone where it is at present .
My view is that we should remove party financing as soon as possible from that twilight zone .
That is also in the interest of European citizens .
I consequently hope that the time remaining will be used to approve this proposal with as large as possible a majority and to see what amendments might contribute to its further improvement .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wish to deny most vehemently what Mr Poettering has just said , announcing quite prematurely that this report could appear on the agenda of the forthcoming Brussels mini-session .
I should like to remind my fellow Members that we have just voted to refer the report back to committee .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs will , therefore , have to meet and discuss the matter again .
Mr President , we can only accept what has happened here , albeit through sleight of hand .
That too is a democratic right enjoyed by parliamentarians here .
At the same time I should like to support emphatically what Mr Poettering and Mrs Maes have just said .
We cannot continue making ourselves ridiculous as a Parliament by spending funds in a way that is patently not above board .
We do not wish to do this . We cannot collaborate in this .
This item must be put on the agenda as soon as possible and as spokesman of the liberal group I should also like to warmly support what Mr Poettering has said .
We must discuss this matter again as soon as possible and then adopt a motion .
Mr President , I would like to inform you that a very detailed debate took place on Mr Schleicher 's report in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Mr Dupuis is , of course , free to think that the matter was not analysed sufficiently : that is his personal opinion and the opinion of other colleagues who represent a minority of the committee .
When Mr Dupuis requested that the vote be referred to committee because the translations of the amendments were not available in all the languages , we granted his request .
We have therefore acted totally conscientiously .
If Mr Dupuis wishes to consider himself to be the self-appointed representative of the Court of Auditors to our committee , with a strange mixture of institutional responsibilities , then that is up to him .
In any case , in view of the vote , which was obtained by majority despite the presence of only a small minority of the Members of this House , I will convene an extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs without delay , so that a well-researched , clear decision can then be taken in plenary .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall limit myself to making a point of order .
I believe that any decision taken by a parliament can be interpreted according to the motives that have been expressed .
Some of you may not believe this , but I only discovered the motion tabled by Mr Ribeiro e Castro as I was coming into the Chamber .
Our fellow Member has , to be precise , tabled a motion of inadmissibility based on the absence of a legal basis , pending the ratification of the Treaty of Nice .
It therefore seems quite clear to me that Parliament , through its vote , has decided to postpone the discussion until the Treaty of Nice has indeed been ratified .
That is my first point .
My second and final point , which I shall discuss much more briefly , is that this is a question of democracy .
I must say that democracy does not consist of those parties that have a majority gaining material advantages over the opposition and , furthermore , of assuming the right to deny the opposition these advantages for ideological reasons of their own .
Mr President , it is unacceptable to give the impression that minority parliamentary groups and the smallest groups in this Parliament , which have taken the initiative of proposing that we reject this report , have done so in order to conceal the funding of European political parties , or those that claim to be such .
This is simply an attempt , by the large groups in this Parliament , to cover up a decision by the European Court of Justice , which enabled them to benefit from funds to finance ' European political parties ' , which are not ' parties ' since they do not use universal suffrage , which are ' political ' in name only , since they are only concerned about financing the activities of parliamentary groups , and finally , which are only ' European ' because they are not African or Asian .
We would be creating a monster .
Until my view can be disproved , the funding of European political parties can only be justified , even after the Treaty of Nice , once it accepts the practice of universal suffrage , which is the only acceptable definition of a political party .
Mr President , I make no judgment either of the procedure for or the outcome of this decision .
However , I protest because , when the vote was taken , we and numerous other members were meeting in the Committee on Budgets .
I just happened to hear the bell and I came unprepared and , to be honest , I did not know what was going on .
How can you hold this sort of vote while committees are in session and hence , ipse facto , those present , i.e. those who are able to vote , are unable to determine the final outcome ?
It is in this sense that I protest because my democratic rights have been undermined .
Mr President , I think that we have to make the best of a bad job , because we are fortunate enough to have quite a full House , which is quite rare for a Wednesday afternoon .
We can see that the trick worked and that it is perhaps for the best .
In fact , my group was intending to vote for the Schleicher report , as long as some slight improvements were made to the rehash produced by the committee , which , it must be said , was not particularly impressive .
We are now being asked to allow a short delay , in order to improve it further .
There is certainly room for improvement and I think that some good can come out of this .
My only regret is that Mr Pasqua did not come in person to tell us how he intends to proceed in the future to ensure that the funding of political parties is carried out with the utmost transparency .
Thank you , Mr President , for not having overlooked me this time .
I am very grateful for that , since this is the eighth time I have asked to take the floor .
I should like to say three things .
First of all , our fellow MEP , Mr Duff , pointed out a moment ago that the committee and committees had given thorough consideration to the issue of the legal basis .
It is interesting to note that not a single instance can be found of consideration being given to the fundamental issue , namely that of whether Article 308 can be used to implement a real change in the Treaty .
It is , of course , only with the Treaty of Nice which , it will be recalled , has not yet come into force , that a legal basis has been furnished .
That is what the issue is about and , when Mr Napolitano now tells us that he is immediately to call an extraordinary meeting of the committee , he might perhaps be requested to see to it that this fundamental issue of legality and the legal basis is examined , at least in such a way that some indications of the legal issue emerge .
I can refer to a long list of pronouncements by the EC Court of Justice , clearly showing that we really are concerned with a Treaty change here .
Finally , I just want to add my congratulations to that majority which , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , prevented the matter from coming up for debate .
Moreover , I would take the liberty of drawing the President ' s attention to Article 143 , Paragraph 2 which states that , once such a proposal has been adopted , Parliament should immediately - I repeat the word ' immediately ' - move on to the next item on the agenda .
Mr President , in this debate on a point of order the term ' nationalists ' has been used , which does no justice to the arguments of the aggrieved parties .
My impression is that a number of other matters are involved , the question whether it is legitimate to distribute taxpayers ' money to parties and through government impose rules on parties that strengthen the distrust of citizens of what they see as a political elite .
That is a problem .
Parties should be bottom-up and not top-down organisations .
Real parties do not emerge because the structures of a state require the organisation of a competitive struggle at election time but because there are people with common ideas , interests and activities .
That is why it is rather artificial , at a moment when there is no European public opinion , to create parties from above in a forced way .
I therefore ask for understanding of the objections which are something other than nationalism and I think that it mainly revolves around the question whether the European Union has the power to do such a thing , or whether it does not have the power , which is why Mr Krarup has already indicated that in that respect we are now on thin ice .
I think that if such a measure were ever to be passed , we should all have to be certain that it does not conflict with previously agreed European rules .
Mr President , I should like to support the motion by committee chairman Mr Napolitano and therefore request that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs be convened immediately as a matter of urgency .
Combating social exclusion
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for a second reading ( A5-0155 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a programme of Community action to encourage cooperation between Member States to combat social exclusion . [ 13740 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0046 / 2001 - 2000 / 0157 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mrs Figueiredo )
Ladies and gentlemen , poverty in the European Union continues to be of grave concern , with new groups , such as immigrants , falling into this category and new threats of exclusion , amongst which I would highlight ' info-exclusion ' resulting from ongoing inequalities in access to the new technologies . This affects tens of millions of people , particularly women , children and the elderly , but also , increasingly , workers in precarious or atypical employment or workers with low salaries .
Against this background , it is particularly important to place definition of a global strategy to combat poverty and social exclusion on the agenda , on the basis of Article 137 of the EU Treaty .
Although all specific measures , both local and national , are important , it is crucial that we put in place a European Union strategy designed to coordinate policies and concentrate on the fight , which must be a priority , against this genuine scandal of living at a time when wealth is being created and increasing and yet , even today , more than 50 million EU citizens do not have access to fundamental rights enshrined in the Social Charters and the Charter of Fundamental Rights itself , recently proclaimed by the Community institutions .
Nevertheless , as we all know , at the Nice Council , common objectives were adopted for combating poverty and social exclusion , which must be set out in a coordinated and integrated way , in a multidimensional approach , in the national action plans that the Member States have undertaken to draw up by 1 June .
As we all know , the common objectives that must be set out in the national action plans are :
to facilitate participation in employment and access to all resources , rights and services ;
to prevent risks of exclusion ;
to work on behalf of the most vulnerable members of society ;
to rally all the parties involved .
Furthermore , at the European Council of December this year , at the end of the Belgian Presidency , we are to adopt common indicators for poverty and social exclusion in order to be able to compare the results expected by the Member States from implementing national action plans on social inclusion .
Given this context , it is particularly important that we adopt and implement the Community action programme as urgently as possible to encourage cooperation between Member States in the fight against exclusion .
Until this programme comes into force , we will not have the necessary mechanisms for Community-level coordination and monitoring of the actions that are undertaken . These are fundamental aspects of the global strategy which the Council undertook to adopt .
It is , therefore , hard to understand the Council ' s refusal to accept proposals made by the European Parliament , particularly those which the Commission has already accepted . We can see that the Council common position of 12 February 2001 fully or partially incorporates 25 of the 47 amendments adopted by Parliament on 16 November last year , whereas the Commission had accepted 31 .
In the proposals that are now being put forward again at second reading , which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted unanimously on 25 April , the positions which the Commission accepted but which the Council , regrettably , rejected are being adopted once again .
Amongst these are the establishment of comparable parameters for national action plans and the 90 % funding of activities undertaken by the main European networks participating in the fight against poverty and social exclusion . This percentage of funding has already been accepted , in the programme for combating discrimination , for example , and has been rejected here for goodness knows what reason .
Furthermore , we are reconsidering the key issue of allocating the programme EUR 100 million of funding , rather than EUR 70 Million , as the Council and the Commission are insisting , although it is true that the Council has already accepted proposals that will require increased expenditure such as the networking of national monitoring centres and similar organisations for combating poverty . Spending will also be increased for exchanges of experience , preparatory meetings for the Annual EU Round Table Conference on social exclusion , with the participation of all speakers , and field visits to ensure that the excluded can participate .
There are also issues of commitology , specifically concerning the Committee , including the Commission ' s initial proposal , an assessment of the potential effects of macro-economic policies on poverty and social exclusion and the funding of innovative projects .
I must also make a reference to some small technical amendments that were introduced , after the services of the President of the sitting pointed out the need for them , to improve the legal quality and the visibility of the text adopted by the Committee on Employment and , at the same time , to enable us to bring our text into line with other texts adopted by Parliament , such as the minor technical amendments to Amendments Nos 10 and 2 , and the new Amendment No 18 .
I do not feel that Amendment No 3 , tabled by our Committee , is necessary , bearing in mind the technical amendments I have just mentioned , but I shall , of course , leave the matter up to the House .
With regard to the three amendments tabled by the Group of the European People ' s Party , I feel that these are merely procedural issues and that adopting them would make adopting the programme more difficult .
Lastly , Mr President , I should like to thank all those who have contributed to producing this report and to express my hope that the programme will be adopted as soon as possible .
Mr President , the programme to combat social exclusion is extremely important if we are to achieve the objectives set in Lisbon .
It is even more important if we consider that there are Member States with no history of combating social exclusion using global policies based on scientific studies and reliable statistics and which do not understand the important of combating social exclusion , not on moral grounds , but for reasons of social cohesion and economic progress .
I refer here in particular to my own country , Greece .
That is why we are calling on the European Commission to make a fundamental assessment of the national action plans which it receives , using the agreed quantitative and qualitative indicators , and not to make do with lists of political measures which are neither complementary nor global in nature and which do not get to the root of the problem .
We are also calling for help for the agencies involved in combating this phenomenon , not just in the form of coordination from Brussels , but at national level , close to the root of the problem , which is why we , as a political group , enthusiastically support any new innovative plans with European added value to combat social exclusion . In order to facilitate this , we support funding to the tune of 90 % .
We also call for the European Parliament , the social partners and other agencies in the civil society to be given an opportunity to help prepare the annual conference on social exclusion .
My political group maintains that the European Commission should not take recourse to extraordinary technical assistance or make use of external experts and , similarly , that the proposals financed should be selected on the basis of invitations for expressions of interest .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Figueiredo most warmly on her good work in preparing this report .
I am also very glad that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has put forward these amendments .
What the Commission has tried to do in bridging the opposition between ourselves as Parliament and the Council is also gratifying .
But I really must say that the Council has taken precious little notice of us .
Only a few formal matters have been adopted .
The Social Council and the Swedish Presidency , the Swedish socialist presidency I would almost say , are not aware that there is also such a thing as codecision , they what to keep control of everything themselves .
They think : there is open coordination and you as a Parliament must simply pay for our stunts from the Community budget .
That is , I believe , unacceptable .
That will undoubtedly lead , Madam Commissioner , not only in this case , but also in a number of others to great problems with the Council if the Council does not manage to clarify its position somewhat .
We have had one discussion with the Council in which obviously the way was pointed to compromises between this Parliament and the Council , Mrs Figueiredo did that splendidly , but the Council did not listen at all and simply made a kind of blueprint , a kind of stamp of what it previously intended and that is a kind of circuit for civil servants , by civil servants and for civil servants , so to speak .
Our amendments are an attempt to change that just a little .
I believe that we must adhere to them , since only then can the fight against poverty and the combating of social exclusion be tackled in a truly European way , namely if everyone has a hand in it , and not just a bunch of highly-paid civil servants gathering cosily together in Brussels .
Mr President , first I would like to assure Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou that all the national action plans on exclusion and poverty submitted to the Commission will be examined in the framework of the indicators and concrete goals agreed in the Stockholm Council .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Figueiredo on the excellent work she has done , which is both helpful and useful .
I believe that since we all agree how important this programme is , we can agree as soon as possible to start implementing it .
As you will recall , in its amended proposal the Commission accepted in full or in part 31 of the 47 amendments that were tabled by the European Parliament .
The common position that we have been examining incorporates 25 of these amendments .
With regard to the amendments which are now under consideration , the Commission can accept six of them in full or in part .
I refer to Amendments Nos 2 , reference to the Social Charter ; 4 , reference to the compatibility of the proposed budget with the current financial framework ; 6 , strengthening the comparability of indicators ; 7 , as it refers to the involvement of the local and regional level , 11 , reinforcing the monitoring of coherence between this programme and other policies ; and , most importantly , Amendment No 14 , referring to raising funding to NGOs under exceptional circumstances to 90 % .
The following amendments cannot be accepted . Amendment No 1 proposes adding solidarity among Member States to the list of relevant Community tasks .
The fight against poverty and social exclusion in each Member State is a national effort and should be placed in the context of promoting national action plans underpinned by Community-level objectives and policy-oriented cooperation .
So it is obvious that these are national efforts and national targets .
Amendment No 5 , in which the European Parliament is proposing to be involved in the agreement of targets , is not in line with the decisions of the European Councils of Lisbon and Nice .
As regards commitology , referred to in Amendments Nos 3 and 10 , despite the fact that our proposal referred to the creation of an advisory committee , I believe that the mixed committee is a fair solution .
This is the option that is applied in two other programmes : the equal opportunities and the anti-discrimination programmes .
The Commission is assisted by a management committee for horizontal issues concerning implementation , and by an advisory committee when dealing with individual funding decisions .
Amendments Nos 8 and 12 refer to the role of the European Parliament in the open method of coordination in the social exclusion field .
I am ready to explore with you all the appropriate means of making sure that the European Parliament can play its full role within this framework in this context .
For example , I have already accepted the setting up of a round table , which will bring together the relevant actors .
Amendments Nos 7 and 13 propose to open funding under the programme to innovative projects with a European added value in combating social exclusion .
As I have already stressed , the aim of the programme is to encourage close national policy cooperation and mutual learning , and not to fund actions on the ground .
Moreover , innovative projects on the ground can be funded by the European Social Fund and by the new EQUAL initiative .
My next comment relates to your proposal in Amendment No 14 to name the actors to be consulted in the preparation of the annual Round Table Conference .
I feel that such a list risks being more restrictive , incomplete and less flexible than the admittedly more general term " all the actors concerned " .
As regards Amendment No 9 , as I said at first reading , the Commission has carefully examined all the questions concerning the budget and is of the opinion that the original proposal for EUR 70 million is an appropriate one .
I cannot accept at this stage an increase in the budget .
Amendment No 18 seeking to delete Article 7 is not acceptable to the Commission because it will make the execution of the programme very difficult .
Amendment No 15 attempts to restrict the implementation of measures , under Strand 1 of the programme , to tenders only , in fact excluding the possibility of promoters of the innovative projects participating in the call for proposals .
Amendments Nos 16 and 17 seek to curb the role of the Commission by preventing it from using external expertise as well as technical and administrative assistance .
To summarise , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 6 and 11 .
It can accept parts of Amendments Nos 7 and 14 .
It rejects Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 17 and 18 .
I have a couple of questions for the Commissioner .
If I have understood correctly , she rejects any mention of the European Parliament in the programme .
Is that correct ?
Secondly , she also rejects increasing the programme , even though the Commission proposes to diminish the amount for other social actions in the next year by 17.5 % .
Is that also correct ?
The role of the European Parliament is a very important one but , of course , this role is defined by the decisions of the Council .
According to the Lisbon and Nice Councils , there is a role for Parliament and cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , but nothing more than that - if you mean the commitology issue .
Of course , we can find other ways of cooperation .
I have already said that we can organise a round table .
There can be cooperation between the Commissioners and the high-level Social Protection Committee , which deals with exclusion issues .
Of course , the European Parliament has a very important role to play in the joint employment report , which will evaluate all the programmes .
As far as the budget is concerned , I insist on the original proposal of EUR 70m .
It is very difficult to change it .
We have to be realistic about what the Council will accept and how this programme can be implemented with the human resources at our disposal .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
Safe and sustainable pensions
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0147 / 2001 ) by Mr Cercas , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication on The Future Evolution of Social Protection from a Long-Term Point of View : Safe and Sustainable Pensions [ COM ( 2000 ) 622 - C5-0011 / 2001 - 2001 / 2003 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , this House will tomorrow put forward its position , ideas , hopes and also its concerns regarding the future evolution of pensions from a long-term point of view on our continent .
The Commission communication on the future development of social protection , pursuant to the mandate granted by the Lisbon European Council , has provided us with the opportunity of doing so .
I should therefore like to begin by welcoming that communication . It has brought the problem out into the open , provided Parliament with an opportunity to discuss it and presented a broadly-based study of the phenomenon of ageing in Europe .
The debate has been taken beyond mere financial considerations .
It is only right to congratulate Commissioner Diamantopoulou on having involved Members of the European Parliament as representatives of the citizens of Europe , in a debate of this nature , crucial to the future of the Union . I would like to take this opportunity to do so .
At the outset , I would also like to thank my colleagues on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
This is not just a form of words , I am genuinely grateful to them . Not only have they been kind enough to adopt this report by an overwhelming majority , but they have also many useful contributions in the course of discussions .
In addition , they tabled a broad range of amendments .
For the most part , I was able to incorporate these into my report , because they embodied useful approaches .
I have no wish to appear boastful but it does seem to me that in the Committee on Employment we have revived a broad consensus across all groups in this House .
Clearly , this has proved possible because instead of each group seeking to impose every last detail of its own plan on this issue , we have sought consensus on its most important aspects . We are all aware that the ultimate responsibility rests with our States .
Nonetheless we realise that in the Europe we hope to build , there is scope for establishing criteria , objectives , values and principles which will be common to all Europeans . We are also conscious that it is our right and our duty not to remain silent in the face of this major problem .
I should also like to state , in this initial overview , that I am firmly convinced this is a problem which demands a broad debate and social and political consensus .
When it was created , the European social model was founded on broad social and political consensus . It will not be possible to reform this European social model under the auspices of new forms of enlightened despotism as advocated by those who believe that select groups of experts , high-ranking bureaucrats or certain Finance Ministers should rule the world .
The social and political consequences of modernising the European social model are such that the matter cannot be entrusted to those who only appreciate the financial perspective and neglect the social dimension of the problem .
It would be irresponsible of us to ignore the data on economic requirements .
However , we would be making an even greater mistake if we focused entirely on the economic consequences , and failed to take the impact on human beings into account .
Europe is ageing .
Unless there is a dramatic upswing in the birth rate , this will have serious repercussions . It will impact on the financial capacity of the system , on the balancing of public accounts and also on individuals .
If we fail to resolve the problem or do so in an unsympathetic manner , we run the risk of unleashing a wave of poverty and social fragmentation across our continent .
Consequently , the first message I should like to send out , or rather that I feel Parliament should send out , as our committee has already done , is that all the challenges posed by ageing must be taken into account in a balanced way . I could mention in particular the challenge to public finances and also the challenge to the methods adopted by previous generations for the building Europe .
In our committee we noted that the demographic dependence ratio is a very important factor , but not the only one involved .
There is another even more significant factor , namely the economic dependence ratio . This means that our main problem will not be the number of pensioners we are confronted with , but the rate of employment .
The crux of the issue is that if Europe grows , it will create employment , it will create firms capable of ensuring that that rate of economic dependence does not deteriorate . Europe has a long way to go , because our rates of employment are inadequate .
They could become adequate however , if we achieved economic growth and if that growth were directed at creating the jobs needed on our continent . The figures are far below those of our main competitors , the United States and Japan .
In fact , if we attained the objectives set at the Lisbon Summit , the objective could be perceived as far less daunting that the data available indicates .
Furthermore , this data , although certainly significant , amounts to long-term predictions and is therefore subject to revision .
No Biblical curse is about to befall us .
We could yet find a way out of our predicament because there is still time to deal with a number of factors currently causing concern .
Constant monitoring of that data will be called for , and increasingly rigorous criteria must be applied , to ensure that it does not become grist to the mill for those who are intent of benefiting from the situation .
Mr President , I should like to make one final point . If we are to create the jobs Europe needs , the jobs the social protection system needs , we need to include women and older workers .
They are the reserves we have to mobilise .
We must activate all the Union ' s social and economic potential . In the Committee on Employment we believe that is the best way of tackling the problem of ageing on our continent .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for a well-balanced report .
Ideally there would be no need for the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities to make any particular comments from a gender perspective on the design of pension systems - if only we were living in an ideal world where equal opportunities were guaranteed .
That is not how things stand , however .
The injustices which women suffer throughout their lives continue when they get older .
I am pleased to say that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has taken on board the majority of the comments made by the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Someone once said that if it had been men who consistently fell foul of the pension systems , the basic principles would have been fundamentally overhauled long ago .
The committee recalls the goals of the Lisbon Process , as does Mr Cercas .
Women ' s right to their own income and so to financial independence is extremely important .
Today the employment rate for women ranges from 38 to 71 percent in Europe .
Generally speaking , women must have the opportunity to take on paid employment .
Women and men should also be able to choose freely between paid employment and a career break to take care of family members .
Joint taxation in many Member States and a lack of childcare and care for the elderly are a couple of reasons why many women are unable to enter or stay in the labour market .
One important principle is that care of children and dependants should be compensated for in the pension system .
A more equal Europe is a fairer Europe , a Europe which manages both employment and future pensions .
Better equality can only be achieved through a change in fundamental attitudes and in partnership between men and women .
A more even division of responsibility for the home and family could lay the foundation for more equality in the workplace and a labour market of equal opportunities and equal pay for equal work .
In the end this will also produce a fairer pension system .
Mr President , for years the European Parliament has been arguing for Community initiatives on pensions and consequently we are pleased with the principles agreed in the Council and the work prepared by the Commission .
The task now is to use the texts in front of us in order to promote the convergence of the systems through cooperation and coordination between Member States .
There are two ways of approaching this .
On the one hand , there are a series of common challenges , the ageing of the population and the dearth of younger people or the relation between younger and older people , the changing degree of dependence or the ratio of active to inactive people , etc . , limited budgetary resources , technical potential in health care , and so on .
On the other hand , there are number of cross-border complications : the mobility of individuals or the option of working in another Member State and drawing a pension , the mobility of capital or the option of saving in another Member State and drawing a pension , the supplementary pension funds , which unlike the compulsory pension schemes appeal to people in various Member States and even in other countries .
For all those reasons , the systems must be made sustainable so that they can withstand common challenges and cross-border complications .
The report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs indicates current thinking in the European Parliament and also in the European People ' s Party on the convergence of pension systems .
It is not for the European Union to prescribe to Member States how pensions should be organised and financed .
The Member States themselves choose the appropriate ratio of compulsory scheme to supplementary schemes , between an apportionment method and capitalisation , between contributions and payments or between social security or index-linked prosperity .
But , on the one hand , solutions must be found for difficulties that hamper the free movement of pensions and pensioners and on the other efforts must be made to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of systems with budgetary resources in the service of social aims and not the other way round .
For the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and for the PPE-DE Group too the combination of cooperation between Member States and coordination between the systems seems the appropriate way of safeguarding pensions and reassuring pensioners and consequently this point must be clarified at the European Council in Gothenburg .
I think that years ago the Luxembourg Summit on employment , where the open coordination method was effectively introduced , showed us an excellent way but of course a link must be made between pensions and employment .
For as long as Europe and the various Member States do not succeed in solving the difficulties surrounding the employment of the over-55s and for as long as the case is not pressed more urgently , more opportunities are not created and more things are not made virtually compulsory , the pensions problem will not be solved .
It is essential to link the two .
This should be one of the guidelines in the framework of the coordination and indicators which is about to be drawn up .
Mr President , may I first of all thank Commissioner Diamantopoulou warmly on behalf of my group for her solid work in this communication , which gives us the opportunity to discuss pensions in a different way and allow me also to congratulate Mr Cercas Alonso on his excellent report .
I hope , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that our recommendation , on which we shall vote tomorrow , can prove an inspiration to the Gothenburg Summit and particularly will move the Council to involve the European Parliament in a more structural way in future in the discussion on the open coordination method on pensions .
For that matter I am also grateful to the Swedish Presidency for the work that already been carried out in this field .
I hope with all my heart that Gothenburg will be able to give a clear mandate to the Belgian Presidency to formulate common social goals in the context of European cooperation on pensions .
As Mr Smet said just now it is , of course , the Member States who decide what pension system they want , how they organise it , and how they underwrite its financial robustness .
However , the fundamental aim , namely to maintain and improve the quality of pension systems in Europe , is surely an aim that we must all share .
It is , of course , clear that because of the dynamics of economic and monetary union , the pension dossier is already on the European agenda , although very one-sidedly , as part of the debate on the financeability of pension schemes .
We believe that in the discussion we must never lose sight of the essential component , namely modernisation of pension systems so that we can guarantee today ' s and future generations of pensioners a reasonable pension and a participation in social life .
That debate is also about solidarity and also the equality of men and women .
For us a number of principles are essential in this . I should like to mention four .
Firstly , pension systems must be able combat poverty in an efficient way .
It is unacceptable that in the European Union there should still be pensions , especially those of women , that fall below the poverty line .
I should therefore like to be so bold as to ask the Commission , on the basis of the recommendation of 1992 to retable this pensions dossier on minimum payments .
Secondly , reasonable pensions are of course more than the minimum necessary for survival .
It is a matter of guaranteeing a certain standard of living .
It is therefore important to retain the link between the general rise in prosperity and pensions .
Thirdly , the second pillar of pensions must never replace the first because it is the first that gives the fundamental guarantee that everyone has access to an adequate pension .
For my group it has long since ceased to be a question whether one is for or against the second pension pillar . Rather , it is a question of how we are to ensure that , even in that second pension pillar , solidarity is organised so that supplementary pensions do not remain the privilege of a small group .
Naturally , Mr President , I could also continue the discussion on the necessary raising of the pensionable age , but I shall not do so .
One thing should be clear : for my group , this does not mean a general compulsory rise in pensionable age , does mean measures to encourage people to continue working longer and to prevent companies from jettisoning older staff .
I hope , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that Gothenburg will be able to translate these principles into common objectives .
Mr President , seeing the great care taken by the Ecofin Council to anticipate the long-term impact that funding pensions has on public finances makes one wish that equivalent care could be demonstrated with regard to sustainability , in order to prevent the deplorable long-term effects , for example , of the lack of fiscal harmonisation or of investments in the nuclear industry .
Do not think , however , that the Group of the Greens is suggesting that we entrust the future of pensions to the Ministers of Finance .
We support those in the Commission , in some Member States and in Parliament , who see the future of pensions and of social protection primarily as social issues , as key elements of the model , which must be strengthened , and which cannot be reduced to its financial dimension .
To hear some people talk , we might wonder if the prospect of living increasingly longer , and by ' living longer ' I mean in good health as well , is not the greatest disaster threatening the citizens of the twenty-first century .
The report by Mr Cercas Alonso has the merit of not skirting the crux of the issue and of the debate .
A certain increase in spending on pensions in the GDP is certainly unavoidable because of greater life expectancy , but the rapporteur quite rightly emphasises that changes in the rate of employment is a decisive factor .
In this context , he recommends taking account of the rate of economic dependence and not only of demographic changes .
Given the prospect of full employment , this takes us away from alarmist rates , which clearly seek to legitimise new forms of finance , raised individually and through capitalisation .
The report also emphasises the invaluable role of guaranteed pension systems in combating the insecurity and social exclusion of the elderly , particularly women and workers who have had long periods of atypical work and who should be guaranteed a sufficient level of income to lead a decent life .
Lastly , the report warns against any attempt to undermine public pay-as-you-go pension systems .
These systems guarantee intergenerational solidarity , which is essential to social cohesion and they enable real-time adjustments to be made to contributions , regardless of the fluctuations of the stock market situation .
This is why our group recommends that we adopt this report , without undermining its current balance .
Mr President , I think there are many good points in the Commission ' s report , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a job well done .
Much has been said about solidarity and security . This is exactly what should be addressed with regard to pensions .
There is still great anxiety about the discussion on pensions .
My colleagues have expressed unease over certain crucial points .
In my home country , Sweden , we have already started to adapt to this type of change , and a considerable part of our future pension system will be linked to a supplementary pension based on what happens on the financial markets .
In Sweden , most people have started buying and selling shares and in the past few years many of them have experienced just how risky buying shares can be .
Many have lost a great deal of their savings and are now wondering whether the same thing could happen to a pension system which is so heavily dependent on what happens on the financial market .
There is a worry that the system will be unfair . Most of all , perhaps , there is a worry that it will be unreliable .
Our group has tabled an amendment to tomorrow ' s vote , in which we ask that the effects of the new system are at least assessed and the impact on solidarity on society studied .
What will happen to security ?
How will it affect women ?
Several speakers , including Mrs Jensen and Mrs Van Lancker , have pointed out that women are a particularly vulnerable group , and in many countries I believe that women could lose out in the system now being introduced .
I would also like to mention our Amendment No 13 in which we address a general raising of the retirement age as a way of solving future pension problems .
It is tempting to use such a solution to try not only to increase levels and ratios of employment , but also to reduce the pressure on the pension systems .
However , this presupposes that people will manage to keep working up to the raised retirement age .
This may work in certain countries as they currently have a relatively low retirement age , at least for certain categories of pensioner .
However , in my country and other Scandinavian countries , where we already have a relatively high retirement age of 65 - 67 , there is currently talk of raising the age threshold to 70 .
I believe this is unrealistic .
Most people are worn out from a long working life long before they reach retirement age .
In this situation it is foolish and inhuman to try to force people to remain in the labour market .
Finally , I would like to point out that I believe it is regrettable that neither the Commission nor the report we are now discussing mentions anything about the candidate countries .
It could be said that this is a problem for the future , but when talking about pensions we are talking about the future .
It is clear that there should have been a discussion on what a system of the type we now want to introduce will mean for poor candidate countries .
Mr President , first of all I should like to address my thanks to the Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , and my heartfelt congratulations to the rapporteur for the excellent job he has done .
There is no doubt that a prospective cause for alarm in the field of pensions is the ageing of the population .
But it should be noted above all that some Member States have already undertaken reforms of their systems without trauma , with significant contributions from social actors . These reforms have , over the course of time , also had positive effects on the health of public accounts .
The problem should therefore , perhaps , be split in two : on the one hand , States that may still have some imbalance in public spending but in the context of a stable economy , and on the other , those that have deficient social security systems and an economy in transition .
In the first case a gradual approach is essential .
Almost all public pension schemes , in fact , are still run completely or partly on a pay-as-you-go basis , and without a gradual changeover to a fully funded system , accompanied by harmonious taxation systems and effective family policies , there would be serious social repercussions .
For the second hypothetical scenario , and in the general case , we agree with the rapporteur in hoping that a convergent basis of parameters for maintaining the dignity of pensioners can be put in place at Community level .
This will also prevent a widening of social gaps which supplementary schemes , although useful , cannot fully remedy . In the meantime , in fact , the only path open is to increase the contributor base , while noting that the current rise in the employment rate seems rather insecure .
I fully agree with the rapporteur that what is avoided in all cases is anticipating even for the sake of intergenerational solidarity - paradoxical here - a reduction in the current levels of public protection .
Mr President , this is a very good report .
It has received widespread approbation in the committee and I hope that when it is voted on tomorrow it will receive similarly widespread support throughout the House .
The matter of pensions is a hugely important issue , and I say that not just because I have a vested interest in this matter , being close to pensionable age myself : it is an issue of increasing importance to the people , for example , sitting up at the top in the gallery there .
Today 's youngsters will need a pension in the future .
We must remember that these generations deserve the same sort of pension security and safety and sustainability as that which we are talking about for ourselves .
I really just wanted to make a couple of points : there are two amendments that we have put in for the vote tomorrow which very nearly got in through the committee and were only just defeated , and I hope that when they are re-submitted tomorrow in the name of the EPP-ED Group , the whole House will be able to support them .
They are to do with recognising that pay-as-you-go schemes can no longer be exclusively relied upon to keep people 's pension expectations fulfilled and also exhort Member States to sort out their tax and spending policies .
It is all very well for us to wish that people should have a safe and secure pension , but for this to happen , pensions have to be sustainable , the funding has to be put in place .
Anything less than that and we would be betraying the generations which are looking to us for support and we must not let them down .
Mr President , the insurance issue divides political opinion in all the Member States and yet , interestingly , it unites the general public .
The rapporteur , Mr Cercas , had to cope with pressure to liberalise and privatise the insurance system , alongside other maximalist positions wanting to undermine a whole series of new data .
He has managed to find the common ground , giving us a report which , it seems , Parliament will adopt by a large majority .
Of course , congratulations also go to the Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , who has courageously speeded up the insurance initiative .
There are three messages or conclusions which could come out of this report .
Ôhe first is that we continue to believe that the state insurance system should take priority or , if you like , we believe in the political option of not undermining it .
The second results from the fact that , in the end , the progressive line has prevailed . This means that the cost of funding the insurance system is not seen as a negative factor in the economy and it is accepted that social protection forms part of sustainable economic development and that there will inevitably be a relative increase in the ratio of pension costs to gross national product .
This brings us to a third and particularly useful conclusion , which is that there is no such thing as insurance policy per se or insurance policy as an isolated problem and that , within the framework of a horizontal approach , it is a necessary aspect of other policies , especially tax policy , employment policy and policies to combat discrimination and exclusion .
If these are basic political choices rather than academic declarations , we need to accept that it will not be easy in the future to adopt proposals which may increase inequality , reduce the income of senior citizens and compromise the quality of services provided by the central insurance system .
I would point out that part of the report constitutes an acceptance of the need for immediate support for the care of the ill and elderly at home in the form of fiscal , social and employment measures , the need to safeguard not just any pension , but a pension which can support a dignified life and the need for a package of proposals so that new insurance legislation can properly assess all the special aspects of women 's work .
In short , without denying the funding aspect of the problem , we have cut it free so that it no longer depends solely on that aspect .
The people of Europe need to be convinced that we shall pursue our options consistently .
Mr President , Mr Cercas Alonso has drafted a quite excellent report .
As we have seen , this is an issue which we are all itching to get our hands on : safe and sustainable pensions , a truly hot potato which gets hotter rather than cooler the longer we leave it .
That is why both the Member States and the European Union need to act here .
We need a satisfactory pension system , which is why the reference to the 1992 recommendation is , I think , particularly important .
But we also need a flexible pension system which has one eye on social change and the need to adjust to the job market .
The idea of an active old age has , basically , been accepted .
You only have to think of the employment policy guidelines for 2000 , i.e. maintaining employability and lifelong learning .
I should also like to mention the contribution by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities to the report .
It refers to the numerous women on widow 's pensions with no source of income of their own .
We must reverse the trend whereby these widows ' pensions are being whittled away .
This is one very important matter addressed in the report .
As far as the future is concerned , the concept of open coordination is on the table .
We must also ensure that this has real meaning as far as pensions are concerned .
We should not simply use it as an open sesame ; we have to understand that the employment policy guidelines cannot simply be applied line by line .
On the contrary , we need new forms of coordination and these need to be created .
For the rest , I really do welcome the fact that the second and third pillars are dealt with as well as the first .
I would also mention the idea of capital formation by employees .
We must ensure that capital formation and old-age pensions complement rather than contradict each other .
The decisive step for the future of social protection in Europe was taken at the Lisbon Council and enshrined in the Treaty of Nice .
The issues put to the recently-established committee are extremely wide-ranging and require practical responses under the terms quite rightly laid down by the Commission and by the particularly excellent report that we are now assessing .
I therefore call on the Council to reformulate its mandate for this committee .
It is not enough to calculate the financial contribution needed to meet the requirements of the various systems . This should already have been done under the Stability Pact since , like employment , social protection is conditioned by macroeconomic policy decisions and by the increased dependence of the elderly and the unforeseeable increase in changes in the labour market , with periods of training alternating with periods of activity and inactivity .
It is absolutely crucial that we consider the cost to our societies of failing to transfer our citizens ' pension systems , in terms of loss of political confidence in Europe , social upheaval , greater insecurity and poverty , a fall in consumption , economic recession and greater inequalities .
This is the key political question to which we must respond and which the Council must soon answer .
Capitalisation must have clearly-defined borders and must be part of the solution , not part of the problem .
It cannot be an obstacle to mobility , because it does not solve demographic problems and does not involve solidarity .
It involves benefits and risks and stimulates the financial markets , factors which must be considered . It is not , however , and cannot be part of the problem , and would contribute to greater risks for social protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are social policy as well as financial , economic and employment policy aspects to the pension issue .
All these areas must be addressed together if pensions are to be secured in the long term .
I would also add that we have economic policy guidelines and the stability and growth pact on the question of employment and growth policy .
When it comes to the question of demographic change as one of the causes of the problem of pensions , there are several problems : one is the unfortunate fall in the birth rate , another is early retirement in numerous countries and a third is longer life expectancy , for which we , of course , thank God .
As far as birth rates are concerned , we must help to create a stronger awareness of what mothers and fathers contribute from a social policy point of view and ensure that family and work can be smoothly combined .
As far as early retirement is concerned , we must ensure that the retirement age can be brought up to the statutory retirement age in all countries .
A variety of measures is needed for this .
Without doubt , the question of life expectancy has repercussions on the actual retirement age as well as on the statutory retirement age in many countries .
I trust that we can help to strengthen the second and third pillars as well as the first pillar in Europe .
We have countries today in which 80 % of people in employment have a company pension .
In my country it is just 9 % , while the European average is 25 % .
We are currently debating a directive here in Parliament , and I call on the Council to stop blocking a European regulation on company pensions at long last .
I call on the Commission to set up a European pension forum to discuss the different fiscal and employment and social regulations and to help harmonise these issues throughout Europe .
I should like to start by congratulating Mr Cercas , who worked very closely with the Committee on Economic Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights , resulting in the impressive consensus in today 's debate .
The question of pensions is a key political , economic and social question which every government has to address .
Some reforms are under way , others are being discussed and others were completed a mere year or two ago .
So it is a European problem and the sustainability of pensions is the wager for the next generation .
There is a set of policies which , if they are successful at European level , will support and strengthen the sustainability of pensions .
The aim of these policies is to increase the rate of growth and employment and they include policies to provide efficient support for parents , so that they can combine work and family , and immigration policies .
However , over and above these general policies , every country needs to reform the system itself , which has been inherited from a previous era of industrial development .
This reform is social and economic in nature .
I think that it is particularly important , as numerous speakers have stressed , that pensions are no longer the exclusive preserve of Ecofin and budgetary discipline and have been discussed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs as well as by the ministers .
Pensions are , first and foremost , a social issue , but with huge , serious economic implications .
Of course , under the Treaty , insurance system reforms and policy are national responsibilities .
But do not forget that we are also required , that it is a specific objective of the Treaty to safeguard a high level of social protection and sustainable , non-inflationary economic growth .
It is therefore important , post Lisbon , that the heads of state have agreed for the first time that they need to work together on pension issues .
It is a very important change of direction towards European policies , which illustrates the extent of the problem .
With cooperation between the Member States , the reforms will no doubt be more efficient in all the countries .
An initial Commission communication was ordered following Lisbon and has been issued .
The subject of pensions has been discussed at all the Councils - in Feira , Nice and Stockholm - and the study to be presented in Göteborg is being prepared by the newly formed Committee on Social Protection .
This study will analyse all the problems Member State by Member State and will table proposals on basic principles for sustainable systems .
I would just point out that one basic guideline given to this committee concerns the gender dimension .
Numerous members mentioned that it is impossible to take a neutral approach to the question of pensions because women face more serious problems and poverty in Europe is closely bound up with the pension system and the economic and social position of women .
What is important is that it was decided post Stockholm to examine the method of open coordination on the question of pensions , taking account , of course , of the question of subsidiarity and the specific problems of each Member States .
We are preparing a Commission communication , which will be presented before the summer , in which we try to approach the question of the open coordination on pensions in a more analytical manner .
I must say that this resolution by the European Parliament , assuming that it is approved tomorrow as it stands today , will provide strong support for this coordinated effort to reform pensions in the European Union .
I think that this new chapter which is being opened at European level , the chapter of collaboration on pensions , will allow for new forms of cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
And may I remind you that the Commission specifically supported the need for the European Parliament to collaborate with the High Level Committee on the subject of social protection and that this collaboration is now under way .
Honourable Members , I think that the fact that we have opened up this chapter and given a European dimension to the question of pensions will give the governments in all the Member States the support and backing they need in order to bring about sustainable reform , taking account of the economic and , more importantly , the social dimension .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0169 / 2001 ) .
Question No 1 by ( H-0323 / 01 ) :
Subject : Common organisation of the market in the sugar sector On 30 June the current sugar scheme will either have to be extended or changed .
Last year the cost of overproduction in the sugar sector amounted to EUR 800 million , almost as much as the sum made available for dealing with the BSE crisis .
Despite strong criticism of the current scheme by the Court of Auditors and the negative effects on consumers and third-world producers , the Council appears very unwilling to make changes to the sugar scheme as proposed by the Commission .
There is a threat that a number of EU Member States may give in to the short-sighted approach based on self ­ interest taken by the sugar industry .
Does the Council intend to back the Commission proposal , given the strong criticism of the current sugar scheme by the Court of Auditors and the negative effects on consumers and third-world producers ?
If not , why is the Council advocating maintaining a sugar scheme which has been strongly criticised by the Court of Auditors and which has negative effects on consumers and third-world producers ?
Reforming the common organisation of the market in the sugar sector has been discussed by the Council since October last year , during which time the Council has taken on board certain criticism from the Court of Auditors .
As this House is aware , Parliament made its declaration on this matter on 13 March 2001 .
In looking at this declaration , I can say that it is generally not along the lines suggested by the honourable Member .
I would also point out that the Commission has stated that it may approve an extension of the current organisation of the sugar markets beyond 1 July 2003 on condition that all the other parts of its reform proposal are approved by the Council .
I also believe that there is disagreement among Member States between those who support reform and those who oppose it .
The Council will continue addressing the issue at its meeting in May and will look at all contributions , including those presented in the question which has just been put to the Council .
In addition , the Council adopted a regulation on 26 February 2001 on the " Everything but Arms " initiative to extend duty and quota free access to all products except arms and ammunition originating in a large number of least-developed countries .
With regard to sugar , full liberalisation of trade will apply from 1 July 2009 .
I understand the caution with which the Council must answer , given the fact that there is so little unanimity among the countries of the European Union , but it remains disgraceful .
In effect we are subsidising the sugar industry - last year to the tune of over EUR 800 million - as if there were not enough sugar in the world and as if we were eager for these subsidies to help our farmers survive .
I really think that the policy we are pursuing with regard to the developing countries is and continues to be hypocritical .
A splendid initiative like " Everything but Arms " is actually tainted by the fact that we maintain our hypocritical attitude and prefer to continue doing what suits us , by supporting the sugar producers , who traditionally belong to the castes of our nineteenth-century industrialists .
I note that we have once again made an exception .
I hope that the Council will continue to exert pressure for unanimity for reforms .
The Presidency will do what it can , i.e. ensure that the issue is constantly discussed .
There are differences of opinion among Member States .
This is a sensitive issue for many Member States .
We will be taking the matter up at the Agriculture Council of Ministers in a few weeks and I promise that we will continue to give the issue high priority .
At the same time , it is unfortunately impossible to predict what any future compromise will look like .
Question No 2 by ( H-0325 / 01 ) :
Subject : Euro Council Despite earlier Council decisions that the preparatory talks held prior to Ecofin meetings between ministers from the 12 euro countries would be completely informal and that only euro-related issues would be discussed , the signs are increasing that such talks are becoming formalised to resemble a ' euro Council ' and , in practice , by taking preliminary decisions on a range of Ecofin issues , are taking over real power from ECOFIN .
Belgium , in particular , has put forward proposals for ' developing ' the informal euro Council .
In view of this situation , what steps will the Council take to put an end to all attempts contrary to the Treaty to formalise a ' euro Council ' and gradually transfer Ecofin 's powers to such a Council ?
The ' Eurogroup ' is an informal body set up in 1998 on the basis of a resolution on economic policy coordination in stage 3 of EMU .
The resolution was adopted by the European Council in Luxembourg on 13 December 1997 .
The resolution states that the Ministers of the States participating in the euro-area may meet informally among themselves to discuss issues connected with their shared specific responsibilities for the single currency .
The resolution also confirms that decisions will in all cases be taken by the Ecofin Council in accordance with the procedures determined by the Treaty .
The European Council in Nice in December last year welcomed the improvements made to the workings of the Eurogroup and its visibility .
It also welcomed the intention to extend the range of mainly structural matters dealt with in this forum , with due regard for the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council meeting , i.e. that the Eurogroup be informal and without any decision-making powers .
I would like to thank Mr Danielsson for his reply .
In some ways it is positive if it is saying that the Eurogroup does not make any decisions at all .
My first supplementary question is this : is it really the case that no real decisions are made in the Eurogroup , or is it the case that decisions have already been taken by the time the matter reaches Ecofin , which simply goes along with whatever has actually been decided in the Eurogroup ?
My second question concerns the future . The Presidency is aware that proposals have come from a number of sides , not least from Belgium , to develop the informal " Euro Council " and add more functions .
Mr Danielsson confirmed that the Eurogroup has started to take on additional functions and address more issues .
My second question is therefore : can we be absolutely sure that the Eurogroup will not actually take over more and more real power in the future ?
It is vital for the countries not in the euro to be able to remain outside the euro area without losing power over matters directly concerning the euro .
I am willing to admit to Mr Gahrton that , on taking over the presidency on 1 January this year , Sweden was quite concerned about how things would work with the Eurogroup and the Ecofin Council .
We were worried that we would end up with a situation in which - as Mr Gahrton was suggesting - decisions would be taken in a room to which we had no access .
As such , we would receive a ' fait accompli ' which we would just have to process in the Ecofin Council .
However , I can honestly say that things have not turned out that way .
A great deal of respect has been shown for the principles set out in the decision I quoted from Luxembourg , i.e. the European Council Resolution of December 1997 .
Of course , there is need for discussion in the circle of ministers of finance who share the single currency , but no real decisions are taken in this circle .
The position of the Ecofin Council has been respected , with great unity shown on the principles of this matter .
Can we be absolutely sure about what will happen in the future ?
As someone once said , it is difficult to predict , particularly about the future .
I think there is every reason to believe that the members of the Council will continue to feel solidarity on the principles laid down in the European Council ' s previous decisions , i.e. that the Ecofin Council ' s position will be preserved .
The fact that some representatives have expressed a personal opinion that the position of the European Council should be expanded is a matter for them .
We are trying to assess how things have worked in practice , and we believe we can say without hesitation that the position of the Ecofin Council has been respected .
Question No 3 by ( H-0329 / 01 ) :
Subject : Western Sahara The UN has decided to extend the presence of MINURSO in Western Sahara by two months in spite of the fact that the settlement plan signed between Morocco and the Polisario Front is not yet fully applicable .
On the contrary , the threat of renewed armed conflict between the two parties is now greater than ever .
For example , several indicators point to the fact that Morocco is seeking to rearm , such as the announcement that it is purchasing American or French fighter planes by investing part of the money obtained under the recent agreement between Vivendi and Maroc Telecom ( US $ 3.5 bn ) .
The British press has also recently revealed that Morocco benefited from trade agreements with the UK , thus enabling it to acquire more arms and renew its military capability : Mirage fighters , and spare parts which may already have permitted the manufacture of 56 field guns .
These weapons are now deployed at the border , along the so-called ' defence wall ' .
If confirmed , this transaction would be illegal since Community legislation - the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports - prohibits the sale of arms to countries or areas where there is a conflict situation .
Can the Council confirm this information ?
Does it propose to intervene with the Member State in question ?
The Council has not discussed the particular matter brought up in the question .
Contrary to what is suggested in the question , there is no Community legislation on arms export . Therefore , the question cannot arise of whether or not a particular transaction is legal in accordance with Community Law .
The Code of Conduct to which the honourable Member refers was drawn up on 8 June 1998 and is based on common criteria for conventional weapons transfers .
According to the operative provisions of the Code of Conduct , each EU Member State will assess export licence applications for military equipment made to it on a case-by-case basis against the provisions of the Code of Conduct .
As such , decisions on whether an export licence should be granted are made by each individual Member State , and it is not up to the Council to decide on such individual transactions .
According to the Code , every year Member States must exchange information on their arms exports in the Council , allowing a joint review of how well the Code is operating .
This annual review is presented in an annual report in accordance with Operative Provision No 8 .
The general political stance of the Council with regard to the conflict in Western Sahara is to fully support the United Nations and the UN Secretary General ' s personal envoy James Baker in their work on finding a solution to the conflict .
The Council is convinced that the UN process constitutes the best framework for a rapid , lasting and mutually agreed solution which would also increase stability in the whole region .
It is clear that every solution must be acceptable to all parties and based on complete respect for fundamental democratic principles and human rights .
In line with this political aim , the Council is willing to contribute to the process and help to create a climate of trust between the parties concerned .
In this respect , at the end of last year the EU submitted a proposal to the parties concerned for a number of humanitarian and trust-building measures .
The EU is maintaining close contact with James Baker and is looking into how best to support the UN ' s initiatives .
I would also like to emphasise that the EU is the largest provider of humanitarian aid to the Western Sahara refugees , giving aid of EUR 20 million over the next three years .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council , although I should like express my disappointment that we are unable to ensure that the quite important and strict criteria of this code of conduct are respected .
Amongst these criteria I would highlight the idea of banning the sale of arms to countries or regions that are involved in conflict .
This matter is so serious that now , in the United Kingdom , MPs have obtained the right to vet arms sales from their country to anywhere the world . This move has created quite a stir in that country , even though the decision is not retroactive and British MPs cannot take action on this matter of arms sales to the Western Sahara .
I would nevertheless put my question once again : do you not think that there may be ' sanction ' -type measures that the European Union could take when this code of conduct is breached ?
Furthermore , what concerns me the most is that this affair appears to demonstrate Morocco ' s desire to rearm itself .
Deplorably , it also demonstrates the support that the country is receiving within Europe .
This can only heighten the already tense atmosphere in the region .
Although the situation in this 25-year-old conflict is currently deadlocked , largely as a result of Morocco blocking the validation of the electoral lists established by MINURSO ( United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ) , there is a risk of armed hostilities flaring up overnight .
Can I ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether the Swedish Presidency plans to issue a statement on the matter before the end of June ?
I am thinking back to the German Presidency , which made a specific statement on Western Sahara .
Given this background , why does the European Union not officially recognise the Polisario Front as a negotiating partner in this conflict , something that the United Nations did 25 years ago ?
The code of conduct concerning arms is not legally binding , so there are no legal grounds for sanctions .
However , the Swedish Presidency is working to achieve greater openness and transparency in this area as in most others .
I believe that we have seen several positive , constructive steps taken on the road to greater transparency , even in the application of the code of conduct for arms export .
We will continue to work with our supporters in the Council to take further steps to increase transparency in the issues surrounding arms export .
As far as the Western Sahara conflict is concerned , it has gone on far too long .
I believe that we all currently feel great frustration over the lack of progress .
However , the Council is of the firm opinion that we can best help the work on finding a peaceful solution by continuing our clear support for the UN and the UN Secretary General ' s personal envoy James Baker .
This is the stance the Council will continue to take .
The Presidency has given Mrs Boudjenah very satisfactory answers , not just on the subject of the code of conduct for arms but also regarding the conflict in the Sahara . The President-in-Office of the Council is well aware that Mrs Boudjenah ' s question arises out of her concern about the conflict between Morocco and Western Sahara .
In his clear reply , he spoke in support of the United Nations and James Baker .
He outlined the need to reach an agreement acceptable to all . He stated that Europe is in fact the largest donor of humanitarian aid , contributing EUR 20 million .
Given that we are the largest donor of humanitarian aid , ought we not to play a major political role in this conflict ? We should prevent the inhabitants of Western Sahara returning to arms and an escalation of the fighting .
Why should we limit ourselves to supporting James Baker and the United Nations ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , an acceptable agreement was reached back in 1992 , when the inhabitants of Western Sahara laid down their arms to vote in a referendum which should have been held that same year .
Do you not agree that the best way forward would be for that referendum to take place , with European backing ?
The Western Sahara conflict is extremely difficult and has a complicated background .
I believe that the best course of action for the EU , which wants and will have an active role to play in important and difficult international conflicts , is to provide strong support for the UN ' s work .
I can see from the report presented by Mr Baker in April this year that progress has actually been made in developing various proposals for self-governance for Western Sahara .
I believe that it would be foolish at this stage for us to choose any other approach than continuing to provide this constructive support for Mr Baker .

Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I invite you to follow the straightforward train of thought I am about to present .
You stated that the Council has tackled the issue of the conflict in Western Sahara , and that a range of measures have been taken aimed at rebuilding trust between the parties .
Do you believe that a measure of trust between the parties is that a Member State , one as important as the United Kingdom , should be selling arms to one of those parties when a cease-fire is in force ?
Secondly , continuing my straightforward train of thought , which code of conduct are we referring to ?
My impression is that many individuals and organisations must be referring to a different code of conduct from the one you mentioned . The code you mentioned might or might not exist .
Thirdly , I hope you will give up that metaphysical position which allows you to state that you support Mr Baker ' s efforts without specifying exactly how you propose to do so .
I would be grateful if you could explain how you plan to support Mr Baker .
The Council has not had occasion to discuss any individual Member State ' s sale of arms to the region .
I cannot therefore comment on this .
However , I believe that I have been sufficiently clear in trying to underline the Council ' s view of how best to achieve progress in the conflict itself .
For example , the Council has stated its regret that the situation is deadlocked on the issue of a referendum .
The UN Secretary General has proposed that the parties discuss alternative solutions to achieve a solution to the conflict , as the issue of a referendum has proved so difficult .
I repeat that I believe it would be most unfortunate if the EU did not wholeheartedly support the collective , international efforts to solve this difficult conflict .
Question No 4 by ( H-0330 / 01 ) :
Subject : Deaths of four African emigrants on the beaches of Tarifa on the coast of Andalusia , Spain On 21 March 2001 another four people , two men and two women , one of whom was pregnant , were found dead after having tragically drowned , like so many others , in an attempt to reach European territory in search of work and a new life .
When will the European Union act , directly and by interceding with the Spanish authorities , to put an end to this appalling situation which is a disgrace for all the European institutions and for those of the Spanish state ?
The Council has had the opportunity to answer similar questions from the honourable Member on several occasions .
Therefore , the Council ' s stance ought to be well known .
I would refer the honourable Member to the reply to his oral question H-27 / 2001 of 14 February 2001 .
In addition , let me emphasise the hard work which the Council and the Commission have put into carrying out the action plan for Morocco .
Let me also point out that the battle against human trafficking is a priority issue .
I would also like to stress that Spain does not have any authority in Morocco and therefore cannot control when vessels of various kinds leave Morocco .
Mr Minister , since I raised this issue the last time , thousands of immigrants have continued to arrive on Andalusian , that is European , beaches in small boats , risking their very lives .
Women , men , young people , both boys and girls , and children , some of whom have arrived dead , discovered lifeless on the beaches and rocks of the tragic border between Africa and Europe .
Others have been arrested and many have escaped inland to try to find the work that did not exist in their own countries .
Given this unacceptable situation , when will the European institutions understand that this is their problem and one that affects them directly ?
When are they going to take action to prevent such occurrences , so that when these people arrive , they enjoy conditions that befit them as our brothers and the human beings that they are ?
I have already said here on another occasion that the European Union cannot turn a blind eye from a tragic situation that should shame the European and Spanish institutions and that this should force them to implement the measures necessary to remedy the situation .
The Council is not turning a blind eye .
The Council realises that this is a major problem which represents a large amount of human suffering .
The Council is deeply involved in a dialogue with Morocco to try to change the circumstances in such a way that we do not see these terrible examples of human suffering which the honourable Member has brought up .
I would remind the honourable Member that the decision by the Council referred to in the question is based on a Commission proposal from 26 January 2000 , a proposal for a Council Regulation determining the list of third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders , including Colombian citizens , and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement .
The Council would also like to point out that Parliament confirmed the Commission ' s proposal on this issue on two separate occasions , in its declaration of 5 July 2000 and in its second declaration made as recently as 1 March this year .
The Council adopted the ensuing regulation with a qualified majority on 15 March , and it entered into force on 10 April , i.e. just over a month ago .
The Council cannot therefore understand Mr Carnero González ' view that the decision was wrong .
The system as it is set up was devised with full consideration for openness and transparency , as Member States should inform the other Member States and the Commission of what measures they are taking in accordance with this regulation .
For the same reason this information should also be made public in the Official Journal of the European Communities .
I shall rephrase the question , because it is essential for the Council to reply in political terms . I do not need to be reminded of European Union procedures for adopting decisions of this kind .
I think we are all familiar with them .
The Council ' s decision to include Colombia in the list of countries whose citizens require visas to enter European Union countries is not simply useless in the fight against the organised crime some Colombian citizens might be involved in . It also forces ordinary citizens to bear the additional cost of obtaining a visa .
Furthermore , this decision clouds relations between the European Union and Colombia unnecessarily .
In addition to myself , many Colombian intellectuals , led by none other than Mr García Márquez , have stated how close Colombia is to us .
It has come to my notice , for instance , that Mr García Márquez did not travel to Spain to take part in the recent celebrations marking the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the newspaper El País . This was to comply with the undertaking given by those intellectuals who stated that they would not travel to the Union , at least , not to Spain , until this rule is withdrawn .
I would ask you please to reply to my question and I hope the reply will be in the affirmative . Will the Council review this decision in the near future , having first consulted the Colombian authorities and Colombian society ?
The reason why I gave what Mr Carnero González considers to be a bureaucratic and procedural reply was that there was a suggestion in his question that the decision was wrong .
As such , I feel there is reason to point out that all the rules , including two hearings in this House , were followed .
Mr Carnero González is , of course , free not to sympathise with the content of the regulation adopted , but it was taken recently and all applicable rules were adhered to .
As far as I know , there are no plans to make any changes to the regulation .
Question No 6 by ( H-0338 / 01 ) :
Subject : Report by Christa Klaß , MEP , on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine On 24 October 2000 , Parliament adopted by a large majority a report ( A5-0195 / 2000 , C5-0090 / 2000 ) on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine .
What stage has been reached in the further consideration of this document in the Council ?
Why has the Council not yet completed its consideration of this directive ?
When will the directive be placed on the Council 's agenda for final consideration and forwarded to the Member States for implementation ?
The Commission 's proposal and Parliament 's report on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine create greater legal certainty for the economic partners concerned in these areas which are so important for wine-growing in the EU .
Clear rules on cultivation , authorisation , registration and checks should simplify trade and establish a clear legal basis therefor .
It is incomprehensible that , five months later , the Council has still not reached a decision .
Let me start by saying that I entirely agree with the honourable Member on the importance of the legal instrument in question .
Let me also say that the Council appreciates the work of Mrs Klaß as rapporteur for this important issue .
The Council has also taken on board Parliament ' s declaration to a large extent .
It is therefore quite understandable that Parliament is concerned by the delay in the Council ' s final decision on the issue .
The final decision has been delayed because some Member States have asked for more time to consider the provisions on genetically modified organisms , despite the fact that these provisions are no different from Community legislation in force and are equivalent to those recently adopted in accordance with the Community directives on the marketing of seed and forest reproductive material .
Adopting the directive was on the agenda at the Agriculture European Council in November of last year .
It was postponed until December and then until January of this year , as no agreement had been reached on the provisions concerning genetically modified organisms .
However , the Swedish Presidency aims to reach agreement on the Council supporting and adopting the new legislation before the end of the Swedish Presidency , i.e. by June of this year at the latest .
Mr President , I should like to ask the President-in-Office if we can reasonably be expected to wait five months for a decision .
We too have worked on this .
Think about this directive ; in the final analysis it is also about having clear provisions on selection , licensing , registration and control so as to create legal security for vine propagators in the European Union .
This part is also very important to economic operators and economic partners in the EU .
On the other hand , according to my information , the plan was to wait until the release directive , i.e. Directive 90 / 220 , had been adopted .
This directive has now been through conciliation , i.e. it has been adopted .
I therefore see no reason to delay this any further .
This directive says nothing about definitive licensing .
That needs to be decided in the release directive .
I would therefore ask you to advance , not to block Parliament 's work in the Council .
I totally share the honourable Member ' s view .
The Presidency ' s firm strategy is to try to get a decision on the issue .
As I said , we have until June to try to achieve this .
Question No 7 by ( H-0340 / 01 ) :
Subject : Swedish exemption from rules restricting public access to EU documents A brochure entitled ' The EU Agreement ' published in 1994 by the Foreign Ministry 's department of trade ahead of the Swedish referendum on EU membership stated that ' the principle of public access to official documents remains intact and is non-negotiable ' .
This promise was given to the Swedish people ahead of EU membership .
Does this reservation imply that Sweden is exempt from any EU rules which may restrict the application of the national principle of public access to official documents ?
As President-in-Office of the Council , I can be very brief to start with .
I would point out that national legislation on public access to documents is not covered by harmonisation of the Community ' s legislation .
Nor do we foresee any such harmonisation in the future .
Thank you for your answer .
As the President-in-Office of the Council must certainly have suspected , I am thinking of EU documents received by Member States .
The EU has now adopted new rules , a Regulation on the basis of Article 355 , which means that there is a more secure legal basis .
The Regulation talks about loyalty to the EU ' s rules and also about having to request guidance in cases that are unclear .
If , on the basis of this Regulation , the Commission and the EU ' s Court of Justice find that a country cannot make documents available at national level that are classified at EU level , Community legislation may be contrary to Sweden ' s principle of public access to official records .
Does the President-in-Office of the Council believe that such a scenario is out of the question and , if so , why ?
I believe that a procedure such as Mr Sjöstedt describes is out of the question .
I note first of all that the introduction to the Act that has been agreed upon expressly states that it is neither the aim nor the effect of the Regulation to change national legislation concerning public access to documents .
Secondly , Mr Sjöstedt refers to the loyalty principle .
This is not new .
We have been living the whole time with what is known as the loyalty principle , as described in Article 10 of the EC Treaty .
It has not been changed in relation to the agreement made here and approved by Parliament at the beginning of this month .
I want to emphasise that the consultation procedure being introduced through Article 5 into the new Act is only advisory .
If we talk about the situation in Sweden , the fact that , in order to be able to make a correct assessment of damage , Swedish authorities may need to consult the institutions when applying the rules concerning foreign secrecy is not in itself anything new .
That is a familiar fact of Swedish legislation , and the new Act does not change anything in that regard .
I want to thank the Swedish Presidency , and I want to thank Mr Danielsson for his answer .
I want also , of course , to express my gratitude for the committed work that has been done to give the EU a new approach to the principle of public access to official records , in this case EU documents .
I nonetheless wish to ask a question .
Might we in Sweden see a development in which representatives of Swedish authorities practise self-censorship in situations in which Brussels and European authorities differ from Sweden in the assessments they make as to whether , and to what extent , the secrecy rules are to be applied ?
This issue of self-censorship and of being able to adopt a distinctively Swedish view when a different assessment is made in Brussels is a relevant subject for discussion .
The question put by Mr Sacrédeus is obviously of relevance .
It is perhaps even more relevant in a Swedish Parliament than in this illustrious European Parliament .
I have a lot of confidence in the Swedish authorities ' ability to make independent assessments of such issues .
I think the risk of self-censorship is very slight .
Allow me just to emphasise that , in the Council ' s view , the system we have had up until now regarding public access to documents is subordinate to the rules on which this Parliament has adopted a position and which it has actively helped to devise .
We now have an Act covering all documents , and last year ' s Solana decision , as it is known , is no longer valid .
We have compulsory registers .
We have a requirement for rapid assessments to be made of whether or not documents can be released .
We have clearly defined provisions governing secrecy etc .
Thanks in large part to this Parliament , the EU ' s institutions will therefore acquire much better and clearer rules governing transparency and accessibility .
Just to show that this question is not only of interest to Swedish Members of the European Union but to other nationalities as well , is this new procedure in the Council in operation ?
If not , when will it be in operation ?
In other words , when can I get my first document out of the Council ?
I do not know whether the Member is asking the President-in-Office of the Council to assess a practical matter .
I rather think that is impossible .
I presume that , once this Act has come into force , all the European Union ' s institutions will apply its provisions in a competent way , which means that it will sooner or later be possible for Mr Newton Dunn and others to obtain access to those documents not covered by the secrecy test which must always be carried out .
Question No 8 by ( H-0342 / 01 ) :
Subject : Council 's position on acts of violence by Turkey During his recent visit to Skopje , capital of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) , the High Representative for the CFSP , Mr Xavier Solana , stated that it would be a mistake for the government of FYROM to negotiate with the terrorists ( of the KLA ) .
He also added that the FYROM leadership had the support of the EU as there was no place in the Union for those who resort to violent means .
In the light of this categorical statement , will the Council say why this position of principle does not also apply to Turkey , which used violent means in 1974 , in breach of international law , to seize 40 % of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus , which it has since held under occupation in defiance of UN resolutions ?
Is the Council unaware that the country in question , which has recently been declared a candidate for accession to the EU , uses violent means to prevent the Kurdish minority from exercising its personal and civil rights , uses excessive force against prisoners , imprisons journalists and , in general , exercises the power of the State by violent means , violating all human rights charters , a fact which has also been established on numerous occasions by the International Court of Human Rights ?
The Council ' s position regarding the issue of Cyprus and the human rights situation in Turkey , including the issue of the Kurds , is well known .
It is perhaps most clearly apparent from the Council ' s decision , adopted on 8 March 2001 , concerning partnership in connection with Turkey ' s accession .
A considerable number of the priorities and objectives in the accession partnership have to do precisely with human rights .
Regarding the issue of Cyprus , this Act repeated what was said at the European Council in Helsinki in December 1999 .
In the light of the accession partnership and of Turkey ' s national programme for adopting the rules , the European Union will now concentrate on ensuring that Turkey really implements these priorities .
An Association Council is planned for 26 June 2001 , when the issue of implementation will be addressed .
The Commission has given notice that another in the series of reports on Turkey and the other applicant States will be published in November of this year .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office for the reply which he has given me which , in principle , I find satisfactory , although he has strayed from the point .
I asked because , in Turkey 's case , although it exercises violence against Cyprus , a dialogue is under way , on friendly terms no less , and it is already a candidate country , while in other cases Mr Solana says that we do not engage in dialogue with countries which exercise violence .
I should also like the Council to tell me if it knows about the following new provocation on the part of this country , by which I mean Turkey .
First , the allegedly pacifist , europhile foreign minister , Mr Cem , threatened that if Cyprus was accepted as a full member of the Union , his country 's reaction would know no bounds .
In other words , he threatens all and sundry .
Secondly , the Turkish air force has repeatedly and frequently violated Greek air space , forcing the Greek air force into dangerous interceptions .
Thirdly , the International Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg found last week that Turkey was blatantly violating the human rights of Greek Cypriots from the part of Cyprus occupied by the Turkish military .
What does the President-in-Office have to say about all this ?
I note , as I have done on quite a few occasions before , that the partnership agreement with Turkey gives the European Union the opportunity to follow political developments in Turkey carefully .
It also provides an opportunity to conduct a dialogue with the Turkish authorities and the Turkish Government , when the Council considers that such a dialogue is called for .
According to its usual practice , the Council opts for dialogue as a method of dealing with states of affairs considered to be unacceptable .
I would also point out that the next opportunity for discussion is precisely the forthcoming meeting of the Association Council with Turkey on 26 June 2001 .
Mr President , this Chamber was illegally stormed this afternoon during the debate on Turkey .
This is not the first time we have been pestered in this way .
This is also a question of the security of the European institutions .
Does the Council have any plans to strengthen security in the European institutions ?
I do not believe it is for the Council to comment on Parliament ' s security arrangements .
Mr Rübig , I can assure you that security is a matter of great concern for Parliament . The Bureau is currently working on it and considering the budget implications , given that security measures have proved inadequate .
Clearly , debates must go ahead , regardless of who the protesters may be and of the legitimacy or otherwise of their cause . The Council is not going to be responsible for security in all three premises used by Parliament .
Rest assured that no effort is being spared in dealing with the matter .
The second supplementary question is by Mr Fatuzzo .
You have the floor .
I have listened to the reply by the President of the Council to the problem that was well illustrated by Mr Marinos : the relationship between Turkey and the Greek Cypriots and the Kurds .
I should like to ask the Council whether it checks , watches , is aware and takes account in this context of the situation of the Armenian population living in Turkey which also has not inconsiderable problems in manifesting its ethnicity .
Last week , I met a bishop of the Armenian Church who told me about this very difficult situation of the Armenian population in Turkey .
Allow me to repeat that one of the advantages of the partnership agreement with Turkey is that it provides the opportunity to carefully monitor the situation in the country .
That applies not only to the situation of the Kurdish minority but also , of course , to that of the Armenian population .
Such monitoring is taking place .
Questions Nos 9 and 10 lapse .
A letter has been sent to their authors explaining that pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , items already on the agenda are not dealt with during Question Time . As the House will be aware , the Commission and the Council have made statements on the serious issue of those Turkish prisoners on hunger strike .
Clearly , Parliament ' s Rules of Procedure have been applied correctly in this case . There can be no doubt about that .
In any case , Mr Alyssandrakis has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , it is true that the Council has replied and that the Council and Commission have made statements .
However , we are allowed a supplementary question during Question Time .
The decision not to hold a debate under this procedure deprives us of this right .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , these questions may not be raised because they have already been dealt with in the statement by the Council and the Commission .
I do not believe that applying the Rules of Procedure to this case constitutes a breach of any fundamental right .
There are many ways in which you may express your views in this House .
Question No 11 by ( H-0348 / 01 ) :
Subject : WEU satellite facilities at Torrejon Following the decisions made at Nice by the European Council , what are the plans and the timetable for transferring these facilities from the WEU to the EU ?
The European Union confirmed at the Nice Summit that it intends to take over the WEU ' s crisis management responsibilities .
The Council noted the decisions on principle that have been taken to incorporate the appropriate tasks of the Western European Union into the Petersberg tasks .
These included setting up a satellite centre and an institute for security studies in the form of bodies into which suitable parts of the current , parallel WEU structures would be incorporated .
The Swedish Presidency was called upon to join with the Secretary General of the Council in continuing the work on this issue in the Council ( General Affairs ) .
A draft Community measure on the establishment of a satellite centre for the European Union is in the process of being discussed right now by the Council bodies .
The Swedish Presidency aims to have it adopted by the Council before the end of June .
A satellite centre is of the greatest importance for increasing early warning and crisis monitoring capability within the framework of the common foreign and security policy , especially the European security and defence policy .
The centre must have a constitution and structure which will enable it to respond flexibly to the demands of the European Union and its Member States and to carry out its tasks in close cooperation with existing institutions within the Community at national and international levels .
The staff and infrastructure of this centre should come , to begin with , from the WEU ' s satellite centre .
The precise arrangements for this have not yet been determined .
The recently established satellite centre , which is to be located in Torrejón de Ardoz in Spain , will begin its activities on 1 January 2002 .
Thank you for that very full reply , Mr President-in-Office .
Since the budget will become European Union operational on 1 January , will the budget for the Satellite Centre be part of the European security and defence budget , which the Council will put forward and which Parliament can debate and amend , as necessary ?
Will it be budgetised within the EU 's normal financial procedures ?
The Satellite Centre ' s budget will consist of contributions from the Member States , with these distributed according to what is known as a GNP key . That is to say , it lies outside the traditional budget .
There will be a special system for sharing responsibility for financing the Centre ' s activity among the Member States according to their gross national income .
Question No 12 by ( H-0352 / 01 ) :
Subject : Statements by the President of the USA concerning the Kyoto international treaty The President of the USA has made it clear by his statements that the USA will not observe the Kyoto international treaty , which requires the country to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases , on the grounds that the Treaty is not in the economic interests of the USA .
The verbal reactions of European leaders to the statements by Bush do not constitute a policy .
What measures is the Council considering in response to the cynical attitude of the USA which is sabotaging the international treaty ?
Is the possibility of economic sanctions under consideration ?
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
I am satisfied with your answer and just hope that you will continue with your efforts to persuade the United States to join the Kyoto Protocol .
I just want to add that the issue of the Kyoto Protocol will naturally be an important subject during the discussions between the European Union and the United States which will take place on 14 June 2001 at the European Council ' s Summit in Gothenburg .
The President of the Commission and the President of the European Council will then have the opportunity to emphasise directly to the US President the degree of importance we attach to this issue .
Question No 13 by ( H-0353 / 01 ) :
Subject : Remembrance of the Holocaust Following up the Swedish Prime Minister Göran Persson 's initiative in arranging the well-received Stockholm International Forum on the Holocaust in January 2000 , Parliament adopted a written declaration on 7 July 2000 on the remembrance of the Holocaust .
In that declaration , Parliament calls on the Council and the Commission to strengthen their efforts to promote education , remembrance and research about the Holocaust , to encourage the study of the Holocaust in all its dimensions , to encourage appropriate forms of Holocaust remembrance , including an annual European Day of Holocaust Remembrance , and to take all the necessary steps to facilitate the opening of archives to ensure that all documents bearing on the Holocaust are available to researchers .
What action has the Council taken in response to Parliament 's appeals ?
Are there any current plans to introduce a joint European day or national days of Holocaust remembrance ?
With regard to the issue of educating people about the Holocaust and raising their awareness of it , I would just remind Mr Sacrédeus of the answer which was given to a written question from Mr Colom i Naval in March 2000 and which I know that you too have had the opportunity to study .
On the issue of establishing an annual European Day of Holocaust Remembrance , the Council would simply point out that it has not received any practical proposals in this area .
Those Member States which are involved in the international working party to promote remembrance , education and research in connection with the Holocaust have followed the recommendations of the committee of government representatives and representatives of voluntary organisations , to the effect that annual days of Holocaust remembrance should be established on a unilateral and national basis .
This has happened in , for example , Germany , Sweden , Great Britain and Italy .
As from next year , Finland too will have such a national day .
The Council would emphasise that what history , including the Holocaust , can teach us is that it is necessary here and now actively to combat racism and xenophobia in all its forms .
In this context , the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna will have an important role to play , especially when it comes to cross-border efforts .
It may also be noted that , on 28 May , the Council and representatives of Member State governments will adopt a declaration concerning the fight against racism and xenophobia on the Internet .
It is , unfortunately , a sad fact that new technology is exploited by anti-democratic forces .
As part of the further efforts being made to disseminate knowledge concerning the Holocaust so that it will be possible , for example , to draw conclusions about the ways in which contemporary intolerance is to be combated , an international conference was held in January of this year in Stockholm on the very subject of the fight against intolerance .
Representatives from all the EU ' s Member States , the Commission and the OSCE , together with the Secretary-General of the UN , met to discuss strategies for combating racism , anti-Semitism and xenophobia .
Allow me also to conclude by saying that the Council really appreciates the European Parliament ' s commitment in this area .
I would say a special thank-you to Mr Sacrédeus himself for his work on the important position adopted by Parliament in July of last year on this subject .
I would thank the Swedish Presidency and Mr Danielsson for their comprehensive answer and for their most generous concluding words .
The European Parliament ' s decision following the written declaration in remembrance of the Holocaust - a direct follow-up to Prime Minister Persson ' s initiative in arranging a conference in Stockholm on this subject in January 2000 - indicates that we should like to see the Member States establish national days of remembrance or , better still , a European Day of Remembrance .
I would point out that - as current President of the EU and , at the same time , the person who took the initiative to arrange this conference - Prime Minister Persson has a unique opportunity and a special authority for getting even more countries than those which Mr Danielsson has just mentioned to establish annual days of remembrance and perhaps to agree upon a common day of remembrance .

I welcome the work that is being done on combating racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism .
My practical follow-up question is this : is the Prime Minister prepared , during the time that remains of the Swedish Presidency , to bring to life - if only on an informal basis - the possibility of an annual day of remembrance of the Holocaust in different countries ?
It is a very pressing issue that Mr Sacrédeus is addressing .
It has also been discussed in detail in the Council .
One conclusion drawn is that there are unfortunately many historical events of the 20th century in which atrocities have been carried out .
That applies , unfortunately , not only to the Holocaust which we have just been talking about but also to other events which there will be a desire to remember and use as a point of departure in the fight against intolerance and xenophobia .
We have therefore arrived at the view that it is probably most appropriate to let the issue of a national day of remembrance be purely a national issue and to inspire national authorities to take decisions to establish such days .
It might perhaps be better to refrain from recommending a specific day , for example 27 January , as a European day of remembrance .
There are so many other dates .
For example , there is Crystal Night , which is important to remember in many countries , and we have the days around the end of the war in 1945 , which can also be important days to remember .
We therefore believe that the best course is to inspire national decisions rather than try to put forward proposals to be decided upon at European level .
Question No 14 by ( H-0356 / 01 ) :
Subject : Hake fishery : significant discrimination due to the greater reductions in sub-area VIII ( Bay of Biscay ) In December 2000 , the EU Council of Ministers for Fisheries set the TACs and quotas for Northern hake for 2001 providing for a greater reduction in the allowable catch ( 45 % ) in sub-area VIII ( Bay of Biscay ) than in the more northern sub-areas ( 58.9 % ) without any justification based on scientific management advice , given that for the purposes of monitoring and scientific assessment , this resource has since the late 70s been considered to form a single stock which is not divided into regional components .
What criteria did the Council use to justify this distinction ?
Given that there is no scientific evidence to show that the stock consists of different components rather than constituting a single fish population occupying a vast area of the sea , is the Council aware that the subjective political criteria used have resulted in significant discrimination against some fleets in the Community ?
Does it not consider that it should take this into account so that it can remedy the situation when setting the TACs for 2002 ?
I would first of all refer to the answer to Question No 280 , given by the Council to the honourable Member during the part-session in April of this year , and also add the following .
In the light of scientific opinions from the ICES , recommending that lowest possible catches be adhered to and that a recovery plan be implemented for the stock in question , the Council has laid down the Total Allowable Catch for hake at 22 623 tonnes , compared with 42 090 tonnes during 2000 .
The Commission had proposed a TAC of only 11 000 tonnes for 2001 .
The Total Allowable Catch for hake is divided up into four administrative areas .
According to the scientific information to which the Commission had access , the situation regarding hake in Divisions VII a , b , d and e was worse than in the three more northerly areas , which is why a proportionately greater reduction in the TAC was made there .
Measures for 2002 must be taken in the light of the current discussion concerning a recovery plan for hake .
I cannot understand your reply . According to the information at my disposal , scientific studies consider northern hake to be a single stock .
I therefore have no idea as to the source of the data differentiating between the Bay of Biscay and elsewhere with regard to the situation or the reduction in stock .
Secondly , I should like to suggest to the President-in-Office of the Council that the Council should have taken socio-economic and commercial factors into account . As far as possible , it should have safeguarded the viability of hake fishing , insisting on strict compliance with the technical measures for fisheries management which the common fisheries policy has been unable to implement in recent years , despite the constant warnings issued by the bodies from which the scientific management council is drawn .
The distribution of quotas is based upon biological and scientific advice and not , therefore , upon socio-economic advice .
According to the scientifically based advice , the serious situation of the hake stock requires drastic measures to be taken .
Because there is clear scientific evidence that the hake stock is at present considerably over-fished , a number of measures have been proposed by the scientific advisers in this area .
These will , of course , have short-term socio-economic effects but , hopefully , also positive , long-term effects when it comes to the stock .
Question No 15 by ( H-0357 / 01 ) :
Subject : Chairman of the EU Military Committee The post of chairman of the Military Committee has been created within the structures of the Council of the EU .
Which institution will pay this official ' s salary , how will it be determined , and is it intended to seek the European Parliament ' s approval for the post and the appropriations necessary to pay for it ?
The chairman of the European Union ' s Military Committee is a part of the despatching Member State ' s delegation , in the same way as the chairman of a committee or working party within the Council .
That also applies to chairmanships that do not go with the Presidency , such as the chairmanships of the Economic and Social Committee or the Committee for Economic Policy .
It is therefore up to the despatching Member State to determine and pay out the chairman ' s salary .
The procedure for appointing the chairman of the European Union ' s Military Committee does not require the European Parliament ' s approval .
Thank you for your answer .
The matter is clear .
Have you forgotten , however , that you promised to send out information concerning the so-called wise men ' s salaries in the Austria case ?
That was something you promised last time .
Do you intend to send out that information ?
I can assure the honourable Member that I have in any case signed the answer .
I hope that it is on its way .
Sometimes , it is an awfully long way between Stockholm and Strasbourg , but I can promise that the answer is on its way .
Let us hope that the problem will have been resolved by the next sitting , and that the Community letter will have arrived .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 16 and 17 will be taken together .
Question No 16 by ( H-0359 / 01 ) :
Subject : Association Agreement with Algeria and the situation of women Will the forthcoming Association Agreement between the EU and Algeria provide for any commitment to defend the human rights of women ( including the right to education in rural areas ) and to improve the status of women within the family ?
What improvements are planned ?
What assistance will the EU provide to ensure that the process of democratisation also reaches women ?
Question No 17 by ( H-0377 / 01 ) :
Subject : Algeria It is now estimated that 200 000 people have been killed over the past ten years in Algeria .
These killings are continuing at a rate of about 200 a month .
Will the Swedish Presidency indicate what measures it has taken during its Presidency in support of an international independent inquiry into these killings and what initiatives it intends to pursue at UN level with a view to stopping the killings and the reported widespread use of torture ?
Allow me first of all to point out that the negotiations for an Association Agreement between the European Union and Algeria are going according to plan but that a number of important issues remain to be resolved .
The negotiators meet almost every month with a view to concluding the negotiations this year .
Much has been achieved .
Algeria has already given its preliminary approval to the following human rights wording : ' Respect for the democratic principles and fundamental human rights established by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights inspires the domestic and external policies of Algeria and constitutes an essential element of this Agreement . '
This broad reference covers human rights for all human beings , irrespective of gender , as well as all areas of civil and political , as well as social , economic and cultural rights .
Another provision in the draft gives each of the contracting parties the right to take suitable measures if it considers that the other party has omitted to fulfil an obligation under the Agreement .
In the ongoing negotiations , agreement has also been reached concerning two important matters affecting the situation of women . Special emphasis is to be placed on giving the female section of the population access to education , including technical education , higher education and vocational education ; and - within the framework of social cooperation - priority is to be given , through education and the media , to promoting women ' s role in the process of economic and social development , concurrently with Algerian policy on the issue .
Concluding an Association Agreement will facilitate and institutionalise the political dialogue with Algeria , including on issues affecting human rights .
With regard to Mr Andrews ' s question , the Council shares his concern about the murders which have taken place in Algeria over the last ten years .
Through the Swedish Foreign Minister , the Presidency addressed the issue at the meeting for political dialogue between the European Union and Algeria which took place in Algeria on 24 April .
We expressed our concern about disappearances , arbitrary arrests and torture .
Moreover , a list of such cases was passed to the Algerian authorities , and we requested information about these cases .
The European Union has also expressed its concern along the same lines at the annual meeting with the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
Within the framework of MEDA ' s technical and financial aid to Algeria , the EU supports a project for modernising the police force .
The programme includes training in respect for human rights in the course of police interventions . EUR 8.2 million have been set aside for this purpose .
The European Union is also providing aid to selected institutions with a view to strengthening civil society .
Once the Association Agreement with Algeria that I have just mentioned has been concluded , the political dialogue with Algeria will be institutionalised .
We shall then have a framework within which we can express our concern about , and criticisms of , Algeria .
I am grateful for the reply given by the President-in-Office of the Council . However , his role is to some extent that of a messenger and he must know as well as I do that women ' s rights will be disregarded unless there is an explicit reference to their recognition in the association agreement .
We are discussing a country where Algerian Berbers were killed as a result of police charges on 29 April of this year .
We are actually talking about an association agreement with that country .
I do not think that an explicit reference to the rights of women and Berbers is too much to ask . This association agreement should also provide for the respect of the civil , cultural and linguistic rights of Algerian Berbers .
Is the President-in-Office of the Council prepared to pass on this request ?
As I stated in my answer , the general wording on human rights is included in the draft Association Agreement which is now on the table .
It is important that the General Declaration of Human Rights in the Association Agreement should cover not only women but also minorities .
You yourself mentioned the Berbers .
There are many other groups which also need to be mentioned .
As an example , I can assure you that , with this general wording as a basis , the Swedish Foreign Minister , who is a woman , made clear references to precisely this need to draw attention to the position of women in Algeria .
That is repeated the whole time in the dialogue with Algeria , and we shall be able to repeat it still more powerfully once we obtain an Association Agreement .
The Agreement will give us a framework which will make it possible to address all the problems related to human rights .
I believe we have precisely the same view of the necessity for improving the position of women in Algeria .
I also believe that we have precisely the same view on the need to ensure that Algeria does not only respect women ' s rights , but all human rights .
Let us therefore work together in order to achieve this .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office for a very comprehensive reply , and it seems to me that everything is going to be perfect after this Association Agreement is concluded .
I want to ask him : Does the Council intend to approve this Association Agreement if the appalling human rights abuses continue in Algeria ?
It is all very well to have human rights agreements signed , but the reality is that no matter what efforts have been made in Algeria over the years by the Council and by the European Union , the situation , like in Turkey , has got worse instead of better .
I want to ask him : Is it the intention of the Council to agree to the final statement on the association agreement when it arises in October or November ?
My own feeling is that every possible sanction should be imposed on the Algerian Government to ensure that human rights are respected for everyone : men , women and children .
I do not want to anticipate the Council ' s final position on the Association Agreement , but I nonetheless think it is important to ask the question . Why does the European Union have such an instrument as an Association Agreement ?
It is not , in any case , because an Association Agreement would give a government or a country some kind of carte blanche to do whatever it likes .
An Association Agreement exists because the European Union desires a framework , a form within which , for example , a political dialogue can be conducted - also concerning matters about which there is no agreement .
That is why we want Association Agreements .
The Council believes that this is a more effective instrument than just letting things happen .
As the case of Turkey shows , the Association Agreement is an effective instrument enabling the European Union to highlight and criticise states of affairs it does not accept .
Matters proceed slowly sometimes , and we can all feel frustrated but , in these contexts , dialogue is always more effective than isolation .
Question No 18 by ( H-0366 / 01 ) :
Subject : " Everything but arms " agreement What are the consequences for Community banana producers and traditional ACP suppliers of the recent " everything but arms " agreement to eliminate tariffs for the least developed countries ?
This is an important issue that the honourable Member has addressed .
I shall therefore give a relatively long answer , in spite of the lateness of the hour .
As the honourable Member is aware , what is known as the ' Everything but arms ' Regulation was adopted by the Council on 26 February 2001 , when freedom from duty , without any quantitative restrictions , was extended to include all products , except for weapons and ammunition , originating in the world ' s 49 least developed countries .
The Regulation came into force on 5 May 2001 .
We think that this measure forms a significant contribution to the economic development of the least developed countries and that it is also concrete proof of the European Union ' s political goodwill towards the developing countries in connection with the preparations for the next round of the WTO negotiations .
The Regulation was the result of intensive discussions in the Council , where full account was taken of the consequence analysis prepared by the Commission and of the Member States ' need for assurances concerning the more detailed provisions for implementing the proposed system .
These assurances related not only to the Member States ' interests , but also to the consequences of the proposal for those ACP states that are not among the least developed countries , as well as to the desire to guarantee that the least developed countries themselves , rather than third parties , benefit from the new system .
The doubts related mainly to three particularly sensitive products : bananas , rice and sugar .
The final text took account of these doubts , while the main principle , according to which the EU should adopt meaningful measures to improve the economic situation in the least developed countries , was maintained .
When it came to bananas , rice and sugar , implementation was therefore deferred until such time as agreement had been reached on the principle of access without duties and quotas .
Where bananas were concerned , complete liberalisation was postponed until 2006 .
In the meantime , annual 20 per cent reductions in duty would be introduced as from January 2002 .
In the light of the problems of infrastructure that would-be banana exporters in the least developed countries at present encounter , it is difficult at this stage to assess with certainty what direct effect the Regulation will have on the banana market .
As has been mentioned previously , adjustments have been made to the Regulation so that account might be taken of the misgivings experienced in this regard in the European Union and the banana-producing ACP countries that do not belong to the group of least developed countries .
Moreover , the Commission has undertaken to monitor the application of the Regulation in order to discover and deal with all the difficulties as soon as possible .
The Commission will investigate to what extent the least developed countries are benefiting from the Regulation , whether the available tools are sufficient for tackling - where justified - more serious disturbances in Community markets and when it is a question of bringing the adjustment mechanisms into play , especially for rice , sugar and bananas .
In the light of this investigation , the Commission will present a report in 2005 and table the necessary proposals .
As the honourable Member certainly knows , the Council is fully aware of its ACP partners ' problems when it comes to the operation of the banana market and is doing its utmost to take account of these misgivings in all relevant initiatives .
In connection with the Cotonou Agreement , the EU acknowledged the overwhelming economic importance of exports to the EU for banana suppliers in the ACP countries and agreed , if need be , to take measures to guarantee the continued profitability of banana-exporting companies in the ACP countries and continued opportunities to sell their bananas in the EU market .
When the Council acts in order to meet the need to alter the organisation of the banana market so that it complies fully with the WTO ' s rules , the attempt will therefore also be made to introduce guarantees to prevent ACP bananas from being excluded from the market .
On this point , I also want to mention the agreement in principle reached immediately before Easter between the Commission and the United States regarding the protracted dispute between the EU and the United States concerning the trade discipline for bananas .
In very general terms , those parts of the agreement concerning ACP suppliers are designed to protect the latter ' s position by guaranteeing more reliable and more favourable conditions for the ACP states ' access to the EU market .
Of special importance in this regard is the proposed introduction of a quota , exclusively reserved for ACP suppliers , and of an historic licence system which is seen to benefit the ACP suppliers more than the previous ' first come , first served ' proposal .
In this connection , I would also remind you that , when , in 2006 , the EC ' s organisation of the market in bananas becomes a duties-only system , a reduced duty will , in any case , give the ACP states a relative advantage .
According to the Commission ' s proposal , the Council will have to submit formal points of view regarding certain details of the agreement in principle with the United States .
Parliament ' s views will , of course , be sought regarding each possible change to the Council Regulation on the common organisation of the market in bananas .
Finally , I would remind you of the Council Regulation establishing , from 1 January 1999 , a special aid scheme for ACP states that are traditional banana suppliers .
This system offers technical and financial aid to help ACP suppliers adjust to new market conditions and increase their competitiveness , at the same time as encouraging environmentally more friendly production and marketing methods .
The financial and technical aid supplied in accordance with this Regulation amounted to almost EUR 45 million in 2000 .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his detailed reply . However , I would like to ask him whether as from 1 January 2006 , pursuant to the new banana regime , the only protection offered to Community banana producers and ACP countries which are also included will be the tariff .
The Community has just given up the tariff .
Consequently , no protection of this sort will be available after 1 January 2006 .
I anticipate that the beneficiaries of this measure will be the large multinationals .
If I were in charge of a multinational company , I would relocate the plantations from Central America , Ecuador or any other country to one of those least developed countries . The reason would be that thanks to this agreement I would be assured that as from 1 January 2006 there would be no restriction on the import of bananas .
My question to the President-in-Office of the Council concerns whether consideration has been given to the implications of all this both for Community producers , some of whom live in very underdeveloped areas of the Community , and for producers in other ACP countries who do not enjoy a particularly high standard of living either .
As I mentioned , the Commission has carried out a consequence analysis of the effects on the Community ' s own banana production .
The Commission ' s assessment is that there will be minimal consequences in the medium term .
The honourable Member also indicates other possible measures that multinational companies can take on the basis of these changed rules .
It is precisely in order to be able to counter such measures that the Commission will be reporting - next time in 2005 .
I assume that there will subsequently be continuous monitoring by the Commission so that this new organisation of the market in bananas is not abused .
I am convinced that , with its usual diligence and promptness , the Commission will see to it that this new scheme , whose main aim is to benefit the least developed countries , is not abused .
Thank you for being so very helpful this afternoon , Mr Danielsson .
We shall now invoke the Rules of Procedure .
Questions Nos 19 and 20 lapse because the Middle East has already been referred to in the statement made this morning by the Commission and the Council .
Questions Nos 21 and 22 have been withdrawn .
As the time allocated to Question Time to the Council has now elapsed , Questions Nos 23 to 44 will receive written replies .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Aid scheme for olive oil
The next item is the combined debate on the following reports :

( A5-0137 / 2001 ) by Mr Jové Peres , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulations No 136 / 66 / EEC and ( EC ) No 1638 / 98 as regards the extension of the period of validity of the aid scheme and the quality strategy for olive oil [ COM ( 2000 ) 855 - C5-0026 / 2001 - 2000 / 0358 ( CNS ) ] ;
( A5-0114 / 2001 ) by Mr Casaca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the European Court of Auditors ' Special Report 11 / 2000 on the support scheme for olive oil , accompanied by the Commission ' s replies [ C5-0009 / 2001 - 2001 / 2001 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , it is now two years since the COM in olive oil was last reviewed .
Hoping to receive more and better information on the actual situation in the sector , the Commission has postponed the final review for two years . It has presented a proposal with a bearing on quality aspects and market actions .
Although the proposal ' s aim is commendable , it does have a number of shortcomings concerning three issues : the market situation , checks , and the marketing of blended oil .
Public intervention purchases were done away with in the 1998 reform , against Parliament ' s wishes .
This decision was taken even though their average cost was the lowest in existence .
As a result , market prices have fallen dramatically and the producers ' income has dropped .
This matter is not part of the Commission ' s proposal , but that does not justify turning a blind eye to the consequences of the last revision .
In its replies to the Court of Auditors , the Commission stated that it would make provision for closer checks in this revision .
It has to be said that in general , it has failed to do so . The report therefore formulates proposals to improve the efficiency of controls by increasing the frequency with which oil mills are to submit information and introducing similar conditions for aid to pomace oil .
Parliament has been speaking out about the problems ensuing from marketing blends of olive oil and other fats since 1996 . We have called for similar protection to that in place for milk and butter , for example .
Unfortunately , no regulations have been adopted in response to these requests .
On this occasion , the proposal ' s shortcoming is all the more conspicuous since the Commission ' s proposal focuses on quality strategy .
The European Parliament ' s Committee on Agriculture therefore proposes a ban on marketing blends of olive oil and other fats , in line with measures already in place in most of the producer countries .
Regarding the content of the proposal , the designations proposed by the Commission have been somewhat modified .
In addition , the report proposes a number of measures concerning labelling . The most significant of these is aimed at preventing the designation ' olive oil ' being used as an advertising slogan , thus confusing the consumers .
In cases where olive oil was not the only fat contained in a food product , the use of the denomination ' olive oil ' would therefore be restricted to the quantitative description of ingredients .
As far as labelling is concerned , the inclusion of two other details is proposed : the origin of the oil , namely the place where the olives were grown , and in the case of ordinary oil , a requirement to state that it is produced from refined and virgin oils .
I trust the Commission will respond more positively to these points than it has in the past .
On 25 October last , for instance , the Commission rejected some thirty of our amendments to the proposal for the COM in fruit and vegetables on the grounds that they would be included in a later report .
That report has now been published , but the substance of our amendments was not included .
Furthermore , our document includes a number of amendments aimed at making the Commission ' s proposal more flexible and precise .
The Commission intends it to be implemented in two years ' time , through the collaboration of what it terms the ' organisations of economic agents ' .
Since the actions planned are to be financed partly from a deduction withheld from aid to production , it follows that producers will be involved in the administration .
Some clearly defined entities already exist , such as producers ' organisations , their associations and interbranch bodies .
Given the circumstances , a two-year period for the introduction of the proposed actions should not be necessary .
A clear list of actions which may not be included should also be drafted , to provide legal certainty and speed up and facilitate the preparation of programmes .
In conclusion , special thanks are due above all to the members of the Committee on Agriculture .
Their amendments have enriched the report considerably , bringing it into line with the requirements of producers and consumers in all the states involved . This was evident at the meeting organised by the Italian Ministry of Agriculture in Verona as recently as last April .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by offering my sincere congratulations to the European Court of Auditors , whose report on olive oil has made another major contribution to the debate on the effectiveness of the system of common organisation of the markets under which the common agricultural policy still operates .
My first thanks go to the Commission , which spared no effort during the drafting of this report to make themselves available , to answer the questions put to them and to explain their decisions . I also wish to thank our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the draftsman of the opinion on this report , Vincenzo Lavarra and the rapporteur on the olive oil sector , Mr Jové Peres .
My sincere thanks go to them for their contributions and for the way in which they cooperated so willingly with me .
I wish to make very special mention of the excellent study on the environmental impact of the common organisation of the market in olive oil , produced for the Commission ' s Directorate-General for the Environment by accredited institutions for agro-environmental analysis , from which I shall quote frequently in this speech .
The COM in olive oil is based on aid for production . In other words , it encourages higher productivity as a means of increasing farmers ' incomes .
The average production of an olive grove varies between 200 kg and 500 kg per hectare per year for traditional olive groves in poorer areas and between around 8 and 10 tonnes per hectare per year in the more intensively cultivated groves with the best soil .
Since it is possible , then , to increase the productivity of olive groves by 10 or even 20 times , a policy geared towards increasing the quantity produced has inevitably led to traditional olive groves and the most difficult land to cultivate being abandoned and has led to the intensification of production on more fertile land .
Traditional plantations have a low density of trees , which are generally old - trees that are centuries old are common - also contain arable crops or grazing land for sheep or goats , are frequently planted in terraces and are very labour intensive .
The value of olive trees for heritage and for the landscape in terms of protecting land from floods and landslides or in terms of increasing biodiversity is incalculable .
The study to which I just referred counted 120 plant species , 70 species of vertebrates and 160 species of invertebrates in traditional olive groves in the province of Cordoba in Andalusia .
Ancient olive groves and trees play a particularly important role in preserving many species of birds .
The value of subsidies for production is too low in this area and traditional olive groves are being abandoned throughout the Mediterranean , with the inevitable damaging consequences for the environment and for rural development .
Modern intensive plantations have a high density of low-yield trees , which are chopped down after a few years . These plantations use copious amounts of water for irrigation , up to 350 kg of fertiliser per hectare and pesticides and herbicides to clear the soil of vegetation .
These plantations do not use terraces , which often creates slopes of more than 12 % .
It is estimated that modern olive groves in Andalusia have caused erosion of 80 tonnes per hectare , whereas more than 50 tonnes of erosion per hectare is considered to be an extremely serious level .
The around 1 million new intensive plantations in Andalusia are therefore causing erosion at a rate of 80 million tonnes of soil per year , making this one of the main factors for desertification in the southern Iberian Peninsula .
Although fewer studies have been made of the problem in these areas , it also affects huge swathes of the Peloponnese , Crete , the Aegean islands and Tuscany .
In areas such as Liguria and in many parts of Portugal , erosion is caused more by traditional olive groves being abandoned than by the establishment of modern groves .
The current system of production-related aid is not only stimulating the human and environmental desertification of the southern part of our continent , but is also making the work of those who adulterate olive oil easier , enabling them to cheat the Community budget , cheat consumers of their right to buy a natural , high-quality product , and cheat the farmers .
The level of fraud and irregularities uncovered by this Court of Auditors report on the olive oil sector is far too high .
It is true that there is every indication that the only reason for more fraud being discovered in olive oil than in milk is that there are tighter controls , not because there is any greater propensity to commit fraud in that sector .
The European institutions must make the fight against the adulteration of food in areas such as meat , milk , wine and olive oil absolute political priorities , which will inevitably mean overhauling the way in which the CAP operates .
Preserving and improving the environment and farmers ' incomes is the prime objective of the agricultural chapter of the Treaty .
Our current approach , however , is proving of greater benefit to the agro-industrial conglomerates than to agriculture . It is causing the desertification of the poorest rural areas , is having a damaging effect on the environment and makes the sale of bogus products easier .
We therefore need to abandon the old COM system of providing incentives for productivity and to create a new CAP that focuses on protecting farmers ' incomes , the rural world , quality and the environment .
Mr President , I should like to express my appreciation to the rapporteur , Mr Jové , for his splendid work and for always being willing to collaborate with members of the Committee on Agriculture .
I should also like to thank the European Commission for its report on quality strategy for olive oil and for the draft regulation . Both these documents are sound in principle .
Nonetheless , the proposal in question has been much improved by Parliament ' s report . Allow me to highlight a number of areas where this is the case .
Regarding checks , we fully agree that they should basically be undertaken at the level of the oil mills . This is a far more efficient method of monitoring .
The geographical oil information system should become complementary to it . Secondly , as far as mixtures of olive oil and other fats are concerned , we advocate a total ban on marketing .
In so doing , we are responding to requests made by the producer countries .
The consumer can easily be misled by such mixtures , and olive oil ' s reputation will be adversely affected . It should be noted that this in no way restricts consumer choice , as any individual interested in such a mixture can produce it for personal consumption .
Thirdly , following revision of the COM in 1998 and the end of intervention aid buying , aid to private storage became the only way of regulating market prices .
This measure has not been implemented correctly , however . As a result , price levels have been below the limits set by the Council for many months , when such measures had not been authorised .
It is therefore very positive that Parliament ' s report should call for the automatic opening of private storage . This will allow olive oil prices to be maintained at an appropriate level .
Finally , I should like to refer to aid for the production of olive pomace oil .
Its purpose is to ensure that the by-products of olive mills are handled in an environmentally-friendly way . We feel that such aid should be calculated with reference to the amount of pomace oil actually produced , and should not be awarded on a lump sum basis as is currently the case .
Furthermore , this proposal is certain to have a beneficial impact on quality strategy .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteurs on these important issues .
I shall just take a few minutes to comment on the proposal for a Council regulation on the new COM for olive oil , first thanking Mr Jové Peres for the competence and willingness he has shown , which have led to the considerable understanding of our Committee .
The conditions were not right for a thorough reform and so we have chosen to bring forward the introduction of some important rules allowing this sector to face the new challenges posed by the World Trade Organisation , the liberalisation of the markets and the reform of the common agricultural policy .
This has been the driving force that has led us to identify specific rules and requests for new aid .
In particular , for us it is important to give the origin of the oil as the place where the olives were harvested and not where it was produced .
We have the duty of transparency and of coherence with the principles of traceability : it is a matter of courtesy to the producers and the consumers .
I hope the Council will approve our position and issue an order to revise Regulation 2815 .
Equally worthy of consideration are the ban on blending olive oil with other oils or fats and the incentive to the producer organisation to increase market supply capacity , because this is the paradox to overcome : a rising demand for consumption of this precious commodity and a fall in prices .
With these measures we think the whole sector can be sustained , and I am pleased to finish with a particular comment on the method we have used , that is to say the meeting of Parliament with the whole sector , which has led to these points which I hope we will approve today in this House and which I hope may guide the final decision of the Council .
Mr President , I thank Mr Peres for the work he has done and especially for his willingness to receive proposals and suggestions ; I thank the Commission for having done such a thorough job ; and I thank the Committee on Agriculture for having unanimously approved the amendments tabled .
This means there may be a unanimous vote in Parliament tomorrow , and there is hope that a strong proposal may reach the Council , strong because it is expressed by a unanimous Parliament .
It is true that in the debate about the reform of the common agricultural policy , which is beginning to be discussed , the conviction is emerging from many parts that in time aid for production will gradually be cut down .
Producers are not frightened by this prospect as long as it is possible to sell on the market at a fair price .
This objective can be pursued essentially in two ways : either by organising a promotion , information and consumer awareness campaign as well as advertising the product , which is the only way to make quality prevail on the market , or by preventing and discouraging fraud and adulteration .
The latter is a problem that cannot be left just to the Member States , but one that the whole Union must face by understanding that it is responsible .
The amendments tabled and approved are a step in this direction .
Here I shall ask the Commission a formal question .
With this resolution we are going to intervene in Regulation 1638 / 98 .
There is , however , an amendment which explicitly seeks an undertaking regarding Regulation 2815 , the regulation which provides for the possibility of marketing oil without labelling and lays down the origin of the product linked to the place of pressing and not the place of harvesting .
Commissioner Fischler gave me and Mr Lavarra an undertaking that at the time of the COM reform this Regulation too would somehow be eliminated or at least modified .
The Regulation expires on 31 October 2001 .
My question is this : what is the Commission going to do ?
Does it intend to keep faith with this undertaking and also with this approved amendment which will surely be approved by Parliament tomorrow , and thus not renew this Regulation from November 2001 onwards , or change it in line with the wishes of the highest democratic assembly ?
We ask for an explicit undertaking by the Commission because while we are discussing and legally intervening in Regulation 1638 we do not want the other Regulation to go off in a different direction which does not allow for the possibility of its being legally amended .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for its report , and also by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Jové Peres , for his excellent input .
In my opinion , the Commission ' s proposal to extend the current aid regime for a further two years is sound . However , I share the sector ' s concern at the Commission ' s intention to resort entirely to an operational geographical oil information system for future monitoring of this regime .
We feel this could prove a good monitoring tool , but only a complementary one .
We believe it would be more useful and fairer to put in place appropriate checks at the oil mills , not just a geographical information system . Hopefully , such checks would be more effective in preventing fraud .
We do not agree with the Commission ' s proposal where it introduces a new concept , that of economic operators .
This concept is quite unclear . Any one of us could set up tomorrow as an economic agents ' organisation and withhold significant funds from those genuinely involved in oil production , namely producers ' or interbranch organisations recognised by the Member States themselves .
In our judgement , the key element of the strategy to promote quality is a permanent ban on the marketing of blends of olive oil and other fats .
This is essential to pursue fraudulent blending with seed oil . The ban must be central to management of the olive oil market , so as to avoid defrauding customers and to establish a clear policy on quality and food safety .
We endorse the general feeling within the Committee on Agriculture concerning the new designations . They result from extensive consultation with the sector , as does the reduction of maximum permitted acidity for extra virgin oil .
Ladies and gentlemen , no other crop is so closely linked with the people of the Mediterranean and with their culture . No other crop shaped the landscape over thousands of years , as this one has .
We are convinced of the environmental value of olive groves in maintaining biodiversity and stemming the advance of desertification . Those of us who live in the area are especially aware of this .
In drafting programmes aimed at improving the environmental impact of olive groves , consideration should therefore also be given to recycling material removed when pruning the groves . Both the olive wood and the leaves can be used commercially , thus taking full advantage of all the by-products of cultivation .
Following the last ' reform ' of the common organisation of the market in the olive oil sector and now that the transitional period has come to an end for the Commission to change the aid system , from aid for production to aid per tree , the Commission has presented its strategy for olive oil quality and is extending the present aid system for a further two years .
This extension is to be welcomed , but the Commission has failed to provide a solution on three points that were not resolved in the 1998 reform . These are : the establishment of compensation aid for small producers , as proposed by Parliament ; a ban on the sale of olive oil mixed with other fats and labelling that does not mislead the consumer and which only gives the name ' olive oil ' to products made from olives .
Furthermore , doing away with mechanisms for public intervention and replacing them with private stockpiling has not managed to prevent a fall in prices and the consequences of this on reducing farmers ' incomes .
Salvador Jové ' s report seeks to resolve some of these fundamental issues , particularly with regard to blends , and I support his ideas on this matter .
The report by Paulo Casaca undermines the European Parliament ' s resolutions by using an opinion on the report by the Court of Auditors to go ahead with proposals to replace the current system of aid for production with direct aid to farmers , which opens the way to the Commission ' s option of per tree premiums .
We must reject this proposal .
Aid per tree would not only have damaging consequences for production and for employment - with the olives not being harvested - but we would also lose a key element for monitoring the production of olive oil and its quality . This would consequently increase opportunities for fraudulent practices .
Mr President , several times over the last year I have addressed enquiries to the Commission for news about the large consignments of extra-Community oil imported into Italy via third countries .
I have requested that a Community database be set up for oil and that Regulation 2568 / 91 be revised , in order to check analytically for the presence of hazelnut oil in the olive oil imported into Italy .
Unfortunately the answers have never been reassuring , and sometimes they have been quite alarming .
The observations made in the explanatory statement in the Peres report are all true , highlighting once again the demand for a guaranteed income for farmers and respect for the space and special character of the Mediterranean environment , the strong demand to prevent aid per tree by supporting aid based on production , and the valuing of the quality and genuineness of the product to protect the consumer .
It is clear that Parliament ' s position is not yet in tune with the Commission ' s , and I hope that at least some fundamental amendments in the Peres report will be approved to clarify the important function of the producer organisations as a useful presence on the market , to value interprofessionalism , to protect the consumer from any abuses by preventing the blending of olive oil with other vegetable oils , to establish the place of production of the olives as the place of origin , and lastly something which particularly concerns the south of Italy and the Puglia region : to add some cultivars to the genetic mark , preventing them from being regarded as defects of organoleptic characteristics whereas instead they are expressions of techniques and special characters that can be found in the production specifications of protected denomination of origin olive oils
Mr President , in just two years ' time we will be facing a series of important dates for the common agricultural policy : from the verification of Agenda 2000 to the review of the common organisations of the market for seed plants , sugar , milk , and at this point also olive oil .
By chance , by a strange stroke of luck , we have the competent Commissioner here today .
The financial resources and the aid that the producers expect will become a sort of financial bottleneck which must in no way affect the solidity of any of the above-mentioned dossiers .
Oil in particular should be safeguarded as a sector because it represents European agricultural values throughout the world .
We must work so that quality and safety and also the multiple uses of the product can be the key to the future of Community olive oil production .
To achieve this aim it is necessary , however , that in the period before these important dates arrive there should be a review , reappraisal and enhancement of the role of producer associations especially ; in fact , the centralisation of the operators is essential for achieving consumer protection based on labelling and traceability .
From this viewpoint , the introduction of a clear classification of oils can only result in greater access to the competitive advantages of guaranteed production .
In addition , alongside the financial aspects of a sector like that of oil , the Community law on designation of origin must necessarily be revisited .
The European principle must in fact become that of identifying the origin of the oil with the place where the olives are produced and no longer with the place where they are crushed , as has debatably been the case until now .
In this context the blending of olive oil with other vegetable oils , in the absence of labelling that will identify each component in the blend , damages the image of the producer , the consumer and the Codex Alimentarius .
It would in fact be deplorable if we were to find ourselves facing not just the existing uncontrolled piracy of digital music but also unfair competition in foodstuffs , playing on false denominations and bogus labels .
Adulteration must be repressed , especially in the area of foodstuffs , because what is at stake are the interests of consumer safety and the producers ' right to entrepreneurial freedom .
The whole olive oil sector , supported by the political institution at whatever level , should assume the responsibility of carrying out the activities of management and market control through concentration and the marketing of the product , to the benefit of quality , certification , research , promotion and traceability .
I thank Mr Peres for the truly excellent results of his work .
This evening I take the opportunity - and I shall repeat this in the House tomorrow - to say that we have a problem with the Italian translation : the translation of ' brut ' , referring to oil , as ' greggio ' ( crude ) is not acceptable in my country and so tomorrow I shall ask for the Italian version to use the term ' naturale ' ( natural ) or ' vergine ' ( virgin ) .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my congratulations to Mr Casaca on his excellent report , which amply demonstrates that we have still not managed to bring olive oil regulations into line with the demands of modern agriculture and the fact that this agricultural policy is in need of radical reform .
I should like to cite two examples here .
First : one of the main objectives of production aid is to give olive farmers a fair income and guarantee market balance .
As the Court of Auditors quite rightly states , the objective of production aid in relation to producers ' income has never been defined .
In other words , no one knows if this objective has ever been achieved , because we have never been able to assess it .
The same applies to market balance .
In 1998 , the Commission established that there are 180 million olive trees .
That came as something of a surprise , because Olistat had reckoned with a lot fewer trees , some 140 million .
That is a difference of 40 million trees , a discrepancy of about 31 % .
Just consider , you think you have market balance and then you find out that you have 30 % too much stock .
The increase in stock over the last two years does , in fact , indicate that there is a surplus .
Secondly , there were similar weaknesses in the consumption aid abolished at the end of 1998 .
There was no obligation to keep records or ledgers of accounts payable .
As a result , there was a huge amount of fraud and irregularity .
EUR 429 million in undue amounts have still not been recovered for the 1985-1998 period .
Only 6 % has been recovered so far .
Just think how financial control and recovery were reorganised in connection with the reform of the Commission .
We really do have our work cut out here .
As far as export refunds are concerned , just 13 % of the money has been recovered .
Anyone who takes the protection of European taxpayers seriously just wants to get on and reform this agricultural policy .
Mr Casaca 's report shows us how .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to thank the rapporteurs on behalf of the Commission for their excellent work .
The area which we are discussing is not important just for the regions ; it is also a very important area for the European budget .
After all , this year 's budget includes EUR 2.4 billion for the olive oil sector .
In this respect , it is also an extremely important area when it comes to audits by the European Court of Auditors .
Mr Casaca has dealt with the special report by the Court of Auditors .
Mr Jové Peres has led the debate on the Commission proposal .
Strictly speaking , these two areas are totally separate because the special report by the Court of Auditors addresses the measures and aid applied over a three-year transitional period before the Council decision in 1998 , whereas the Commission proposal relates to measures to be taken from November 2001 onwards .
First to Mr Casaca 's report .
The Commission can accept most of the points in Mr Casaca 's motion for a resolution on the Court of Auditors ' report .
However , I should like to take a more detailed position on two points .
The Commission stated in the middle of last year , during its examination of the Court of Auditor 's report , that improving the control system would , of course , be an important issue in the forthcoming reform of the common organisation of the market .
Having examined this question closely , it is clear that radical reforms are needed if any decisive improvement is to be made .
However , come what may , we need a geographical information system .
As the right conditions will not all be in place for this sort of reform in 2001 , the Commission suggested at the end of last year that , the decisive importance of the geographical information system notwithstanding , the reform should be postponed for two years .
Besides , the Court of Auditors ' proposals suggested other ways of making improvements here .
After highly constructive talks with the Member States , these improvements were set out in Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 648 / 2000 .
This motion for a resolution expresses surprise at the fact that the Commission questions the reliability of the International Olive Oil Council 's statistics .
These doubts should come as no surprise .
They were expressed at every Council meeting between 1995 and 1998 .
The Commission checked the data in question and clarified the details with the Member States on several occasions .
The International Olive Oil Council 's statistics for 1999 had to be revised for the purpose of standardising the data .
This resulted in a 30 % reduction in the stock calculated .
It was also found that it was best to assume that national statistics had a margin of error of 10-12 % .

I have the following to say about Mr Jové Peres 's report : the report on the Commission proposal on the future common organisation of the market in olive oil is divided into two parts , dealing with two different subjects . The first part deals with postponing the decision on the reform in the olive oil sector for two years , until we have more accurate data and a more reliable control system , and the second part deals with the introduction of a new regulation on classifying olive oil and the quality strategy for olive oil .
The proposed amendments relate to four main issues : market measures and final reform , controls of the current regulation , classification and labelling of olive oil and the activities of the organisations of market operators .
I should like to comment on all four .
As far as general market aspects are concerned , the Commission agrees with Amendment No 2 on the need to assess the results of the transitional period .
The Commission acknowledges Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 9 but cannot formally accept them because they anticipate the decision on final reform , which the Commission wants to leave open at the moment .
I cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 , 6 and 26 on automatic private storage arrangements even where the market situation has no need of them .
Nor can the Commission endorse Amendments Nos 1 and 46 on aid for actual olive-residue oil production because this would complicate controls still further .
Similarly , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 27 extending production refunds to products not in international competition with cheap olive oil .
As regards Amendment No 37 , concerning the basic ban on the planting of additional olive groves , the Commission takes the view that conversions and the legal consequences with respect to land use would give rise to huge problems .
Numerous provisions on control measures have already been issued during the course of the year .
The outstanding problems are connected with marketing structures .
No decisive progress can be made until we introduce the geographical information system which the Commission has suggested as the basis on which aid should be granted from 2003 onwards .
Most of the substance of the amendments proposed here has already been taken into account in the Commission 's regulations .
Amendments Nos 7 , 11 and 14 call for greater involvement of the Commission and additional research .
But the Commission is already working closely with the Member States on controls without , however , disregarding the fact that they have the final say .
Research programmes have already been funded under the general procedure in the areas which you mention .
Amendments Nos 8 , 10 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 36 relate to improved monitoring of mills , the main concern being to use electronic data transmission .
The relevant Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 2366 / 98 already provides a legal basis for priority monitoring of mills .
As a result , at least 30 % of mills must be controlled in situ .
In addition , the mills must send in data on their stock accounts at the end of every month .
These data have already been compared with the information available on olive oil production and marketing .
The proposal for a computerised system for monitoring on a day-to-day basis is being examined .
If it proves to be sensible and practicable , the Commission could issue the corresponding regulation .
However , we must bear in mind that , unfortunately , the IT tools for the Member States for which provision has been made are still not fully ready for use .
As far as classification and labelling are concerned , as addressed in Amendments Nos 16 , 18 and 45 , together with Amendments Nos 19 and 35 , we have taken note of your proposals , especially the call for the place where the olives were grown to be taken as the place of origin .
However , as these questions come under the Commission 's jurisdiction , the Commission cannot agree to their being included in the basic Council regulation .
Amendments Nos 33 and 34 call for the specific reference to olive oil as an ingredient to be banned on food labels .
These proposals are questionable from a commercial point of view and the Commission therefore takes the view that food labelling should comply with Directive 2000 / 13 ( EC ) .
Obviously , the Commission is aware of the fact that the olive oil sector is calling for a ban on the marketing of mixtures of olive oils and other fats .
However , the Commission cannot ban healthy , properly labelled products for which there is a demand simply to protect sales of another product .
We therefore reject Amendments Nos 17 , 20 and 32 .
However , the Commission will make sure that suitable labelling requirements are drafted . It goes without saying that olive oil sold under one of the four compulsory names is still pure olive oil and has all the qualities which make it such .
Amendment No 47 suggests that the term " natural " should be used instead of the term " crude " and Amendment No 48 adds the term " ordinary olive oil " to the term " standard olive oil " .
The Commission is unable to accept this at the moment because it prefers to find terms which correspond more closely to the perceptions of the sector as a whole .
The Commission will , however , include your suggestions in subsequent Council discussions .
Under Amendment No 21 , the new classification would enter into force on 1 November 2002 , i.e. a year before the date proposed by the Commission .
As it will be impossible to complete the necessary implementing measures , market adjustments and international negotiations by then , the Commission cannot agree to this proposal .
Finally , as far as organisations of market operators are concerned , the Commission agrees to Amendment No 12 with its more general wording of the objectives , Amendment No 25 proposing that table olives be included in current provisions for quality improvement programmes and Amendment No 30 subject to legal examination and with the words " for recognised interbranch organisations " .
The very specific Amendment No 13 could be helpful for measures promoted in environmental programmes , but not for the basic regulation of the sector .
As regards measures for which organisations of market operators can claim a grant , the Commission is prepared to examine the inclusion of table olives and the assurance of origin .
However , the details of possible measures must be decided by the Commission .
The various methods for promoting sales must stay within the harmonised framework which applies to all agricultural products , which is why I have to reject Amendments Nos 39 , 40 and 43 .
If an organisation of market operators is to be licensed , it must meet certain criteria which the Commission has yet to decide .
The restructuring of the olive oil sector was less comprehensive than in other sectors and new discussions and conditions therefore appear to be needed .
The Commission has taken note of your request that organisations of producers and branch organisations be given priority .
However , there seems to be little point at present in restricting measures which could help to improve the quality and hence sales of olive oil .
Numerous proposed amendments call for new regulations on organisations of market operators to enter into force as quickly as possible .
This is certainly a good idea .
However , we need a good two years to work out detailed regulations for the sector , for the organisations of market operators and their programmes , for checking programmes and for the Member States to check and licence organisations and design the monitoring tools needed .
If we rush things , we will jeopardise the success of the quality strategy , which is why the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 15 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 38 , 41 , 42 and 44 .
However , I can confirm that the Commission does appreciate almost half the proposed amendments , even if it can only directly accept a few of them .
The remainder are mostly provisions for which the Commission itself is responsible and which will be drafted and amended over coming months , taking account of your recommendations .
Thank you very much , Commissioner for this very full answer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Draft SAB 2 / 2001
The next item is the report ( A5-0138 / 2001 ) by Mr Ferber , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget 2 / 2001 of the European Union for the 2001 financial year [ 60 / 2001 - C5-0153 / 2001 - 2001 / 2026 ( BUD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has again presented a supplementary budget in order to set the Common Foreign , and Security Policy and defence policy in Europe on a broader basis .
We examined the original draft supplementary budget sent to us by the Council very closely and came to the conclusion that it was not acceptable as it stood and I should like to say why in no uncertain terms : what we need in this important political field is to safeguard the necessary transparency and the necessary controls .
The common foreign and security policy of the European Union is one of the core elements in the further development of this European Union .
We cannot withdraw control functions from the national parliaments in this important area without giving them to the European Parliament and we felt that this democratic gap needed to be closed .
I should like to say quite clearly that interinstitutional agreements are all well and good , but they are not the right tool for effective control .
Nor are the Western European Union and its parliamentary assembly the right tool for effective control .
That is why it was clear to us that transparency can only be reasonably guaranteed and this important political field can only be controlled within the framework of the budgetary procedure .
That is why I am most grateful to my fellow members for staying the difficult course which we have taken together and seeing the tough negotiations with the Council through to the end and for supporting the line which I , as rapporteur , have taken from the outset .
I should also like to thank the Swedish Presidency of the Council for making it possible to broker a solution now which guarantees the Council 's ability to act in the area for which it is responsible under the Treaty and which also guarantees Parliament 's right of control .
That was the brief which we stood up for and which we negotiated .
We resisted the temptation - and I am most grateful to my fellow members for this - to make a distinction between administrative expenses and operational expenses .
That would have been too confusing .
You cannot distinguish , post by post , when someone is administering and when they are operationally active .
But now that we have succeeded in ensuring that a separate title in the Council budget includes activities in the area of the common foreign and security policy , this distinction - and hence controls - are guaranteed in an optimum manner .
The supplementary budget , in terms of numbers , totals EUR 9.846 million .
It makes provision for 51 new posts in this area and for the further technical resources needed in order to refurbish the buildings .
I should like to say quite clearly at this point that we shall of course check the Council budget in general and this new title in particular very closely during the course of the 2002 budgetary procedure .
We cannot allow the Council to build up powers which the European Union already has , for which provision has been made under the Commission budget , especially in the area of crisis prevention and civil crisis management , as a parallel structure .
And , as long as that is not the case , I see no need to recommend that the House reject the Council 's supplementary and amending budget .
We shall also ensure in future , as regards heading 5 , that the European Union 's ability to act is still guaranteed when it comes to administrative expenses .
I should like to urge the Council not just to deal with this important area in supplementary budgets , but to include it once and for all in its normal budget , so that we have a reasonable set of figures at our disposal when discussing other areas under heading 5 .
My thanks to the honourable members from nearly all the groups for supporting me .
However , I must say that I am somewhat disappointed that the Greens have moved to reject the supplementary budget .
The chairman of the Committee on Budgets will cast our vote on this motion tomorrow .
Until such time as we can prove - and we need ammunition here - that there are twin structures , it makes no sense to reject en masse something which represents a huge success for the European Parliament and , by extension , for the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , we object on principle to the accelerating growth of European Union military structures outside the NATO Alliance , with all their attendant costs and politically divisive intent .
We believe that the duplication of decision-making bodies and the development of a military staff separate from NATO will inevitably exacerbate policy differences between allies , to the detriment of the transatlantic relationship and the long-term security of our people .
The European Union should be focusing its efforts on economic , administrative and humanitarian contributions to crisis management , to complement the military capabilities which should properly be a NATO responsibility .
The European Union has not yet learned to deliver and manage its external assistance programmes efficiently or to properly spend the resources that have been allocated to these purposes .
Now it wants more money to spend on yet another ambitious and seriously misguided project .
Parliament is being asked to approve a draft supplementary and amending budget of nearly EUR 10 million to fund staff and equipment for the separate European Union military bodies .
In addition to some 90 staff redeployed from other tasks or seconded from Member States , 51 extra personnel are now to be recruited to expand the European Union military structures .
Can we have an assurance that this total of 141 personnel will not be exceeded ?
How long will it be before there is a further increase in staff for the European Union military structures ?
Mr Blair tells people at home that European Union 's defence policy is all about strengthening NATO .
Mr Hoon has even said that there is no concept of a European rapid reaction force as such .
From what I hear , everyone speaking on this side of the Channel has an entirely different perspective .
The aim is to establish an autonomous European Union military capability to underpin a distinctive EU foreign policy in which the Americans are not involved - in due course , a European army .
That is a reality .
That is what it is all about .
It is very dangerous .
Tonight we are discussing an unnecessary EUR 10 million .
I wonder how long it will be before we are discussing a defence budget of EUR 10 billion or more .
The development of an autonomous EU military capability , separate from NATO , has come about as a direct result of initiatives by the British Labour Government in 1998 .
Now their project has run out of control .
We know who is to blame and we cannot support this budget .
Mr President , I am truly amazed - I freely admit - by the last speaker as the official spokesman of the PPE group .
I really expected nothing of the sort .
I would have expected him to be closer to us , now that we know that the Greens have tabled a proposed amendment rejecting this supplementary and amending budget .
But nothing should come as a surprise in the European Parliament , especially not in this area .
The common foreign and security policy is one of the policies of the European Union which , to all intents and purposes , has yet to be developed .
In the past , it is true , we had a situation in which several Commissioners had to agree between themselves as to who was to look after and deal with which part of the world .
At times we remember this and smile .
But , when you look at politics from the point of view of content , it is irresponsible of the European Union not to speak with one voice and to behave like a dwarf in the world when it is in fact an economic global player and - to put it nastily - could in theory push the Secretary-General and representative of the common foreign and security policy around like an operetta general .
That is why we are convinced that anyone who wants to take the common foreign and security policy seriously and really implement it , anyone who wants to prevent the lack of European policy in the foreign policy area that we have seen over recent years , must support the common foreign and security policy .
This morning , Mr Brok said in the debate on the transatlantic dialogue that we , as the European Union , had no profile in Ukraine and that blunders had been made , which is why we must take the Council 's desire to make real progress here seriously and support it .
So support in principle is there .
When the supplementary and amending budget was presented to us - and here I concur fully with Mr Ferber - not only did it fail to convince us ; on the contrary we got all worked up and opposed to it .
It is wrong to try and hide such an important area which is so crucial to the future of the European Union beneath a gentlemen 's agreement between Parliament and the Council in a budget over which only the Council has any influence .
All that does is to demonstrate that you do not want any parliamentary control or any parliamentary support .
Which is unacceptable .
We said as much from the outset and we shall continue to take this view and to formulate our policy and vote accordingly .
But if you enter into negotiations and can clear up this point , i.e. if you can demonstrate that the supplementary and amending budget has been changed so that we can assume in future that we have are involved and have a say , when there is a separate chapter under which the Council shapes future policy in the common foreign and security policy area with parliamentary support and control , then you have to agree to it if you really want to make progress .
That is not the time to stand on the sidelines and say , we are waiting to see what happens next .
In all events , one thing is clear : when in reply to questions from the relevant Commissioner one is told in the Committee on Foreign Affairs or in the Committee on Budgets , with the wink of an eye , according to my sources , that there is no overlap , then it is hardly surprising that people ask questions and want to know exactly how things stand .
What we shall not support - and I say this now as a member of the budgetary authority , we are talking here first and foremost as the budgetary authority - are overlapping structures .
We cannot stand and watch two different people doing the same work under the same structures for the same tasks in the European Union .
That cannot be .
In this respect , we have to know what the common foreign and security policy should look like in the future and who is to be responsible for it .
We need concepts here and the Council and Commission need to know where they stand here .
We shall , of course , bring our standpoint very clearly to bear in the overall debate .
We shall wield our power as budgetary authority on every future demand in order to stop this sort of blunder .
Now is not the time to be petty .
Europe 's share of the common foreign and security policy is still very small .
We should not start by being petty .
But we shall monitor how everything develops very closely , we shall address painful subjects and say stop as soon as we get the feeling that we are being taken for a ride .
That cannot be .
We shall agree here , but everyone should know that we shall be extremely vigilant in connection both with heading 5 and with how expenditure develops and with future developments in the common foreign and security policy .
Of course , we shall also give our input so that a forward-looking policy for the world and for Europe as a whole can be developed .
Mr President , first I would like to thank Mr Ferber for an excellent report .
I know that it was the result of hard negotiations in which the rapporteur and the other representatives of the Committee on Budgets successfully defended the rights of the European Parliament .
With the supplementary and amending budget the Council intends to set up three new directorates within its General Secretariat to implement the common European security and defence policy .
These directorates are : 1. a Political Affairs Directorate , 2. an Operations and Exercises Directorate , and 3. an External Action Mechanisms Directorate .
There would be a total of 140 employees involved in this new organisation , of which 51 would be in newly created posts .
One ' s attention is drawn the urgency of the situation .
Why is there such a hurry to create the new posts immediately , even though the actual budget is to be discussed in a few months ' time ?
Another problem is the overlapping of functions .
The structure of the organisation menacingly indicates that the same functions are to be discharged in the areas of both crisis prevention and civil crisis management in the Commission and the Council .
This overlapping must definitely be prevented .
Under pressure from Parliament , the Council is now creating a special Title in its budget for the common security and defence policy .
It is obvious that this will involve the creation of an entirely new Council activity , which will , in fact , have nothing to do with normal administrative expenditure .
For this reason the ' gentlemen ' s agreement ' between Parliament and the Council , according to which they undertake not to interfere in each other ' s budgets , cannot be extended to these actions .
Expenditure relating to the common security and defence policy falls within the competence of Parliament .
Finally , it should be noted that the margin for ' Administrative Expenditure ' in heading 5 is now only EUR 34 million .
On the threshold of enlargement this is so little that it does not make possible any operative additional expenditure at the cost of administrative expenditure .
Mr President , I too must say that this is a most interesting debate .
We already had a taste of it in committee when Mr Laschet suddenly stepped forward ardently advocating rejection , despite belonging to the same group as the rapporteur .
If we are in favour of rejection today , it is not because we do not appreciate Mr Ferber 's work .
On the contrary , we truly believe that Mr Ferber was a tough negotiator .
We have the greatest respect .
Nonetheless , we take the view that one voice here in Parliament must give a clear warning because a development is being introduced here which should give us all cause for concern .
Like the previous speaker , I consider that this agreement cannot come under the gentlemen 's agreement because it does not concern administrative expenditure .
These are politically charged questions , as Mr Ferber has already made clear in his speech .
They are also questions of transparency and control of the common foreign and security policy and of defence policy .
Here too we are of one opinion .
But Mr Ferber believes that introducing a separate title is sufficient guarantee that Parliament will be able to exercise control in the future .
We have our doubts .
We take the view that this separate title alone does not empower Parliament ; on the contrary , because these posts are the Council 's responsibility , they are beyond our influence and control .
I think this is the deciding factor ; not just the overlap , but the question of who can exercise control .
What is at stake here is the delicate balance of power between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
The Council is taking on more and more , trying to resolve more and more intergovernmentally rather than by really communitising these areas .
That would mean making the Commission responsible and strengthening Parliament 's right of control .
That is our one great fear , namely that we have no real control .
There is also another point which must also be addressed .
In our view this question should be resolved in a conciliation procedure , not under a trialogue , because that would demonstrate exactly how much importance we attach to this question and just how much store we set by Parliament 's having full right of control .
I think that the Council should be quite clear that Parliament will not brook this policy of using supplementary budgets to alter political relations and the political balance of power .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just two brief comments .
First , may I assure you on behalf of the Commission that we shall make very sure that no overlapping structures are created - and I say that not just as the member of the Commission responsible for the budget .
Secondly , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Committee on Budgets on using their initiative and exerting pressure to bring about a change in how the budget is represented , a change which affects not just how it is represented per se but which represents an important contribution towards both enhanced democratic control and transparency .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Commission presentation of the preliminary draft budget for 2002
The next item is the Commission presentation of the preliminary draft budget for 2002 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we acknowledge the Commission 's preliminary draft budget and , as always , shall check very closely to ensure that sufficient account has been taken of the priorities set in advance by the European Parliament .
By that I mean both new and traditional priorities .
No doubt the rapporteur , Costa Neves , will have something to say about this now .
We shall have to check that the Union 's revenue is going to be used efficiently and for its intended purpose within the framework of our budgetary law , the financial regulation and the commitments entered into .
And we shall have to look very closely to ensure that due account has been taken of the reforms announced , only some of which have just begun .
Obviously , we too want a speedy and fair budgetary procedure without too much arm wrestling .
The Council needs to heed that more than in previous years .
I should also like to add the following in the wake of the discussions and votes in the Committee on Budgets this year : we shall oppose any suggestion which tries to trim or limit the budgetary powers of the European Parliament in any way , such as by amending the financial regulation or in some other wondrous manner .
I also advise the Commission to take a constructive position which favours Parliament here on all these questions .
That will be a help to all of us who so keenly refer to ourselves as allies in the European integration process .
The truth is we have commitments of EUR 100 billion , payments of 97.8 billion , payments well below the ceiling or 1.06 % of GNP or , to put it another way , EUR 265 per capita of the population , of which EUR 121 per capita is for agricultural for agricultural produce , policy and the countryside . That sounds solid enough .
Taken overall , it is geared towards stability and certainly does not overburden the Member States , the taxpayers or consumers , as many official but emotional and one-sided accounts would have us believe .
At the same time , however , it is the penultimate budget of the Union of the Fifteen .
We need to bear that in mind at this point .
I just want to list a few points which will be important to us .
It is good that the Commission intends to do more about clearing the backlog of payments .
Commissioner Schreyer has just quoted a few figures here .
But we also need a guarantee that payments for new commitments will be dealt with speedily so as to avoid another mountain of backlogs in the future .
We also welcome thoughts of setting up an earmarked reserve in the agricultural area .
The idea of creating a contingency reserve , given the imponderable nature of these markets , was originally Parliament 's .
I would add that the ad hoc procedure has proven to be an increasingly constructive procedure between the institutions over recent years .
The actual figures will be available in the autumn .
It is good that the Commission has left room for manoeuvre in internal policy .
Nonetheless , the reasons behind certain estimates require clarification . For example , -5.3 % for culture and the audiovisual sector , below average rates of + 1.8 % in the area of social dimension and employment and -14.5 % in the area of the labour market and technological innovation .
These are examples of where there is a real need for consultation .
In foreign policy - which was addressed earlier - the question arises of how democratic control and discussion of operational expenditure under the common foreign and security policy will take place in future .
Then there is the fact that Asia is down 2.2 % , Latin America is down 6 % and food aid is down 4.5 % .
The question is , has the necessary balance between traditional priorities and new tasks been duly safeguarded or might this positioning be construed as concentrating on Europe and its neighbours .
That would be too little for me from a foreign policy point of view .
Commissioner , I should like to address one final point : administration .
I should like to remind you that Parliament stipulated that the second tranche of 317 posts was linked to the early retirement commitment , so as to bring about a bit more budgetary neutrality , and it is up to the institutions to achieve this .
I remember the resolution passed in spring last year , in which we clearly stated that the second tranche was linked to very clear , precise considerations as to how measures to guarantee the ability of the European Union to act during the course of the enlargement process could be prepared while retaining the substance of the acquis communautaire .
I should like to remind you of this resolution .
Clearly , therefore , we shall all be called on to discuss the introduction of and introduce a realistic pre-accession and accession strategy as of this year , including in the administrative area , so that we have sufficient time left over to include this aspect in the budgetary policy .
I get the impression from all the discussions that resolving these questions will be more difficult and more complicated that resolving many agricultural and structural problems , which is why we intend to tackle these and other questions during the budgetary procedure .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by emphasising the need to respect the timetable unveiled by the Commission when it presented its preliminary draft budget . I must say that it did provide us with the information we needed .
This is a further contribution to a positive climate for the debate on the proposed budget for 2002 .
My initial reaction to the preliminary draft budget is that , overall , I welcome the proposal to increase appropriations for commitment by 3.4 % and for payment by 4.8 % .
The difference between these figures seems insufficient , given the need to make good payments that are overdue .
I would point out that one of the European Parliament ' s priorities is precisely to eliminate quickly the difference between commitments given and payments that have actually been guaranteed .
To confirm our fears , the reduction of unpaid commitments ( RAL ) , will be in appearance only .
The truth is that , if the increase in appropriations is insufficient , paying the commitments that have been outstanding the longest will delay the payment of new commitments .
This would be the equivalent of rehashing the RAL and would not solve the problem .
The solution lies in paying off old RAL , specifically in categories 3 ( internal policy ) and 4 ( external action ) , not in creating further RAL .
With regard to this matter , we shall carefully analyse the progress report that is to be presented to us at the end of June , as was agreed , and we will continue to do everything we can to improve the budget ' s implementation rates . In other words , we want to contribute to a more effective discharge of the European Union ' s commitments .
I have noted the fact that , despite the 4.8 % increase proposed for payments , these will remain at a level of 1.06 % of the European Union ' s GDP , whereas the financial perspective would allow the figure to reach 1.10 % in 2002 .
I must also stress that we shall be undertaking a thorough assessment of the Commission ' s commitment to the priorities defined by Parliament which feature in the broad economic guidelines adopted in April .
In the agricultural sector in particular - category 1 - I have paid close attention to the impact of the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises on the budget .
It would be useful to have the precise figures as soon as possible .
Nevertheless , the existence of a reserve of EUR 1 billion proposed by the Commission seems acceptable , given the unpredictable nature of these crises .
I would state my view once again , however , that we consider a reserve always to be non-compulsory expenditure , as we want to be able to intervene in decisions on its use .
We hope to find out , in the Letter of Amendment which is to be presented following first reading , if not before , exactly what the costs arising from BSE and foot-and-mouth disease are .
In this context , I would remind you that we are counting on a Commission document on the direction to take with regard to the mid-term review of the last common agricultural policy reform , in which I hope to see consistency between the decisions taken on the crisis , and guidelines for the future .
The broad economic guidelines give 15 September as the date for this document to be presented .
The Letter of Amendment is another possibility to consider for the presentation of this document .
With regard to fisheries and given the much-discussed failure of the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco and the consequent need to restructure our fleets , we must make a careful assessment of how this will be funded .
In internal policies ( category 3 ) , the current margin is limited and the broad economic guidelines lay down clear priorities in this area , which must be respected .
In external action ( category 4 ) , it is still difficult to guarantee the stability of the European Union ' s action .
Reprogrammings have been the rule and we are concerned about the possibility of once again facing reductions in appropriations in budget lines to which we attach great importance .
I am referring here to Latin America , human rights and the fight against Aids , for example .
In the meantime , in the Balkans , where the European Union has also made clear commitments , we are seeing , as I understand it , a reduction in budgetary resources .
Everything indicates that account has not yet been taken of the report by the World Bank , which will give precise details of reconstruction needs .
What will happen then ?
And what about the operational costs of our defence and security policy ?
In the field of administration ( category 5 ) , to what extent are the appropriations proposed sufficient , when added together , to cope with the reform of the Commission , enlargement , the launch of new policies , an increase in the Council ' s budget of around 10 % , and the proposals of other institutions ?
It seems quite clear that the resources decided on in Berlin are insufficient .
We shall see .
In the field of pre-accession , ( category 7 ) , I would stress that Parliament came out in favour of reallocating unused appropriations , similarly to what is happening in category 2 .
Once again , I wish to state my hope that we can maintain a constructive approach to the debate that has now begun .
Consensus with the Commission and the Council is both desirable and possible .
We must therefore watch out for clouds on the horizon , and I am referring specifically to the fact that the Committee on Budgets today voted on its position on the financial regulation .
I would stress that this position complies with the broad economic guidelines .
These stated that Parliament will not hesitate to reconsider its position on such matters in its budgetary decisions .
It is still possible to guarantee a real assessment of our position on the revision of the financial regulation .
I thank the rapporteur and the Commissioner .
Estimates of the European parliament for 2002
The next item is the report ( A5-0166 / 2001 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee for Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2002 [ 2001 / 2062 ( BUD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today , during the formal meeting with President Schuster of the Republic of Slovakia , we spoke yet again of the historical opportunity of overcoming once and for all the division of Europe .
An opportunity that must be given concrete shape , as the honourable Member Böge said .
In just three years ' time we shall be able to work together on an equal footing with colleagues from current candidate countries , at any rate in theory .
Consequently we must speed up institutional changes to ensure that enlargement goes smoothly .
We shall shortly be receiving the three-year plan on administrative preparation .
Perhaps then , we may come to the conclusion that it would be sensible to employ civil servants from candidate countries in advance so that they can play a part in preparing for enlargement .
Think , for example , of people required to set up a language regime .
It therefore strikes me as extreme foolish to reject that option now in the resolution of Parliament .
Enlargement must be prepared for not only administratively , but also substantively .
In order to exchange mutual experiences it is important that contacts between ourselves and colleagues from candidate countries are intensified .
The Committee on Budgets asks that the most appropriate form for this be included in the three-year plan .
I myself can imagine that it might , for instance , be useful if a very limited number of facilities were offered to these parliamentarians and future Member States so that their visits are as effective and useful as possible .
Mr President , enlargement will increase pressure on the margin of the budget .
It is therefore a financially sound policy to pay off real estate costs faster , creating scope for future budgets .
In addition accelerated financing leads to considerable savings in interest .
It is , though , a pity that I now have the doubtful honour of being the rapporteur who is investing a very considerable sum in the parliament building here in Strasbourg .
But you will agree with me that for as long as the Parliament is condemned to being a travelling circus , it is not sensible to force another EUR 210 million down the throat of the European taxpayer .
It is becoming less and less of one , so that it is all that money for just four days in Strasbourg .
This brings me nicely to another point in which I hope content will win out over the fine words , and that is the environmental audit .
Mr President , this House also devoted some fine words a few years ago to the desirability of an environmental audit .
An interinstitutional working party was even set up .
But since it was not given the slightest priority , it was short-lived .
So we shall now again , and more resolutely , take responsibility and consequently , Parliament should make a clear political promise to participate in EMAS , the Community eco-management and audit system .
Our political position against discrimination must be converted here in this House into policy .
Equality of opportunity is still not a reality .
And I am talking not only about women in influential positions but , for example , about equal treatment irrespective of sexual orientation , race or religion .
The Committee on Budgets therefore asks the Secretary-General for clarification on what measures are necessary to be able to keep the promise of Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , in recent years we have gained greater understanding of the advantages of Activity Based Budgeting and Activity Based Management .
The old management structures method of budgeting need a radical overhaul and part of that is a clear division of responsibilities between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets in the area of personnel policy as at present specified in the budgetary procedure .
The Committee on Budgets examines the financial envelope and its limitations and the Bureau concerns itself with specific content .
This system must be complemented by guiding statements by the House to the Bureau and close monitoring of the management of the Secretary-General .
Should problems arise in future with the Bureau or the Administration , they should lead to changes at that level and not to the assumption of management responsibilities by a House of 626 political representatives .
The new modus operandi must go hand in hand with a radical change in culture , so that the Administration can be democratic , monitored and also very decisive .
To those honourable Members who have been seriously concerned about the margin of category 5 , I can say by way of reassurance that that this afternoon ' s vote on the schedule of part-sessions for next year at any rate turned out very favourably financially .
Estimates were based on a four-day week in Strasbourg and the decision now taken entails no change in costs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her hard work on behalf of the members in the run up to the preparation of Parliament 's budget .
Nonetheless , I should like to take this opportunity to pick out one or two points and examine them more closely .
Enlargement : of course we must prepare for enlargement .
But anyone who thinks that preparing for enlargement merely means creating new posts has failed to recognise the problem .
Everything has to be tested against what we have learned to appreciate and love about the modus operandi of the European Parliament over the last twenty years .
We face a huge challenge if we want to master all that .
Nor is it a question of creating new posts and manning them with officials from applicant countries .
Why are there no other options in situ ?
For example , the Commission intends to work with satellites in applicant countries in the translation area .
We need to create information offices because we have a problem as regards the acceptance of accession to the European Union .
That is our job as representatives of the people .
It is not a question of taking a few people to the fleshpots of Europe here in Strasbourg or in Brussels or Luxembourg , it is a question of bringing people to the European Union .
That is best done locally .
That is why I ask you to consider carefully what really needs to be done and what is better done through activities in the candidate countries , in order to save money .
The Commission is on the right track here .
Buildings policy : I agree with the rapporteur that , as things stand , the cheapest solution here in Strasbourg is to pay off the outstanding amounts as quickly as possible .
But that is only the second cheapest solution .
We must be clear about that .
The cheapest solution would be to build ourselves .
Then we can decide on the layout and fittings , without having to admit in the end that someone has done well out of us and that now we must somehow take over .
We went through that in Brussels and we have been through it here .
We could show a bit more intelligence here .
That would be the cheapest solution .
What we are doing is the second cheapest and I should like to make that clear .
Staff policy : I am surprised at the administration , which is calling for numerous new posts on the one hand , while at the same time making increasing concessions in the so-called non-occupancy quota .
This means that more posts are saved than new posts requested .
We still need an in-depth discussion of how this can be reconciled .
In other words , there is a great deal of room for manoeuvre by transferring staff between the services of the European Parliament without always needing to create new posts straight away .
I can tell you now that the PPE group will be looking at this issue very closely in the autumn , once we have the actual figures to work with .
I am delighted that the rapporteur has also taken up our transport options .
I hope that we shall not have to cycle around Brussels .
I consider that far too dangerous .
I think the initiative by the town of Strasbourg following the change in the mayor 's office is real progress .
We too can take the tram now .
Perhaps we can take the metro in Brussels .
That would take us one stage further .
But , as I say , bicycles in general are too dangerous in my book .
I hope that we can find a reasonable solution here .
We in the PPE shall carry out a strict and close examination of the budget line by line in the autumn , once the figures are available .
But let me make one thing clear : if the report is adopted tomorrow , this does not mean free passage for the reading which we shall have to hold in September or October .
Madam President , I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her work ; I support most of what she has said , especially on reform .
You may be aware of the findings of a recent Euro poll , which showed that the European Parliament is one of the most recognised of all EU institutions .
Therefore , the onus is really on us to ensure that we increase the confidence of European citizens in the EU as a whole .
This is why we need to set an example and lead the way in improving effectiveness , transparency and accountability , as outlined by the rapporteur .
However , the reform process embarked upon so far sometimes feels a bit slow .
We need to speed things up in the coming year and try to embrace reform and modernise our working methods and decision-making processes .
As everyone agrees , this is essential because of the challenges presented by enlargement .
There is a clear danger that the EU could be deflected from its course if the public does not see concrete and swift reform being carried out on a significant scale .
All of us know that enlargement will have far-reaching effects on all aspects of Parliament 's services .
The additional budgetary cost of enlargement could be in the region of EUR 145m per year , according to one report .
We could need about 459 new offices in Brussels alone .
This will need considerable planning , with all the implications well thought through .
Therefore , Parliament 's three-year plan is essential to make enlargement successful .
It is critical that this plan should be considered and not rushed .
I strongly oppose the amendments tabled by the PPE-DE Group imposing a deadline before the summer for this report , because if we do not have a considered and well thought-out enlargement plan , it could backfire on us .
The PPE-DE Group has tabled other amendments , which are equally nonsensical and will not enhance the standing of the European Parliament if adopted .
What I find particularly astonishing is that , on the one hand , we are constantly nit-picking about minor new establishment posts for the executive and yet , in practice , we are happy to increase posts for the political parties , when it suits particular needs , without any real justification .
Where are the principles of budgetary rigour and efficiency which the PPE-DE Group often talks about ?
It is important that we review these issues , but not at this stage .
I wish to stress that the three-year plan should be considered because we face many challenges , but we should - and must - be more dynamic in all areas , in particular languages and buildings , because that is where the substantial costs lie .
I hope the plan will in some ways think the unthinkable and radically review the language services , given that in two to three years ' time we may have six new official languages to deal with .
Just to give you some food for thought : the Commission is a very different institution from us , but it manages to work in two languages .
Let me make it clear that I strongly believe in linguistic diversity , but we cannot just add on all these additional languages and still try to be an efficient and effective organisation .
In relation to buildings policy , we must carefully examine all available options .
I know there is a proposal to purchase this building , and although it makes financial sense here and now in terms of the savings we will make in the immediate future , I am concerned about the long-term suitability of the building : it hardly meets our requirements now , so what is it going to be like six years down the line ?
Madam President , I will try and keep to the timetable .
Mrs Buitenweg has drawn up an excellent report as a basis for Parliament ' s budget next year .
My sincerest thanks go to her accordingly .
Among the main challenges for the European Parliament are improved administration and increased efficiency .
The EU ' s forthcoming enlargement will make these especially necessary .
Next year , we must prepare for the fact that in 2004 Parliament will grow by more than a hundred members bringing with them a dozen or so new languages .
This will make very special demands on the organisation and enhanced effectiveness of the translation and interpreting services .
There will also be totally new demands on general administration , which is why it is absolutely necessary to extend Activity Based Budgeting and Activity-Based Management to parliamentary administration also .
The other problem is buildings policy .
There must be an aim to rationalise the work of Parliament so that buildings expenditure can be cut .
Buying property is quite acceptable when money can be saved as a result .
On the other hand , we must insist that the Member States that have seats here do all they can to ensure that a swift decision can be taken on settlements in respect of property .
It does not do the host country credit if the European Parliament in its territory has inconceivable difficulties trying to establish a rational building policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11 p.m. )
Address by Mr Schuster , President of the Slovak Republic
Ladies and gentlemen , I take particular pleasure in being able to welcome the presence here today , in this Chamber , of the President of the Slovak Republic , Mr Rudolf Schuster .
Mr President , since the Slovak Republic was founded on 1 January 1993 , and particularly since Slovakia presented its candidature for accession to the European Union in 1995 , relations between your country and the European Parliament have developed steadily and fruitfully , paving the way for mutual understanding and the building of ties of trust .
The change of government in 1998 , and then your election as President of the Republic in the first presidential elections to be held in Slovakia using direct suffrage , in May 1999 , are events that have had a very positive influence on enhancing relations between us and making them more effective .
Since you were invested in Bratislava , having served your country in various roles , including as mayor of the town of Kosice from 1994 to 1998 , the Slovak government , led by Mr Dzurinda , the Prime Minister , has turned its policies towards the prospect of accession to the European Union .
Under your Presidency , Mr Schuster , democracy has been established and consolidated in Slovakia .
The Helsinki European Council of December 1999 took the decision to open the negotiations for accession , which began in March 2000 .
The opening and progress of negotiations between your country and the European Union demonstrate , and I am particularly pleased to see this , that Slovakia has fully mastered the ' catching up ' principle , because it was at the request of the European Parliament that this principle was established at the Helsinki European Council .
Slovakia has now decided to place itself , as you have just said , Mr President , at the vanguard of the accession process .
I want your country to know that it has the support of the European Parliament . It can count on a totally constructive attitude towards this accession being achieved as soon as possible .
Mr President , I shall now ask you to address our Parliament .
( Applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , only a short while ago I paid my tribute to the memory of Louise Weiss , an exceptional person , initiator of the idea of European unification , journalist and politician who gave the opening address at the first session of the European Parliament in 1979 - ten years before the fall of the Iron Curtain .
Louise Weiss was connected by ties of deep friendship with one of the most noted personalities of our history , a Slovak politician of European-wide standing - Milan Rastislav tefánik - politician , diplomat , scientist and astronomer who made France his second home .
Louise Weiss said in her address to the European Parliament that it was the happiest day of her life .
Today , I have the exceptional and great honour to speak to you at the plenary session of the European Parliament , representing the most important political parties of the Member States of the European Union and for this opportunity I wish to thank you .
This is the first time that the Slovak language has been spoken at your plenary session .
It is my deep conviction that , in a not too distant future , it will become one of the official languages of the European Union .
Just as , geographically , my country is an indivisible part of the European continent , its history , culture and traditions are an inseparable part of European history .
Shutting my country out behind the Iron Curtain was nothing more than an artificial move by the holders of power on the political chessboard of history .
It is therefore natural that we should link the future of Slovakia with Europe .
Europe that is unified and prosperous , peaceful and attractive .
Our common Europe .
You are performing your work for Europe in a truly momentous period .
Your term coincides with the taking of historical decisions on enlargement which , and this is my deep conviction , represents the most important contribution to the stability and prosperity of our continent in its modern history .
We owe you our respect and gratitude for promoting this process .
The citizens of Slovakia will always bear this in mind .
The accession of the Slovak Republic to the European Union is among the key priorities of our foreign policy .
However , I view accession also from the broader perspective of the development of our society and of Europe .
Slovakia 's progression towards the European Union means that the country is returning to the culture and civilisation where it belongs both by its history and its system of values .
This is the general framework in which the Slovak Republic defined its foreign policy priorities right from the outset , when it set out to obtain full membership of the European Union and NATO .
In 2000 Slovakia gained membership of the OECD and is one of the most hopeful candidates for NATO membership when the Alliance decides to enlarge .
We are pleased to note that around 70 % of our population of more than five million people support accession to the European Union .
What is even more important is that this percentage includes the supporters of the strongest opposition parties , because these political parties too , currently in opposition , built their political programmes on the integration ambitions of the Slovak Republic .
The right course of Slovakia 's security policy whose ultimate goal is membership in the North Atlantic Alliance , through active participation in the European Security and Defence Policy was confirmed by the security strategy document adopted by our legislature .
The fact that this document was adopted with the support of an absolute majority in Parliament , demonstrates that both the ruling coalition and the opposition pursue the same strategic principles when it comes to the future orientation of the Slovak Republic .
However , as the President of a young democratic country , I cannot fall victim to the feeling of self-satisfaction with this rare political consensus .
Ever since I assumed my presidential office I have been trying to impress not only on the political leaders , but also on all those who are not indifferent to the future of Slovakia , that the direction of the country must not depend on a momentary euphoria or on the fleeting political preferences of those in power .
This is the reason why I and a group of experts are drafting a medium-term and a long-term vision , which should be adopted as a constitutional statute by the National Council of the Slovak Republic with the support of the broadest possible political spectrum .
This document - may I call it a State doctrine - should define in very clear terms and at the highest legislative level the future orientation of Slovakia to the European and transatlantic structures .
It would convincingly dispel the doubts with which I am often confronted during by trips abroad in my discussions with the friends and observers of Slovakia who ask : " What changes can be again expected in the foreign policy orientation of Slovakia after the next elections ? "
As I have said , we are pleased with the public support for the integration ambitions of Slovakia .
However , we cannot ignore the worries or mistrust among citizens of the EU Member States who fear that the enlargement of the Union could have undesirable consequences .
I can understand their concerns - they are natural and human .
At the same time I have the impression that these worries are often conjured up artificially .
It is not our wish to disturb what has been achieved in the integration process in past decades .
We have to jointly focus on two areas .
We - in the applicant countries - must thoroughly prepare for membership and , together with the EU members , we should alleviate the doubts concerning enlargement .
And we must work together to strengthen European solidarity and the feeling of togetherness .
Europe is not only a map .
I am convinced that the basis for its permanent revival is an ongoing honest dialogue with the citizens of the unifying Europe .
The entry of each new country will enrich the common house by its spiritual , cultural and historical heritage .
We want to contribute to the enlargement of the common market but at the same time we want to be a contribution to the economy and thus contribute to greater stability and security for all of Europe .
You are familiar with the fact that the Slovak Republic was not invited to open accession negotiations in 1997 in Luxembourg because of its failure to fulfil the Copenhagen political criteria .
This was not a good situation for Slovakia .
The European Parliament was the first to respond to the new situation in the Slovak Republic through its Resolution of October 1998 , which acknowledged the changes in the style of government of the country and its new orientation after the elections .
I would like to take this opportunity to state how highly I regard the relations between the European Parliament and the Slovak Republic which , especially during the last two years , have gained a new momentum .
The relations between the European Parliament and the National Council of the Slovak Republic have also intensified thanks to the activities of the Joint Parliamentary Committee which I personally highly appreciate .
Parliamentary democracy is also greatly strengthened by the joint meetings between the President of the European Parliament and the presidents of the parliaments of applicant countries .
The next such meeting is to be held in a few days in Bratislava .
Slovakia was invited to open negotiations on accession to the European Union in 1999 in Helsinki .
Today - after 17 months of negotiations - we note great progress .
I am convinced that by the end of the Swedish Presidency we will provisionally close negotiations on more than half the chapters .
At this rate our country has a chance to catch up with the countries that had started negotiations earlier , and to complete accession negotiations by the end of 2002 .
We make no secret of our hope that the citizens of the Slovak Republic will also cast their votes in the 2004 elections to the European Parliament .
The path of integration is interspersed with exceptionally lively political discussions and , sometimes , disputes .
We are happy that we have got rid of the one-sided monologue of political elites we knew in the past .
This path is not a smooth one , but the prospect of future membership of the European Union multiplies the sorely needed pro-reform energy .
I want to assure you that we have no shortage of this energy .
The year 2000 was the year of the " economy " .
We continued implementing the reforms launched by the Slovak Government after its coming to power in 1998 with a view to restoring stability at the macro-economic level .
Structural adjustment brought improvements in the effectiveness of the corporate sector .
However , if I want to take a realistic view of the economy of my country , I must consider it from the point of view of the everyday life of people , their economic possibilities .
And here I realise - as confirmed in my direct contacts with the citizens of my country - that economic reforms can have painful consequences for the socially weakest groups of the population .
I am convinced that the current - and the most difficult - phase of the reform will soon bring its positive effects .
In this respect , I feel that the Slovak Government may have lost some time when , during its first year in power , it was too absorbed with pointing to the mistakes of the previous government and pronouncements of the need to eliminate their consequences , rather than immediately and constructively tackling all the problems , especially in the economic field .
It is too late to say now that if the style of government had been more flexible right from the start , today the citizens could enjoy the fruit of all those sound economic steps .
This too is the reason why in every political or professional discussion on the subject of economic and legal reforms I stand up as an advocate of the reforms , even though I always view them in terms of their benefits for the majority of our citizens .
This year , 2001 , is the year of " legislation " .
In February the Slovak Parliament passed the long awaited amendment to the Constitution , compatible with the constitutions of EU Member States .
The amendment has put in place the legal prerequisites for the integration of Slovakia .
The amended text explicitly provides that the Slovak Republic may delegate the exercise of some of its powers to the European Union through or on the basis of an international treaty .
The amendment also lays down the precedence of legally binding acts of the European Union over the laws of the Slovak Republic .
Moreover , it sets out the procedure for the transposition of legally binding acts into the national legislation in the form of laws and government ordinances .
Other necessary steps include the taking of measures for implementing public administration reform , completing structural reform , strengthening the banking sector and building a modern state administration .
The national legal system of the Slovak Republic is based on the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
Through its Constitution and the ratified international instruments on human rights , the state guarantees the enjoyment of rights and freedoms to all citizens without any distinction .
However , unemployment and the adverse economic situation in some regions of Slovakia have created serious problems for dealing with the issue of the Roma national minority .
In my opinion , finding effective solutions in this area is one of the most important tasks of society as a whole .
The serious attention given to this problem by the government is expressed through the Government 's Strategy for Addressing Roma National Minority Issues and the set of measures for its implementation .
I take the view that this is not a problem of Slovakia alone , but a broader European problem whose solution is very complex and requires a partner-like approach .
The visit to Roma settlements in Slovakia by Commissioner Günther Verheugen exemplifies the commitment to a common approach to dealing with the Roma issue , which is one of the key areas that will require our attention in the future .
During my years as the mayor of the city of Kosice , situated in the region with higher concentrations of the Roma population , I learned the basic precept - effective assistance requires active involvement of the Roma themselves in the solution of their problems , otherwise the efforts will be wasted .
The Project on Eliminating the Disproportions of the Roma National Minority , launched on my initiative , envisages the participation of the representatives of individual Roma groups in its implementation .
The first experience gained indicates that the level of legal awareness and democratic thinking - even among educated Roma - has been marked by decades of a paternalistic approach by the state to the Roma community whose members find it difficult to exercise their powers .
This is why I believe that this issue will still have to be addressed by the generations that come after us .
I have also brought my initiative to the attention of the Presidents of other Visegrad Group countries ; we agreed to adopt a common procedure with the President of the Czech Republic .
I fully agree with the individual approach and the assessment of the countries on their merits .
This is the reason why we internally are striving to make the Slovak Republic take its place among the first countries to enter the European Union .
We make no secret of our ambition to do it together with our neighbours - the Czech Republic , Hungary and Poland , our partners in the Visegrad cooperation process .
This cooperation , which strengthens our good neighbourly relations , is being positively received both at home and abroad .
Not only does it enhance the atmosphere of regional European allegiance , but is also an important element of integration .
In this connection , on my initiative and in cooperation with the President of the Republic of Poland , several cross-border cooperation projects were launched under the patronage of the Chancellery of the President .
Because of their positive results I plan to extend similar projects also to other border regions - those with Hungary and the Czech Republic .
I attach great historic significance to the creation and functioning of the Visegrad grouping whose aim is to encourage close cohesion of an mutually beneficial cooperation within the central European region as the basis for its future integration into economic , political and security structures .
These common objectives of the V-4 countries contribute to the development of Europe as a whole and to expanding the zone of stability to the entire continent .
The idea of the accession of Visegrad countries to the European Union as one group has logical implications for the definition of the Schengen-type border whose length will depend on the map of the enlarged European Union .
When speaking about the future of the European Union , the discussion on which was launched in the wake of the Nice summit , I would personally prefer to speak about the near future and the distant future .
It would not be easy to mix everything together and to try to resolve all the issues facing the European Union by 2004 .
I support the opinion that the candidate countries should be given a chance to effectively contribute to the exchange of views in the preparation for the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference .
It is personally hardly conceivable for me to see the prospective members of a family left standing at a closed door during the discussions on important matters that concern everybody , older members , newer members and prospective newcomers , especially if the latter are expected to enter the family within the time horizon in question .
We all , both members and candidates for membership , want a stronger Europe .
We may agree with many , although not all the opinions .
Thus , it would not be appropriate to delay the process of enlargement on the ground of what I consider to be unjustified worries about the enlargement bringing the threat of " dilution " of the European Union , or endangering the possibility of the continued political integration .
I am convinced that the Slovak Republic and other candidate countries are no less prepared for further integration than some current members .
Our objective must be to further build the European Union as a political community .
I agree with the words of the President of the European Parliament Madame Nicole Fontaine according to whom we cannot continue building the European Union in " closed circles " .
At a certain stage of development , several issues may emerge and require solution , while it is not always possible to resolve all of them .
But the process must continue and the system must remain open .
An important part of the entire European integration process is the building of the European identity .
National identity plays an important role in the life of individuals , because it is the means for their self-identification and affiliation with a certain group .
As the President and a citizen of the Slovak Republic , I have no worries about the loss of sovereignty after our accession to the European Union , because in an integrating Europe , a sovereign country is one that takes part in the decisions that concern the development and direction of the European Union .
The entry of the Slovak Republic to the European Union will be the real completion of sovereignty of our country .
The future of Slovakia lies with the European Union which will become the area of freedom , security and justice .
I am speaking to you as a European to Europeans , facing a unique challenge and immense responsibility .
Let us turn the ideal of common spiritual values and historic experience into the reality of a unified and prosperous Europe , attractive to all citizens of its countries and serving as an example for other regions and continents .
The Slovak Republic declares its willingness to share in this common responsibility .
Thank you for this opportunity of addressing you
( Loud and sustained applause )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , yesterday , as we all know , there was a minor incident here during the debate on the situation of Turkish prisoners .
In this connection it was stated , by the Vice-President in the Chair amongst others , that the Committee on Budgets was blocking the posts which were necessary to strengthen the security service .
As the rapporteur responsible , I should like to state here that the posts requested were entered in the reserve with the agreement of the Bureau and that the Bureau has not yet made any request for these proposed posts to be taken out of the reserve .
I firmly refute , therefore , the accusation that the Budgets Committee is blocking the posts necessary to improve security in Parliament .
In so doing I would point out that the Bureau is required to request the relevant transfer of appropriations .
Mr Ferber , your point has very little , if anything , to do with the Minutes .
That said , you raise the issue of yesterday ' s incident .
I can assure you that we take such incidents quite as seriously as they deserve .
The Quaestors have already met and looked into the matter .
I would also point out that the group involved was brought in by a Member , and neither he nor his assistant seemed to be around any more , so it was a kind of orphan group , no longer accompanied .
That is one thing .

As regards the Bureau , Mr Ferber , thank you for raising that , we are currently working to adopt some very strict security measures , which I believe many Members want in the interest of our institution , because what happened yesterday is one thing , but other things could happen .
Everyone is well aware of that .
Of course , the Bureau is seeking the cooperation of the Committee on Budgets .
We hope we will be successful as soon as possible .
Madam President , yesterday 's incident has nothing to do with the fact that certain posts have not yet been approved .
The two are wholly unconnected .
Firstly , a mistake was made at the checkpoint here on the way into the Chamber .
The people are there .
We do not need any new posts .
Secondly , people are saying that the security guards posted at the entrances were responsible .
That does not have anything to do with the posts either .
What is important is that we improve security .
Mr Ferber is right there .
However , there is no direct link to yesterday 's incident .
( Applause )

Absolutely , Mr Schmid , that is what I said myself : yesterday ' s incident is one thing , the general security problem is another .
Madam President , I also wish to address item 23 in yesterday 's Minutes concerning security .
We are all very grateful for the explanation that you have given about how the matter occurred yesterday , and it is very important that the House recognises the point that you also made , namely that this is a subject that the Bureau is also currently discussing .
It is an extremely serious and vitally important point , because security in this House is not good enough .
What happened yesterday , however , is slightly different , because it calls into question the status and the responsibility of individual Members as to whom they invite into this House .
We have had a very lively discussion in our own political group this morning on this matter , and I am going to ask you , Madam President , to convene a special meeting of the Bureau so that all these matters can be discussed .
I recognise that it is already on the agenda of the Bureau and is an on-going discussion , but it is so important that we have time to consider the issue properly that I believe we need a special meeting of the Bureau and I hereby request you to convene that meeting .
Thank you Mr Provan .
We will see if that is possible tomorrow morning .
I am joking .
That being so , on 30 May , we will look at the whole situation in all its aspects .
I do not think Mr Provan has understood my invitation .
Thank you very much indeed for that statement , Mr Wurtz .
Madam President , what I have to say concerns the Minutes to the extent that , although it states correctly in the German version of the Minutes that the Secretary-General has been asked to report to the Bureau on the matter , at least in the Spanish version of the Minutes - admittedly I have not been able to check all eleven language versions - it states that posts are being blocked by the Committee on Budgets .
I should like to request that the Minutes be aligned with the German language version .
The Spanish version , in any case , is incorrect .
Madam President , I should simply like to add one more point : the striking thing about this situation was that one of the three people who caused the commotion here was the same person who attacked the Turkish Foreign Minister during a meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I should like this to be recorded in the Minutes once again .
I did say it yesterday to your representative .
Surely it cannot be possible for an individual , who has been identified , not to be banned from entering this House !
Why is there not a computer with an alarm signal stored in it by means of which a person of this kind is denied access ?
There must be no repeat of this !
I would really ask you to ensure that these matters are investigated .
Quite , Mrs Pack .
Mr Wurtz did indeed explain that his colleague had been mislead , but you raise another issue , which I have also recognised . We are going to look into it , together with the Quaestors , to prevent this happening again and ensure that security checks are in place .
Madam President , I want to speak on the item ' statute and financing of European political parties ' .
I do not think the Minutes accurately reflect the point Mr Ribeiro e Castro raised yesterday .
He invoked Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure , raising the question of prejudice and contesting the legal base for Mrs Schleicher ' s report .
A majority in Parliament agreed with Mr Ribeiro e Castro ' s interpretation , and as there is therefore a question of prejudice - the fact that the Treaty of Nice has not yet been ratified - it seems to me that Parliament certainly cannot return to this issue pending the Treaty ' s ratification .
It cannot therefore be put back on Parliament ' s agenda .

I would also like to thank the President for the sitting , Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca , for the way he conducted yesterday ' s debate , and mention a letter from Mrs Palacio , who reminds each of us that the legal bases underpinning Parliament ' s decisions are not determined by strength of majority alone , but also by legal factors and assessments .
Mr Dupuis , I do not feel that what you have just said requires us to amend the Minutes for yesterday ' s sitting .
Madam President , on item 25 of the Minutes and on the excellent motion of inadmissibility by Mr Ribeiro e Castro which was adopted yesterday , I would like to point out that the Minutes mention the speeches by Mr Poettering , asking for the report to be included in the agenda for the next part-session , Mr Barón Crespo , asking for it to be added to the agenda of the next day ' s sitting , and Mr Berthu , who replied , but whose position is not stated .


For accuracy of the Minutes , I would like to make it clear that , in any case , the motion of inadmissibility was adopted , the report cannot be put back on the agenda and , were it to be , that would not be possible without another meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
It would not be proper to proceed otherwise .
Is that what you said yesterday , Mr Berthu ?
Absolutely , Madam President , those were the remarks I made yesterday and they do not appear in the Minutes .
Very well , we shall amend the Minutes so that your remarks are properly reported .
You have jumped ahead rather , but we are still on the Minutes .
That being the case , we will be able to save time later on .
Madam President , with a view to clarifying the situation , allow me to say the following : yesterday , as we all know , there was great confusion here in the Chamber , and I do not wish to reopen the debate on the issue itself at this stage .
However , the reason why it was suggested that we should not debate this report on the status of political parties was in fact that it was said that it did not have a legal base .
In this respect it is right , however - as you said - that the relevant provision is Rule 143 of our Rules of Procedure .
Now the impression has been given that I and my colleagues thought that the report ought to be referred back to the committee ; this has arisen from the fact that we mistook the number of the rule in the Rules of Procedure , and after all to err is human .
The relevant provision was Rule 143 .
That is why there can be a vote straight away on whether we address this report or not .
Madam President , I have since read up on exactly what was written in the Minutes about the incident involving the demonstrators .
I would like to make something clear .
During the sitting , three demonstrators carrying banners entered the Chamber .
That is what it says .
I have to tell you that these three people did not make their way into the Chamber calmly , but sneaked in quickly , and they had not unfurled the banners at that stage .
They did not do this until they were in the Chamber , and our staff were unable to see them .
I simply wanted to say this , because as it is minuted here , one could assume that the staff should have noticed the fact that they were carrying banners .
That was not the case .
Are there any other comments ?
Madam President , with regard to my speech on the debate about the inadmissibility or supposed inadmissibility of the Schleicher report on the status of parties , I asked for the point to be included in the agenda for today , but I would like to add the following : I made this request pursuant to Rule 111 of the Rules of Procedure , which gives the President the authority to propose it , and I would like this point to be added because here we are not debating a referral back to committee , but whether a commando act during a plenary sitting of Parliament can modify the agenda and wipe a subject as important as this from the attention of the Members of this House for years to come , basically , for ever .
Quite , Mr Barón Crespo .
We will make that change to the Minutes .
Madam President , I would ask the various parliamentary units to listen to yesterday ' s tapes before recording Mr Baron Crespo ' s opinion in the Minutes , as , to my mind , the opinion he expressed this morning is not the same as that he had yesterday .
We will look into all that , of course .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Agenda
Pursuant to Rule 111 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , and at the request of several political groups , I propose to include in today ' s agenda , as the first item , the report by Mrs Schleicher , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the statute and financing of European political parties .
Who wishes to speak in favour of this proposal ?
Madam President , I do not wish to repeat all that I have just said .
It is completely justified to make this proposal here in accordance with Rule 111 .
Our group , like the other groups - not all of them , but those which have a major interest in this issue , because we believe that it promotes democracy in Europe - are of the opinion that we must not give way to the opponents of Europe in order to postpone this report , but that we must do our duty here .
That is why we are in favour of this item being placed on the agenda and also of it being voted on today in the voting block at 12 noon .
The people of Europe expect us to discharge our responsibility here .
( Loud applause )
Thank you , Mr Poettering .
Mr Dell 'Alba , you want to speak against this proposal .
Madam President , I cannot understand what Mr Poettering is talking about .
This does not actually involve either Europe or the citizens as such , but only the bureaucracies of the European political parties .
Under the rules you certainly have the right , Madam President , to ask for this report to be included , but I would like to remind you , before you confirm your request , that only yesterday afternoon , the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Napolitano , supported by six Members , Mr Gollnisch , Mr Abitbol , Mr Souladakis , Mr Onesta , Mr Krarup , and Mr Meijer , as well as the rapporteur himself , proposed dealing with this matter in committee as soon as possible , which seemed to me to be a wise gesture .





So I cannot understand the rush .

Secondly , while Rule 111 does indeed authorise you to take a proposal for an amendment , that Rule also stipulates that the agenda cannot be amended , except pursuant to Rules 112 , 143 and so on .
Rule 143 has been applied .
We are not going to do that twice in the same part-session and on the same subject .
That really is quibbling .
So let us be realistic , there is a mini-session soon .
Your services can , I think , wait a little while .
There is a serious problem about the legal base ; Mr Napolitano , the Chairman , has said so . Let the Committee on Constitutional Affairs deal with the matter first .
We have heard one speaker in favour and one speaker against .
As reference has been made to action by the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Napolitano , and as he is asking for the floor , I am very happy to call him .
Afterwards , Parliament will decide .
In my speech of yesterday - as can be seen from the verbatim report - I certainly did not say , Mr Dell ' Alba , that there is a problem of legal base .
I said the opposite : I said , rather , that in the matter of the legal base , in relation to the Treaties , of this Commission proposal - since we are discussing a Commission proposal and then Mrs Schleicher ' s report - we had discussed it long and hard in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , and had also received an opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which did not come up with any observation on the legal base of the measure .
As regards my proposal to convene the committee , that was a result of the confusion that Mr Poettering has mentioned .
I unfortunately arrived in the Chamber - and I apologise for that - once the vote had already been taken and I was given some inaccurate information .
Mr Berthu told me that he himself had thought of asking for a referral back to committee , but then in effect I realised that the vote had been taken under Rule 143 and not 144 .
Therefore my intention to get ready to rapidly convene the Committee on Constitutional Affairs no longer made any sense , once I had found out what had been the base in the Rules of the vote taken in the House .
Mr Dell 'Alba , I want you to know that before using Rule 111 , I naturally gave the matter a great deal of thought .
I met with Mr Napolitano , I met with other Members , and of course I took careful note of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs on this problem of admissibility .
All the conditions seem to me to be in place - I say that in all conscience , but I may be wrong - for me to propose the inclusion of this item on the agenda under Rule 111 .
( Parliament gave its assent )
The report therefore becomes the first item on the agenda .
Status and financing of European political parties
The next item is the report ( A5-0167 / 2001 ) by Mrs Schleicher , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the statute and financing of European political parties ( COM ( 2000 ) 898 - C5-0081 / 2001 - 2001 / 0011 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is regrettable that a number of meetings are taking place at the same time as this debate , despite the fact that this is an issue which actually concerns the whole Parliament .
Parties are the foundation stone of democracies .
Without parties , which ideally fight to establish a model which maximises the welfare of state and society , democracy is inconceivable .
Today , all 15 Member States of the European Union are ruled by democratic forms of state , and therefore by governments composed of varying combinations of political parties .
As citizens of democratically governed Member States we are right to attach importance to them ; as Europeans we can rightly be proud of them .
Many people ask whether we need a statute for European parties .
The European Parliament is the only institution of the European Union which is legitimated by direct , free elections .
The European Parliament is also regarded as the cradle of European parties .
Cooperation in the groups required there to be increasingly close contacts between their constituent parties and with the national parties .
In this way , new international party structures and European parties gradually developed .
I should simply like to refer to the fact that the European People 's Party has been in existence since 1976 , the Party of European Socialists since 1992 , the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party since 1993 and finally the European Federation of Green Parties also since 1993 .
If my information is correct , two more European parties have apparently been founded since then , which means that we already have at least six European parties now .
The party political landscape is hardly uncomplicated .
The number of parties represented in national parliaments varies considerably across the Member States .
Our 626 Members of the European Parliament , at any rate , hail from 130 different national parties .
Italy , with 21 parties in the European Parliament , is represented by the greatest number of parties .
These different national parties have combined in the European Parliament to form eight groups , alongside the 14 non-attached Members .
In response to these various developments , Parliament has been calling for a legal base for European parties since the eighties .
The adoption of the Treaty of Maastricht ten years ago brought a breakthrough for the European Parliament in the shape of Article 191 , which was adopted unanimously by the governments of the Member States .
This article reads : " Political parties at European level are important as a factor for integration within the Union .
They contribute to forming a European awareness and to expressing the political will of the citizens of the Union . "
In the Treaty of Nice , Article 191 is amplified to turn that article , on its own , into a legal base .
" The Council , acting in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 251 , shall lay down the regulations governing political parties at European level and in particular the rules regarding their funding . "
European parties therefore make a valuable contribution to European integration , which should not be underestimated .
This work cannot be done by a national party .
To continue this work , European parties need , for example , office space and employees , which means , in other words , money .
Up until now the European parties have been supported by their groups in the European Parliament .
However , it is precisely this indirect funding by the groups which the European Court of Auditors has criticised on the grounds of lack of transparency and the improper use of parliamentary funds , and it will not tolerate this any longer .
The European Union budget already provides funds for the current financial year in line B3-500 : EUR 7 million for all parties .
This is certainly no cornucopia , as we hear from resentful quarters .
How the funds are to be distributed is also laid down in the Regulation .
The Commission generously tabled a proposal for a regulation in February to establish the conditions which would need to be met .
One of these is for statutes to be submitted , providing evidence that a European party is committed to the principles of democracy , respect for fundamental rights and control of income and expenditure , which are enshrined in the Treaty on European Union .
This goes further than existing national legislation on parties .
In addition , a European party has to prove , amongst other things , that it has been successful in elections in at least five Member States or that it is represented in the European Parliament by Members from at least five Member States .
There are also precise rules on how the Regulation is to be implemented and on control .
The European parties are not permitted to use their funds to finance national parties .
This ban also applies to the funding of election campaigns .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs has added several points in its opinion , including the reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , a definition of the party as having legal personality so that it can conduct legal transactions , and further-reaching proposals on controls , including on revenue from donations .
Thanks are also due here to the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for their good proposals .
In addition there are now a further 40 amendments , which I should like to classify under three headings : those which make the text of the Regulation more precise , those which propose detailed rules and those which reject the proposal .
You will understand that , as rapporteur , I cannot support the proposal 's rejection because , after all , it is Parliament itself which has been calling for a regulation for a long time .
There is another reason why rejection is also incomprehensible to me .
It arouses suspicion that we want to prevent party financing being made transparent at European level .
I cannot recommend detailed rules at present .
This Regulation is a temporary solution until the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice , when we will be in a position to draft comprehensive legislation with the Council .
Today we are taking the first step and until the Council makes a unanimous decision we can unfortunately only deliver an opinion .
It is in the interests of the European Parliament for a neat solution to be found which will enable the criticisms of the European Court of Auditors to be taken into account as quickly as possible .
I should like to address one more point : the Council was present yesterday , and I received the speech of the President-in-Office on behalf of the Council Presidency .
I should very much like to hand it over to the President of Parliament .
In it the Council says that it is interested in our completing our work as early as today if possible .
The Council is full of good intentions to do all it can to bring this dossier to a conclusion , possibly even under the Swedish Presidency .
I should therefore like to thank the Swedish Presidency for showing such commitment in its efforts to allow the European parties to stand on their own two feet , by conferring legal status on them and making their funding transparent .
This is a very difficult task which , in the interests of democracy , will hopefully be crowned with success .
I hereby hand this speech over to the President of Parliament .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to point out the contribution that the European political parties have made to the affirmation of democratic values and the strengthening of a European awareness , the Nice European Council approved an addition to Article 191 concerning the statute of political parties at a European level and , in particular , the rules regarding their financing .
Until the Nice decision is ratified , it is appropriate that a set of rules should be defined that apply to the creation and financing of the parties to ensure immediate effectiveness and transparency in this field from this moment on .
This is the purpose of the timely proposal by the European Commission , to which can be added the proposals set out in the report by Mrs Schleicher , whom I congratulate on the quality of her work .
The opinion of the Committee on Budgets seeks to strengthen the guarantees of transparency in the financing of parties , particularly through the express identification of the origin and destination of all funds .
At the same time , the clear distinction between political groups in the European Parliament and European political parties is maintained for the next legislature , particularly as regards their buildings and staff .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the party statute and the resulting statute on political parties is of far greater significance than most people probably believe .
We think that a party statute , in the truest sense of the word , is important for the unification of Europe and for democracy in Europe .
How then is the will of the European people to be expressed , if not through parties ?
As varied as our views may be , it is after all the parties who , in the end , give expression to our political will , even if this is often only after a very tough process of debate .
That is why the significance of this party statute for the unification of our continent and for democracy in our continent cannot be overestimated , even if it is criticised here and there in the media or in extreme quarters of this House .
The last time that we debated this initiative - I myself was astonished that it is already nearly a year ago - was on 14 June 2000 .
Yesterday we had certain events here in this House and I would also say , Mr President , that we need to consider how we can prevent an anti-European minority from stopping progress in the future .
That is why we need to amend our Rules of Procedure .
I should particularly like to express my appreciation - and for me as a democrat this was a cheering sight yesterday - of the fact that after yesterday 's tumult four conscientious groups immediately realised their responsibility for Europe - the Christian Democrats , the EPP , the Socialists , the Liberals and the Greens - and sought a way out of the situation .
That was a test of democracy here in the European Parliament and I would expressly thank the other groups who took that step with us .
I should like to express my heartfelt thanks to Ursula Schleicher , who by working unbelievably hard in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs under the Chairmanship of our esteemed colleague , Mr Napolitano , managed to forge agreement on majority positions .
My dear Mrs Schleicher , you have done an excellent job here and people will always remember your name with gratitude when this party statute is adopted .
I should also , however , like to thank the Commission , in particular Commissioner Barnier and the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , for responding to the initiative taken by the four aforementioned groups in this Parliament and tabling this proposal .
Even though it is still based on the old law - we are being heard - it is nevertheless a prerequisite for the Swedish Presidency to be able to decide .
I should also like to acknowledge explicitly the very great effort that the Swedish Presidency is putting into this .
Of course Mr Danielsson is not able to be here today .
He was here yesterday , however , and we only have ourselves to blame for the fact that we are not able to debate this with him today .
I regret this , and in the future we need to find a means of cooperating with the Council of Ministers to ensure that the Council is represented here in the European Parliament - and this is not to criticise the Swedish Presidency - throughout the week that we are in session .
We want more transparency . We want straightforward financial control , Commissioner Schreyer .
That is why I was astonished - I must mention this now - to see a statement by Messrs Kuhne and Van Hulten in Euronews .
They had not secured a majority in the Committee on Budgetary Control and were attacking us .
That is completely inappropriate !
If a rapporteur in a committee does not succeed in securing a majority in favour of his report then that is due to the rapporteur 's own incompetence , and he should not defame others who are full of good intentions and wish to contribute to the overall result .
We want transparency and we also need this party statute so that we can integrate the parties from Central Europe .
There , where democracy is only just being established , it is even more important than it is here for democratic structures to gain stability .
I should like to refer to one further point : legal personality for the parties .
Parliament 's Bureau will , as you know , after consulting a committee of eminent persons , advise on the basis on which it will be decided which organisations are genuinely European parties which comply with the criteria .
Obviously there will also always be the temptation of political opportunism to say yes or no to a political party .
That is why the parties need to be endowed with legal personality , so that they are able to appeal against a decision if they believe that the rules have been violated and the right decisions have not been made .
Legal certainty is actually the most important thing in the European Union .
In conclusion I should like to say that whenever there are conflicts between us it is important for those conflicts to be resolved peacefully .
This peaceful conflict resolution is only possible on the basis of the law .
That is why it is important for there also to be recourse to the ECJ .
I hope that a large majority of this House will vote in favour of this proposal tabled by Ursula Schleicher .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today is an important day for European democracy , because we always talk about the institutions of the European structure , but we never talk about the protagonists and we need protagonists on the European stage .
They are the political parties .
Following the awful things that I heard in this House yesterday , allow me , Mr President , to say something that is based on my own experience , which is shared by you , in your country , and by Mr Poettering , which is that those who are against political parties are against democracy .
Parties will have their flaws , but there is no pluralist democracy in the world without political parties that represent the will of the people .
We therefore need to be very careful with demagoguery on this very important issue .
I have to say that I feel particularly proud , because almost ten years ago to the day , with the help and support of President Martens , President De Clercq , who is still our colleague , and President Spitaels , as President of Parliament , I made the first proposal that was given form in Article 138 of the Treaty , now Article 191 , in which , in agreement with President Lubbers , we succeeded in having the political parties incorporated into the Treaties .
We must not now simply content ourselves with proclaiming principles .
What we have to do is develop and give personality to the European political parties , and ensure that they do not continue to be some sort of annex to our groups .
This is the reason why , although we debate and disagree on many other things , we are in agreement on these matters , which are essential for democracy .
With regard to the debate and the report drawn up by Mrs Schleicher , whose work I welcome , I would say to my fellow Member , Mr Poettering , that we disagree on many things , but I would ask him not to get angry with Mr Kuhne , who raised a request made to us by the Court of Auditors in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and I would ask him , before twelve o ' clock , to reconsider his anger and support these amendments , which I think could be positive for everyone .


Another aspect that we think is essential , and here I would also ask for the support of your group , is that we should take a step forward on an essential issue for European democracy , which is the funding of the parties , in terms of who can contribute funds .
This is an open debate .
In the United States we have just seen the McCain initiative on soft money and hard money .
In many European countries we have had bitter experiences in this area .
We have not taken drastic action . We have worked instead on the basis of experiences that have occurred in the various European countries ... what we say is that legal entities , basically commercial companies , should not be able to give money to parties .
We are in favour of a ban in this area , because we believe that this is good for democracy and for transparency , because what we are talking about here are not acts of philanthropy . Something is always asked for in return - you only have to look at what President Bush is proposing for the energy sector .
To conclude , Mr President , allow me to point out the happy coincidence that today the majority of this House and the groups that have a European dimension , and we should not forget that we have a European dimension , have members from all the countries in the Union .
We want order , regulation , transparency and responsibility to the citizens and we therefore ask that our positions be respected in this debate and above all that there should be a shared democratic will at this decisive moment for European integration .
Mr President , in line with our Rules of Procedure , I believe that I should first of all indicate that there is a conflict of interest in my case , as I am also treasurer of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
This is not a financial interest , since the position is unsalaried - exceptionally so , I may say - but nevertheless , this is in any event probably a case of conflict of political interests .
However , I am speaking here on behalf of the liberal group , and not on behalf of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party .
The thing that should , of course , stand out in this entire discussion , is the fact that the situation as it is now is really not acceptable .
The situation in which the groups are keeping the parties afloat .
There was no other way until now .
There was no other way around this , but I believe that we all have understood by now , even intuitively speaking , that this situation is untenable .
The Court of Auditors has highlighted this , which is to be applauded .
Needless to say , nothing has happened in secret .
Everything was above board , everyone was able to see that things were done in this way , but it cannot continue like this .
As it happens , our groups cannot live on air , and if they do not receive support from general resources , where does that support originate from ?
Do we want the European political parties to become a plaything of whatever pressure group , be it trade union , businesses or other non-governmental organisations , rich individuals or whoever ?
It is patently clear that political parties must be able to lead an independent life .
If we do not , we will have American-styled practices on our hands , and I would not simply refer to President Bush , but also to the practice of candidates actually only accruing funds instead of pursuing politics .
We must never end up in a situation of that kind .
We need effectively functioning parties , as Mr Poettering and Mr Barón Crespo already stated very eloquently .
Indeed , that is where representative democracy comes into its own .
That is the case nationally and even much more so at European level .
We need stability in our democracy with a view to enlargement .
The new countries which are about to join us are also politically active .
They too have political parties which need to feel at home in the existing European political families .
Only in that way can we in this Parliament help democracy develop in the future .
That is of key importance .
Furthermore , we need stability with a view to democratic development in the European Union .
We do not know how this will develop , but we cannot rule out that there will come a time when there will be European electoral lists .
Someone will then need to put forward these candidates .
We cannot rule out that a system can be set up whereby it is possible to become individual members of European political parties .
For that too , a proper system will need to be developed to accommodate this .
In addition , it is necessary for those parties to be independent .
It is , of course , too crazy for words that the political parties must be financially independent from those elected on behalf of that political party .
It should be the other way round .
Those who are elected , should be checked out by their political parties .
That is how democracy works most effectively , and in that respect , I believe that even the present system can be improved on .
There is more to say on this subject .
We very much share the view , of course , that this cannot mean support for national parties .
We also agree that the system does not mean that pro-European campaigns are funded with this .
We believe that a number of issues still need to be examined , including legal status .
We should examine these aspects further .
For example , the aspect of support for political campaigns should be addressed .
We can come back to this during the amendment procedure , which will take place in due course , and then we will be able to put the finishing touches to the system .
Mr President , I have little time , that is why I hardly have the opportunity to highlight the importance of the forming of European parties .
Whoever claims , however , that parties are needed should also be aware that they take care of their financial resources and so far , this has been done in an unorthodox fashion .
It had to be done in the twilight zone .
We need a solid basis , transparency and control .
That is why our group is principally in favour of no donations from businesses for political parties , so as to vouch for the independence of Parliament as an institution and of the individual MPs .
Virtually every country has had its fair share of scandals , and we know that it is necessary to act very strictly and monitor closely .
If there are donations , it should be made very clear and transparent where they are from and what they will be spent on .
It must be possible to form democratic parties without creating too high thresholds .
That is why we support the proposal which the Commission presented right from the outset , to take five countries as the norm , so as not to deter any forces - at least if they are democratic .
There should also be sufficient funding for all recognised parties to be able to function as a party .
The overheads - and this can be verified objectively - must be covered before the resources are shared out proportionately .
Finally , we should be acutely aware of the fact that the citizens keep a watchful eye over the system .
We ourselves should ensure that the democratic fundamental rights are observed , for we cannot subsidise parties which subsequently undermine democracy .
Mr President , our Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left is not the group of a left-wing European party .
The parties represented in our group have differing positions on the political proposal on European political parties .
Some colleagues wonder , not without good reason , how meaningful it is and to what extent they actually can represent a European public .
The direct link to the people is not actually forged through Europe ; it exists at national and regional level .
That is where the parties have their grass roots ; that is where they have their members and electors .
I should like to ask Messrs Poettering and Barón Crespo to reconsider their words .
Mr Barón Crespo has just said that those who are against parties are against democracy .
I do not think that this is the case .
Rather I think that parties often tend to take themselves particularly seriously .
The public , for example in Germany , are very sceptical - not without reason - about membership of political parties .
I think that it is only 3 % in the Federal Republic who take an interest in politics by joining a political party .
Nevertheless they are still democrats .
They get involved in society through other organisations of civil society , such as citizens ' action groups and non-governmental organisations .
I want to say that the European party should not be denied the right to exist .
Those political forces which consider mergers of this kind to be right and necessary should also be able to proceed with them .
Quite apart from that , I am convinced , personally , that European parties , as it states in Article 191 of the Treaty , do actually constitute an important factor for integration .
That is why I support Mrs Schleicher 's report and would also thank the Commission for its initiative .
Against the background of the criticisms made by the Court of Auditors , I think it is necessary for clear conditions to be established .
Legal certainty , financial discipline and transparency are indispensable , and I think that in particular the proposals on the statute , and especially the requirement for complete transparency of finances and any donations , should definitely be included in the Regulation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking on behalf of my group , I must , of course , say that the positions I express here do not represent the whole group , in which there are two different feelings on this subject .
I would come back , however , to questions of principle , which I believe we should examine thoroughly .
Firstly , I regret that , in the various stages of the debate in which we have been engaged , the majority , whose strength we have never doubted , has never taken the trouble or care to respond to the legality issues . We should like to know how Article 308 is to be implemented .
How can it be brought forward with regard to the Treaty of Nice ? How can one jump from the equality of political parties at European level to the creation of restrictive entities : the European political parties ?
There has never been a reasoned response .
I should also like to take the opportunity to reply politely to Mr Poettering and Mr Barón Crespo .
We are not against Europe .
We are against the bulldozing of rights , especially in the case of fundamental rights in Europe .
Neither are we against political parties !
On the contrary , we believe that this Regulation is against political parties on a totally illegal basis , because it is not provided for in the Treaties .
We are against illegal discrimination against parties .
Besides , it has been mentioned that our concern is to respond to the concerns of a court : the Court of Auditors .
Given the ups and downs that this Regulation has been going through , it would not surprise me if , when the Court of Auditors first dealt with the matter , it raised the questions of the lack of legal base that have been discussed here itself .
I should also like to draw your attention to Article 191 .
The Treaty says this : ' Political parties at European level are important as a factor for integration within the Union . '
It does not authorise any discrimination between them .
The only discrimination that may exist in this European Parliament is brought about by the power of the electors , the democratic vote , and not by any other kind of instrument that may favour some to the detriment of others .
Mr President , SOS Democracy and the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities unanimously rejects the proposal to use the flexible clause of the Treaty , Article 308 , to finance supranational parties at EU level .
The Treaty of Nice introduces a special legal basis for aid to parties and thereby demonstrates that there is no legal basis in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The Court of Justice has laid down that Article 308 cannot be used instead of Treaty changes .
Therefore , the basis of the proposal is clearly unlawful until the Treaty of Nice has been approved in all the Member States .
The content will , unfortunately , also be unlawful following the Treaty of Nice because the latter does not deal with supranational European parties .
It deals with political parties at European level and , in a special declaration , rules out discrimination .
The Schleicher report would provide some parties with special aid not available to other parties .
This is contrary to the principle of equality .
In a democracy , it is the electorate alone that decides who is represented in Parliament , and the parties must compete on an equal footing .
Particular parties cannot be given advantages according to whether they are organised on a local or supranational basis .
It is not for the majority in Parliament to correct the election results by forcing the entire electorate to contribute to the financing of five supranational EU parties . It is incredible , moreover , that the Commission , as the guardian of legality , is able to submit such a clearly unlawful proposal , and it is inconceivable that Parliament should today adopt a proposal which , in accordance with current legal practice , can be declared unlawful by the EC Court of Justice .
I would call upon the groups to talk the matter through with Parliament ' s own legal service and , at least , to defer the vote until the next session .
Mr President , I think yesterday ' s episode and today ' s represent another sombre period for our Parliament .
It really is a Parliament of charlatans that has spoken this morning .
I think the Court of Justice in Luxembourg will find the matter ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Dupuis , you too are part of this Parliament .
Please try to measure your words .
Mr President , for me our Parliament has been acting the clown .
I warn you , we are working on going to Luxembourg .
The reasoning given by Mr Ribeiro and other Members on the lack of any legal base is glaringly obvious in my opinion , and our Parliament has not wanted to see this .
The discrimination issue is just as glaringly obvious .
Then there are some other points : this report speaks of ' lasting ' parties .
I would like to hear from you , ladies and gentlemen , what a ' lasting ' party means .
There is a political judgment inherent in this report : the Bureau of Parliament will be called upon to decide whether a party is worthy or not of receiving funding .
That is a political judgment !
I have listened with interest to the Members , and without too many surprises .
Jules Maaten tells us so many fine things about where the funding for the parties is to come from .
However , what are political parties ?
They are the expression , they should be the expression of civil society , and therefore either civil society , the citizens ( nobody has said anything about the citizens ) give money to the parties , and so the parties survive because they are the expression of civil society , or they are condemned to die , as quite rightly they should die if they do not represent anyone .
Nobody wants to talk about this .
That is incredible !
It is the bureaucratisation not just of Europe but also of our society .
They are parties that live outside society : an expression of this - read last month ' s Eurobarometer - is the ever-increasing distance between you , your bureaucracies and the citizens .
You have invented a new tax for the citizens , which forces them to finance your bureaucracies .
This is intolerable ; it is a measure against the citizens , and we will act with determination and take this to Luxembourg , because all of this is against Europe .
Mr Barón thinks that somebody here is against parties !
We are for parties that are alive , are expressions of society and not expressions of bureaucracies .
Mr President , yesterday Mr Poettering said that he was taking note of the decision made pursuant to Rule 143 Paragraph 1 as a democrat .
He wanted yesterday 's majority to prove themselves to be democrats if the tables were turned .
I can assure him that we are behaving like democrats .
It is precisely democrats , however , who are deeply concerned about the Rules of Procedure being complied with .
If , in accordance with Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure , the inadmissibility - due to legal shortcomings - of a specific item on the agenda is once moved and agreed , then in my view there is no possibility of magically reinstating it on the agenda by means of Rule 111 Paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure .
Rule 111 Paragraph 2 provides , you see , that the agenda may not be amended , except in pursuance of Rule 143 , amongst others , or on a proposal from the President .
That is an exclusive rule .
Since here the case in Rule 143 has occurred the second case does not apply .
This means , in other words , that today 's debate , in my view , is at variance with the Rules of Procedure , which is why I do not wish to contribute any further to it .
I have one comment on the legal base : in COM document 2000 / 444 the Commission also proposed adding a legal base for the statute to Article 191 .
This was in July 2000 .
I cannot understand the assertion that this cannot have been discussed in the committee .
Madam President , firstly I will refer to Mr Dupuis ' s speech .
He said that it is the people and civil society that should decide whether a party exists or disappears .
I was concerned to hear this from Mr Dupuis , because obviously it is a subject that he knows well , as his party has just disappeared from the Italian political map .
Going back to serious matters and serious speeches , I am the secretary-general of a European political party and moreover , I would like to stress , of a party that does not sit in the European Parliament .
It is the only party that has its own headquarters , a small house in Brussels that is separate from the European Parliament , and funding that for the most part ( more than 70 % ) is not dependent on the parliamentary group but on the parties that are members of our political family .
I think that today is a great day for European construction , but I would go even further : today a big step is being taken in constructing a political Europe .
Because those of us who believe in a political Europe , and in my group we do , of course , believe in this , know that the parties are a fundamental part of a political union .
Political areas , such as the Member States , have parties that provide cohesion : France , Spain , Italy , Germany ... all have national parties .
Europe needs parties that deal with and work in the whole of the Union , and this is what will give cohesion and coherence to the European Union .
I therefore think that this Regulation is a good one and is to be welcomed , for two reasons .
Firstly and obviously , because it provides rules and transparency for the functioning and funding of these very important elements for the political future of the European Union .
Secondly , because of the role that these parties will play in the future .
Because , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a political union , a Europe of 23 , 25 , 27 or more Member States is going to be increasingly difficult to manage . It is going to be increasingly difficult to move forward and increasingly difficult to have common opinions .
The European parties are a new instrument that can provide coherence , which can act as the backbone of this political union that we desire , in order to achieve a consensus where it would otherwise be difficult .
I can imagine the different European political families meeting prior to the meetings of the European Council with 27 prime ministers and reaching consensuses that will enable the European Union to move forward with a firm step towards the future .
I do not think , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that we realise the importance of the step that we are taking today .
Madam President , this proposal will probably succeed as a transitional measure to regularise what is at present a flawed system of financing our fledgling political parties .
I agree , however , with some of the critics who say that the proposal in front of us will not provide a lasting statute for the development of campaigning political parties , which are an essential factor should our vibrant transnational European parliamentary democracy flourish .
We are proposing one amendment that will improve the proposal , which is to grant the political parties legal personality under European Union law .
To leave things as they are at present , with 15 competing national jurisdictions , will be a cause of confusion and future problems .
We should sort this out now and address the other outstanding issues more seriously and more successfully once the Treaty of Nice comes into force .
We also welcome the compromise amendment , which lowers the threshold for the registration of political parties from a third to a quarter , which is in the interest of both fairness and pluralism .
Madam President , first I wanted to return for a few seconds to what happened this morning .
My group is slightly concerned about procedural squabbles ruining this text , which is important to us .
We hope that the fact that there was a sort of forced passage this morning is not going to secure the future of this text because , for us , it is imperative to have transparent financing for these European political parties .
We are well aware of what those who reject this financing mechanism are waiting for .
They still prefer the system where suitcases of banknotes are handed over in the dark .
As things stand , it must be flatly stated that the report which has emerged from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is still not acceptable .
It does not really ensure transparency .
The democratic threshold for accessing the financing is far too high .
As for the type of financing , we are extremely disturbed to see that this text allows private companies to finance parties .
Everyone is perfectly well aware of what that means too : when a company finances a party , it is hoping for advantages in return .
That is called organised corruption .
We therefore hope - because there are now some very good compromise amendments on the table - that this transparency will be strengthened , and that , as my friend Andrew Duff has said , the democratic threshold will indeed be lowered , five right away , and a quarter of the Member States after Nice . Above all we hope private financing will be totally banned , because it is not our calling in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to organise corruption , even if done transparently .
I hereby announce that if private companies are allowed to use their money to buy political parties at European level , our group will not vote for this report at the end of the day .
The extent to which there are , or are not , to be European parties must be a matter for the peoples of Europe and , in a democratic society , this is not something in which Parliament or a Commission should get involved .
This is not , of course , about constructing European parties .
It is about giving money to European parties , and that is quite a different matter .
As I understand it , the problem is that there is now a grey area and that some are opting for corruption and other curious methods of obtaining money for their activities . In that case , however , we must demand that they clean up their acts .
We must demand transparency , and we must demand that the existing European parties scrupulously observe rules and laws instead of cheating their way around them .
Instead , a system is now being devised in which the parties themselves can put their fingers in the till . Fewer and fewer people are joining political parties .
In Germany , the figure is 3 % , which is certainly a very good reflection of the situation in my own country . No one joins European parties , and in that situation parties are opting to enrich themselves .
It is an enormous problem we are creating .
We are hugely deepening the gulf between ourselves and the people .
It will be difficult to face the electorate at the next parliamentary election .
We have just had a foretaste of what we can expect if the Regulation we are debating today were to be implemented .
We have seen how Parliament has voted down the minority groups in contravention of clear legal principles .
It stands to reason that Article 111 of the Rules of Procedure cannot be used as this majority has used it .
It is shameful that there has not been a single legal challenge arising from the fact that Parliament yesterday voted to throw out the matter and is today saying that it is of no significance .
The majority decides ; the majority is always right ; that is the attitude .
Once this Regulation has come into force , the major political parties will subsequently have some very serious problems , however .
They will have problems because it stands to reason that this Regulation cannot be implemented with Article 308 as its legal basis .
This is completely clear following the Court of Justice ' s pronouncement of 28 March 1996 .
Article 308 cannot be used to alter the Treaty , but that is what in reality is being done because the Treaty of Nice , which contains the necessary legal basis , has not come into force .
That is the practical situation , and I can assure all the representatives of parties which vote down the minority groups - those parties that decide here in this Chamber - that we shall do everything to contest this legal basis .
We shall take steps to bring the matter before the Court of Justice in Luxembourg , and I can promise that there will be a political storm over the abuse of power of which this Regulation is an expression .
Madam President , the proposal for a regulation on the statute and financing of European political parties is both inappropriate for all the reasons I shall set out in my explanation of vote , and is also lacking a legal basis .
It is actually based on Article 308 ( former Article 235 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , but that cannot be used unless there is a Community power in existence first and no such power to act has been provided for .
The Court of Justice clearly established this , in its opinion of 28 March 1996 on the possibility of the Community becoming a signatory to the European Convention of Human Rights using Article 308 as the basis .
It declared that the use of Article 308 in such a case was impossible , because no prior general Community power existed to define and modify fundamental rights .
Consequently , in Paragraph 30 of its opinion - which I shall quote in full - the Court concludes that ' That provision ( Article 308 ) , being an integral part of an institutional system based on the principle of conferred powers , cannot serve as a basis for widening the scope of Community powers beyond the general framework created by the provisions of the Treaty as a whole and , in particular , by those that define the tasks and the activities of the Community .
On any view , Article 235 cannot be used as a basis for the adoption of provisions whose effect would , in substance , be to amend the Treaty without following the procedure which it provides for that purpose . '
Today we find ourselves in precisely that scenario with the European political parties .
Article 191 of the Treaty mentions them , but that only has declaratory value , because it does not entrust any mission to the Community as regards those political parties .
Therefore that article can in no case serve as a point of departure for using Article 308 , that is clear .
Lastly , I would add in conclusion that the reform planned in the Treaty of Nice , which seeks to create the absent legal basis , has not yet been ratified , and I hope it never will be , because it runs counter to the French constitution and the general principles of a free society , by which political parties must be free .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European statute on political parties , which we are debating today , is long overdue .
I should therefore like to thank the Commission for helping us , together with the European parties and the groups , to close this gap in European-level legislation in this parliamentary session .
The provisions being introduced here have been national law and have applied to the national parties in all the Member States for a long time , despite varying rules .
To all those who are now talking about parties I do have to say that each of us is sitting here because he was the candidate of a political party at national level .
We are after all living in a multi-party democracy .
Parties are not an end in themselves .
They are an essential part of a functioning democracy and constitute a link between citizens , the groups and the public in the opinion-forming and decision-making process .
In approving the Regulation that we are discussing today , we are making a contribution towards strengthening European democracy , intensifying the opinion-forming process and the debate within Europe and making the national parties more European .
The Regulation helps to increase transparency in respect of the funding of political work , create greater clarity , and separate group and party work , something which the European People 's Party - my friend Alejandro Agag has spoken about this - has been working hard to achieve for some time already , harder than the other parties .
In addition it contributes to guaranteeing the right of the European Court of Auditors to monitor the affairs of the European parties .
This Regulation is , however , also a basic prerequisite for a debate which we need to have on common electoral law and on common rules governing incompatibility for Members of Parliament in the different countries , and a prerequisite for the debate on the possibility of European parties standing in European parliamentary elections .
It contributes to making the post-Nice process more democratic .
We , the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , want more transparency and we want to strengthen the people 's Europe , instead of having more closed doors - read the Council - and secretariats .
We are in favour of the right to have recourse to legal action , enshrining the Charter of Fundamental Rights as a qualitative pre-condition for parties , European parties having legal personality and putting an end to cross-financing .
Madam President , this Parliament certainly lacks neither imagination nor brutality when it comes to consolidating , underpinning and protecting the closed circuit system it christens ' democracy ' . Here we are , faced with another of its innovations
Mrs Schleicher , good authors would say your text was about teratogenesis , that is , the production of monsters , a discipline in which the good Dr Frankenstein distinguished himself before you .
That is what it amounts to when we are presented with a proposal to create European political parties out of nothing , and the very expression is absurd .
They are not parties - they are not competing for the expression of universal suffrage which remains national in context - nor is this a matter of politics , because the only reason for this text is to let the large parliamentary groups get round a decision of the European Court of Auditors , and the whole thing is only European in the sense that it is not African or Asian .
In reality , Mrs Schleicher , the pompous name of European political party disguises a trick as old as the hills , the great lottery for the benefit of the lottery organisers or , if you prefer , a comfortable pension granted to the parliamentary groups most docile towards the institutions this Parliament is actually either responsible for controlling - like the Commission - or supposed to share decision-making power with - the Council : a pension granted by those institutions themselves .
The real name for that is misappropriation of public funds .
Madam President , I feel rather like the great Blondin , just before he started out on his tightrope walk across the Niagara Falls .
I have to say that my group and my delegation are opposed in principle to the regulation or financing of political parties at a European level .
We , like others in this Chamber , have deep concerns that the proposed funding for European political parties has no legal base .
It follows from this that we cannot favour a legal provision for state funding of political parties at European level .
State funding of European political parties is quite different , therefore , to state funding of political groups within the European Parliament .
In the UK , short money , as it is known , is provided for the support of opposition parties ' leadership in their parliamentary activities .
Our view also is that the Schleicher report does not follow the principles of the Nice Declaration .
Article 191 of the Declaration states : " The provisions on the funding for political parties shall apply on the same basis for all these political forces represented in the European Parliament . "
The Schleicher report quite clearly discriminates against some of the smaller parties and groups .
Finally , as Commissioner Patten said : " This regulation is mistaken in principle , unworkable in practice and discriminatory in effect . "
However , I wish to thank all the colleagues who understand that , like Europe , our group and our delegation do thrive on its differences .
Nevertheless , for the reasons stated , that is why I and my British colleagues will be opposing this premature report .
In conclusion , my late grandfather , Harold Macmillan , always held the view that Members of Parliament should not be paid , because when they were paid it attracted the wrong sort of chap .
Thank you for the very full information you have been kind enough to give us , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
EUROJUST
The next item is the report ( A5-0153 / 2001 ) by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Portuguese Republic , the French Republic , the Kingdom of Sweden and the Kingdom of Belgium with a view to adopting a Council decision setting up Eurojust with a view to reinforcing the fight against serious organised crime ( 10357 / 2000 - C5-0396 / 2000 - 2000 / 0817 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we Members think of the Council of the European Union we are by no means always filled with a deep sense of happiness .
It is not only the lack of good will ; difficulties with the subject matter and different priorities also sometimes make working with the Council rather a trial .
All the more reason then for me to be glad today as rapporteur that everything has gone smoothly with Eurojust .
We have acted in concert and made good progress in the fight against serious cross-border crime .
I should like to express my thanks for this , in a personal capacity and on behalf of Parliament , but especially on behalf of the people who live in the European Union .
If Eurojust starts work at the beginning of 2002 and supersedes the provisional unit to combat serious forms of organised cross-border crime , the public will have reason to be glad .
This is because Europe will then have moved considerably closer to being an area of freedom , security and justice .
The public also expect this of us , and I am convinced that they even have a right to it .
That is why I should like to thank warmly colleagues in the committee who have helped to improve the Council initiative and make it more tangible .
By so doing we want to create a judicial coordination unit which is as effective as possible and which works closely with the institutional partners , such as Europol , and the European Judicial Network .
I would ask Parliament to vote in favour of the amendments and additions to the Council proposal which are necessary to achieve this .
Allow me to give just a few examples from the Eurojust proposal where the hand of the European Parliament is visible .
Firstly , the extended and clear-cut list of Eurojust 's areas of competence is very important .
It incorporates the essential features of my ideal of a European public prosecutor and goes far beyond the minimal concept occasionally put forward , which is based on the belief that it is quite sufficient to protect the financial interests of the European Union .
From the public 's point of view if we had adopted this minimal concept we would definitely not have gone far enough .
We need to vigorously tackle all forms of crime which the people of Europe , not without reason , fear today .
The fight must target cross-border fraud , corruption and crimes against the financial interests of the European Community just as much as computer crime .
Money launderers must feel just as vulnerable as polluters .
Of course Eurojust 's general responsibilities must also include all of the other forms of crime and offences in respect of which Europol , as a police authority , is competent to act , including such dreadful crimes as trafficking in human beings or terrorist acts , which we have to read about every day in the newspaper .
Secondly , we have added a recital on data protection .
In my view this was also absolutely essential because the rule of law does not cease to apply in the fight against international and organised crime .
This means that Eurojust must also submit to strict rules on data protection when pursuing all of its investigative activities .
When collecting , processing and using personal data the international rules of the Council of Europe and the individual rules of the Member States apply equally in each case .
Rules on data protection must also be observed unreservedly when personal data are exchanged .
Thirdly , we want to ensure that Eurojust is able to work as flexibly as it possibly can .
This is a fundamental prerequisite for success .
Direct and uncomplicated contact between those involved is particularly important .
That is why we have deleted the national correspondents from the proposal and removed anything which might foster the growth of bureaucratic hurdles .
In conclusion , allow me to say that the Belgian government has announced that it wishes to complete the preparations for the definitive Eurojust unit during its presidency .
With this undertaking and the agreement of Parliament on my report - which I earnestly request - Europe is striking a powerful blow against international crime .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , one and a half years have passed since the Tampere Council decided to set up Eurojust as a European coordination unit for criminal prosecution authorities and public prosecutors .
This is a relatively short period of time if you compare progress in other areas of European policy .
In Parliament we have been very positive towards this rapid progress and have taken an active interest in it .
After Europol , the creation of Eurojust is a further important step towards combating organised cross-border crime in Europe more effectively .
The first step in the judicial area , namely setting up the European Judicial Network , has already been a success .
With the help of this network , for example , the public prosecutor in the German town of Celle was , within the space of a few hours , able to deploy an undercover detective from Belgian customs and , together with public prosecutors from another country , carry out an observation operation in a third country , again within the space of a few hours .
Thus many an opportunity to give mutual assistance - which was supposed forgotten - has been made to bear fruit .
Problems remained , however , for example with interpreting conventions on mutual assistance , criminal law and criminal proceedings and with the division of responsibilities .
To compound matters there were communication problems because of the natural language barriers .
With Eurojust these obstacles should now be surmounted .
Eurojust has , first and foremost , a clearing function .
The officials are to draft comparisons of laws , resolve bilateral disputes over the application and interpretation of conventions on mutual assistance , set priorities for fighting crime in Europe and monitor current transnational criminal prosecution measures .
In the future , Eurojust will also have to keep lists of transnational investigations and be in a position to pass on this information ; it will have to act as a registration point for information on serious offences and plan , coordinate and run training and development programmes .
Through Eurojust , the national prosecution authorities will have access to reliable legal advice - without encountering language difficulties - and will be able to resolve transnational disputes .
I should like to express my warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , for drafting Parliament 's opinion , which is now to be put to the vote , and for the good level of cooperation .
Alongside her amendments , there is one further amendment in particular to which I attach great importance .
Until now , the judicial network has been a body without a head .
If we are now setting up Eurojust to be the missing head then we are also obliged to provide shared nerve fibres , without which body and head will not function together .
Eurojust and the European Judicial Network should not stand alongside each other or only enter loosely into contact with each other ; they need to be bound together in one unit .
This can be achieved by using the already existing contact points of the European Judicial Network instead of the proposed national correspondents for Eurojust .
Only in this way can a superfluous juxtaposition of two systems with the same area of responsibility be avoided in the long term .
This is one of the ideas which our proposals contain .
I should like to ask the Council to take account of these in its considerations .
Then Eurojust really will be a success and make a contribution to the people of Europe living in greater security .
Madam President , the construction of the European Union as an area of freedom , security and justice is making steady progress and growing day by day , although rather more slowly than some of us would like .
Today we are discussing two important segments of judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
The more important is precisely the creation of Eurojust , which has already been started off with the setting up of the provisional unit , which has prepared the ground for the definitive body .
The European Parliament will , I hope , approve the excellent report by Mrs Gebhardt and hence the proposed amendments intended to strengthen the role and effectiveness of Eurojust .
They do in fact indicate its duties and the scope of its competencies in a broad enough way to avoid difficulties and uncertainties in its actions and thus to be able to better ensure the security of the citizens .
They set out better the guarantees that fundamental rights will be respected , especially with regard to the right to a defence and the confidentiality of personal data , and not least they ensure the autonomy and independence of the body , as behoves its nature as a judicial body .
More effective judicial cooperation in criminal matters is a crucial element of the area of freedom , security and justice in order to face the challenge of crime in an area of free movement .
However , in order to establish this cooperation in concrete form , the complexity of the procedures makes me hope yet again that in the next Treaty on the Union this matter too will finally become a Community matter , on a par with civil judicial cooperation , by means of the communitisation of the third pillar .
Madam President , history will show that decisions to set up networks are more important than many other decisions we take .
That also applies , for example , to the network of consumer ombudsmen .
We see that we can all cooperate .
We shall bring about practical results .
As previous speakers have pointed out , it is important that the rules relating to personal protection are respected .
I also want , however , to highlight an idea which Mr Watson has presented , namely that similar cooperation should be organised for those who have been accused and require a defence , so that everyone is operating on a level playing field .
Our group fully supports the view that environmental crimes should be added to those crimes that are to be covered by this proposal .
Unfortunately , we know that deliberate oil emissions are a significantly greater source of pollution than accidents .
It is extremely rare for prosecutors to deal with these crimes .
We therefore need Eurojust for cooperation in connection , for example , with my cherished Baltic .
Our group has tabled Amendment 28 because we have to respect the different ways in which preliminary investigations are organised .
In certain countries , such as my own , the prosecuting authority is , in part , dissociated from the preliminary investigation .
That must be respected , as it also was in the Tampere conclusions , which are the basis for our decision and discussion today .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , faced with the continual increase in organised crime , the European Union has stepped up its initiatives to reinforce the fight against criminal organisations and improve cooperation between investigating and prosecuting authorities .
The Tampere Summit provided new perspectives for this cooperation between police and judiciary , long regarded as the poor relation of European unification .
Eurojust , made up of public prosecutors , magistrates and police liaison officers , has become the object of everyone ' s attention .
How , though , can we envisage effective operation of a unit which could become the future European public prosecutor ' s office without prior harmonisation of Member States ' legislation and a basic rapprochement of their procedures ?
The purpose , for the Member States , is surely to achieve the highest possible standards , at the same time providing sufficient procedural guarantees and effective justice for all citizens , while respecting human rights , including the right to a defence .
Yet , we have to recognise that today we are dealing with a body which is not subject to any European Parliament control .
More serious still is the lack of all jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , in accordance with Article 35 of the Treaty .
Another point to bear in mind concerns the processing of the data that the unit is responsible for .
Eurojust will also have the task of collating information from police records , police reports and Member States ' registers .
This gives rise to a few questions .
What protection will be provided for this information ?
Who can access and use it ?
What right of reply and defence , indeed of correction of incorrect or out-of-date data is there ?
That is the purpose of my amendments , on which our support for this report will depend .
It is true , the European Union needs a supranational judicial structure to coordinate and enhance public action across the whole of European Union territory .
The stakes are as high as they can be .
That presupposes a willingness to implement a common crime policy which will go hand in hand with a minimum of national sovereignty being abandoned , whether the Member States want it or not .
Eurojust is about giving Europol a real judicial partner .
Its whole effectiveness will depend on the complementarity of the added value that the unit will be capable of bringing to the other players in the judicial and police worlds .
So , what use is it to establish supranational structures ?
Why ensure complex coordination between different countries to centralise an investigation if the judge in charge of the case does not have the resources to complete his investigation or secure conviction of the people charged ?
To sum up , rather than having an endless epilogue on the possible powers of a real European party , surely it would be better to make a real decision on a structure which would distinguish itself by its rapidity , effectiveness , and availability to the citizens of Europe while giving them full guarantees .
Mr President , the report considers that creating this overly centralised and authoritarian structure called Eurojust will give added value .
This is an institution with public prosecutors and judges from the Member States with the widest independent powers to prosecute and conduct investigations into so-called ' serious cross-border crimes ' , not that these crimes are described anywhere .
It is an institution which will be able to circumvent national authorities in order to react instantly , which will be able to pluck a case from one Member State and give it - one wonders on the basis of what criteria - to another Member State .
The right hand of Eurojust will be the Schengen system and Europol , which is promoted to the status of institutional partner .
Provision is also made for the European judicial network to be maintained , while Eurojust will create its own database , that is , there will be four networks with sensitive personal data for the criminal records , four means of filing information on citizens and anyone who enters the portal of the authoritarian fortress called the European Union .
The much-vaunted operational independence of the justice system , which civil democracy was so proud of , has been sidelined .
Eurojust and the future European public prosecutor are the finishing touches to a suffocatingly centralised , unaccountable , nightmarish structure for each and every citizen and , more importantly , for the grass-roots movement .
As we watch the European Union march towards unification , we note the trend towards full liberalisation of the market on the one hand , that is , the complete unaccountability of the monopolies in their quest for profit , and the authoritarian centralisation of institutions , the growing militarism of the European Union and suppression , on the other .
The people of the European Union must reverse this march and they will .
This is clear from events in my country , where the grass-roots movement and democratic powers in general have rallied and are resolutely opposing the new authoritarian and anti-democratic law on demonstrations which the government is currently trying to push through the Greek parliament .
Madam President , for too long the European Union has had its hands tied when it comes to fighting organised crime .
In approving the setting-up of Eurojust , I believe we would be adding a new weapon to take on Europe 's criminal organisations .
Organised crime in Europe has been at least ten steps ahead of us , taking advantage of weaknesses in our legal and economic systems .
These criminals are experts in exploiting legal provisions and jurisdictions and they have taken full advantage of our open market .
The European Union must no longer be a soft touch for serious crime .
Traditional enforcement measures are no longer enough .
National prevention measures must be complemented , where necessary , by appropriate action at Community level .
This initiative specifies that it should include trafficking in human beings , and I wish to insist that this should also include the smuggling of illegal immigrants , prostitution rings and the sexual exploitation of children .
In addition , we are talking about competence for dealing with acts of terrorism , protection of the euro , computer crime and protection of financial interests of the EU .
It also extends to the laundering of proceeds of crime .
Today in Brussels the EU Forum on Organised Crime is holding its first meeting .
The Commission must keep us and the public informed of the results of such meetings .
Let us make it a general rule that all relevant EU policies will incorporate a crime prevention element .
Let us make it known that the EU programme against social exclusion can be matched by the crime prevention strategy .
Let us make it known that the Regional Fund can contribute to the national programmes , supporting initiatives to fight and prevent crime .
Let us make it known that the Community 's cooperation and assistance policies and programmes already extensively incorporate the fight against crime .
Let us ensure that all new legislation is crime-proof and existing legislation is evaluated .
Our group will be supporting this report .
Madam President , first I would like to congratulate you in that position , and assure you that , as usual , I will be speaking on behalf of the radical Members of the Technical Group of Independent Members .
My friends and I have studied the issue of Eurojust in depth and frankly it deserves to be called ' Euro Saint-Just ' instead , in view of the way this matter has come before us .
I am told Saint-Just was a good lawyer too .
Eurojust raises many questions , so I am glad Commissioner Vitorino is here .
Nice clearly rejected the principle of an independent public prosecutor .
The countries do not want it , for all sorts of reasons .
A prosecution system cannot be developed without at the same time developing a defence system , a data protection system , and a rights guarantee system .
A bureaucracy will be created which will try to ask governments for criminal proceedings , when criminal proceedings are reserved for the judiciary .
The rules on that vary from one country to another .
In our country criminal proceedings are obligatory , but that is not the case in others .
These are complex matters which , in my opinion , are not going to be improved by this ' Euro Saint-Just ' which seems to me to be a bit like holding the inquisition at European level , if we do not build a parallel system of control and legality .
Furthermore , Commissioner , it makes me wonder when I think of the circumstances in which some countries have nominated their representatives - my country , for instance , which nominated Mr Caselli , in violation of rules laid down by the judiciary itself .


It makes me wonder when my country sends you the procurator of Palermo , who brought charges against Mr Andreotti , Mr Muzotto and Mr Contrada , who has tried five cases on the basis of the revelations of penitents , and who lost five cases out of five - the people he charged were acquitted in court .
I wonder where we will end up if these methods are exported to Europe .
For pity ' s sake , let us reject this ' Euro Saint-Just ' .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , international organised crime accounts for 10 % of world trade , and a large proportion of it is in the European Union .
If the statistics are correct , developments in the crime sector are extremely alarming because in the European Union 30 % of crime is already classified as international organised crime .
In the light of this trend we have to ask ourselves whether the border-free European Union is actually taking advantage of all the opportunities it has to take action against this organised crime .
Where police cooperation is concerned we can say that substantial progress has been made .
We have Europol , and Europol is working extremely successfully to fight crime .
In the field of judicial cooperation , however , we must unfortunately note that here cooperation is still in its infancy .
With Eurojust we now have a new instrument which will become operational in 2002 and will represent decisive progress in cooperation between the judicial authorities .
In principle , then , Eurojust works like Europol .
It coordinates the criminal prosecution authorities in the fight against organised crime .
What we must hope is that cooperation with existing units , with the judicial network and with Europol , works and that duplicate investigations are avoided .
I would congratulate the rapporteur .
There is only one point on which I disagree with her .
She has proposed that Luxembourg should be the seat .
As an Austrian , who also knows that the enlargement of the European Union is at hand - and welcomes it - and that Vienna is moving closer to the heart of the European Union , I would make a counter-proposal and propose not Luxembourg but Vienna as the seat of this authority .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the initiatives adopted within the framework of the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice have made this major political objective of the Union one of the most dynamic vectors for the broadening and deepening of European integration .
As regards the area of freedom , security and justice , the creation of a Eurojust unit in the field is certainly a most promising leap forward .
Eurojust is facing and trying to find an answer to one of the most serious , pressing threats to the rule of law : transnational organised crime , which is estimated to be worth a frightening amount in the world economy and , of necessity , in the European economy too .
The nation states have shown abundant signs that the legal mechanisms they have are insufficient to tackle organised crime in a satisfactory way .
Here , then , the European Union will have exceptional scope for affirming the principle of subsidiarity , for Eurojust is the democracies ' necessary , indispensable response to the scourge of organised crime . Such crime has accompanied the growing interdependence of economies and technological developments , exploiting the weaknesses in national legal systems which turn their backs on each other , impotent victims of an anachronistic pretension to self-sufficiency .
Eurojust and the inevitable European public prosecution service of the future confirm that European integration is a necessity for citizenship , a tangible response to tangible problems affecting the ordinary citizen .
It is on the success of all the concerted action at judicial and police level that the future confidence of societies in their democratic institutions will largely depend .
Eurojust will help preserve the effectiveness and prestige of these institutions and will render a great service to the rule of law .
Information , cooperation and joint coordination measures are the key to a new push forward in the fight against money laundering , the trafficking of human beings , environmental crimes , forgery and other serious offences .
The proposed college is an innovative instrument essential to the pursuit of these objectives .
However , for the rule of law to be strengthened as we would like with the creation of this important instrument of judicial cooperation , it is important that procedural guarantees , so important in domestic law , should also be worked into the operation of the Eurojust system so that the fundamental rights that these guarantees aim to preserve do not end up being diminished .
In conclusion , I congratulate the rapporteur on the thoroughness and quality of her report and , in particular , on the sense of balance which inspired the proposed amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , a word of congratulation to Mrs Gebhardt on her excellent work and also to Mr von Boettcher , who was the PPE-DE shadow rapporteur .
We are aware of the enormous proportions that organised and cross-border crime has reached , requiring swift , common and concerted action particularly in the fight against terrorism , drug trafficking , child pornography , the trafficking of people , forgery of the euro , computer crime and money laundering .
On the subject of Eurojust , I have four things to say : first , we should be pleased to be making progress in this matter .
When the European Parliament gave its opinion on the provisional unit in November last year , we made a clear recommendation that the creation of this unit should not be a pretext for undesirably delaying the setting-up of Eurojust .
Secondly , we are taking one more step towards the creation of the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice . The Tampere decisions are moving ahead , making their way .
Step by step , we are constructing a citizens ' Europe , with the Commission scoreboard , respecting the role of Parliament and with an initiative shared between the Commission and the Member States . Commissioner António Vitorino knows full well , however , that we have found more to our taste in his initiative than we have at times in the Member States ' initiative , as regards its coherence and comprehensive view .
Thirdly , we are honouring the values of our civilisation , the principles of the rule of law : in Commissioner Vitorino ' s fortunate expression , Eurojust is the judicial counterpart of Europol .
Eurojust is to operate with appreciable independent status .
Its annual report is to be placed not only before the Council but also before the Commission and Parliament .
Fourthly and lastly , data protection .
Parliament has already drawn attention to this issue : Eurojust will have to cooperate with Europol , with the European judicial network , with OLAF and with the Schengen information system , in addition to benefiting from crime information supplied by the Member States .
It is particularly important to find a solution that is balanced between guaranteeing and safeguarding citizens ' rights and freedoms , on the one hand , and the instruments needed to fight crime on the other .
It is also always worth emphasising , when talking about the Community institutions , that we must make every effort to avoid any duplication of tasks or conflict of competencies .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be extremely brief so as not to delay voting time .
The Commission shares the overall view that Mrs Gebhardt presents regarding the Eurojust report and would like to congratulate her on the excellent job she has done .
Above all , we stress the importance of finding suitable solutions for the relationship between Eurojust and the European Judicial Network , which has made a very important contribution to the development of judicial cooperation at European level , as well as defining the conditions under which the Commission itself and Europol can be associated with the work of Eurojust .
At this stage , the Eurojust unit has no powers to take operational decisions or to promote investigations as such or to take cases to court .
Obviously , however , the natural course of evolution for Eurojust will be to arrive at this higher stage of judicial cooperation .
Hence the importance of the ideas set out by Mrs Gebhardt , which the Commission recognises , regarding guarantees of a defence for the accused , the rules on data protection and global issues of safeguarding citizens ' fundamental rights .
We all believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union is an important guide in the adoption of these solutions .
We agree with the suggestions made by Mrs Gebhardt , but there is just one point upon which I should like to express a reservation .
One has to be very careful when defining the competence of Eurojust with regard to crime affecting the protection of the financial interests of the Communities . We feel it would be preferable to speak of competence in matters of economic and financial crime .
One of the most sensitive questions is the relationship between Eurojust and OLAF .
OLAF has competencies within the first pillar ; Eurojust falls within the specific intergovernmental context of the third pillar ; therefore we feel it would be best to avoid giving the idea that Eurojust always has to be involved in cases where OLAF takes the initiative to safeguard the protection of the Community ' s financial interests .
Thus , we feel it is very important to specify their different scopes .
Finally , Madam President , with regard to the imaginative and creative figure of speech used by Mr Dell ' Alba , who called Eurojust ' Euro Saint Just ' , I have to say that , for my part , I believe Eurojust is not an instrument of justice for saints : it is an instrument of justice for human beings .
Aware of the difficulties , and even some risks , I say that , like any human endeavour , it is imperfect .
It is not a holy office ; on the contrary , it is a first step towards guaranteeing the protection of fundamental rights and fighting crime at European level .
Not perfect , but an essential first step .
That is why I hope the House will support Mrs Gebhardt ' s report .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a moment .
Thank you very much Madam President .
As you know , I was in the Chair yesterday when the Turkish demonstrators broke into the Chamber .
It is not my intention in any way to delay the votes or to re-open the debate we had this morning , but I think it appropriate to place on record my thanks to the ushers for their very efficient and prompt handling of the situation .
I think their professionalism in the situation deserves much credit .
Thank you for that statement , Mr Martin , which we are very pleased to note .
I ask for your permission to take up a minute of Parliament ' s time to remind you that seven Portuguese citizens are still being held captive in the enclave of Cabinda , a territory situated to the north of Angola and incorporated into that African country .
They are citizens who were working in Cabinda for Portuguese companies and were therefore totally uninvolved in the independence conflict which has been going on there for decades .
Madam President , two of these hostages have been held for practically a year , I repeat , a year in captivity , and the other five for more than two months !
The little news that reaches us indicates that the Angolan authorities are currently placing enormous military pressure on the territory and , in a parallel move , recently ordered the expulsion of all foreign journalists .
We therefore do not know what is happening there , and there is a total lack of impartial witnesses in the field . Naturally we fear for the safety or even the lives of the hostages .
The seriousness of the matter led me to write to the Council myself recently , to ask Mr Javier Solana to intervene .
He would certainly have the opportunity to create favourable conditions for our compatriots to be set free , the primary objective of this speech .
As I asked in my letter , Madam President - I ask you to make every effort within your competencies and to exert all possible diplomatic pressure on the kidnappers and the Angolan authorities so as to create a situation in which the seven hostages can be set free .
Mr Queiró , we have understood your message very well .
For my part , I am going to see what I can do to throw light on that situation which is indeed absolutely tragic .
However , it is 12.20 p.m. and we have an enormous amount of votes .
All the same , we have certainly heard your message .
VOTE
Madam President , I realised just now that this question , which was set aside by the vote in this House yesterday , pursuant to Rule 143 , and removed from the agenda by a motion of inadmissibility , had been reintroduced pursuant to Rule 111 ( 2 ) .
Now Rule 111 ( 2 ) , explicitly states that the agenda can be altered by application of Rule 143 , which has taken place , or on a proposal from the President , in other words you , Madam President .
The word ' or ' , however , clearly denotes , in law , an alternative . In other words , if the agenda was altered by application of Rule 143 , it cannot be altered again , quite obviously , by a proposal from the President .
That is the reason why I have the strongest reservations about the legality of the vote which is about to take place , with many Members prevented from taking part in the debate .
I think the Court of Justice should rule on this matter and I have no doubt that once again , Madam President , it will , sadly , reveal your rather light approach to your responsibilities .
Before the vote on Amendment No 12 :
Madam President , I would ask , pursuant to Rule 130 Paragraph 3 of the Rules of Procedure , that of the three amendments on the table the committee 's amendment be put to the vote first : a split vote has been requested here and I would ask that this request be taken into account .
Please put Amendment No 12 to the vote first and then the others .
After the vote on Amendment No 54 :
Madam President , I should like to ask you to put Amendment No 63 to the vote first .
It is a compromise amendment from the PSE , Liberal and Green Groups .
A new situation has arisen .
Now the parties are only required to be represented in a quarter of the Member States .
It would be more logical to put this to the vote first and only then the Commission proposal .
Before the vote on Amendment No 46 :
Madam President , may I suggest to you that the adoption of Amendment No 46 , does not mean Amendment No 47 falls .
In my group ' s view , it constitutes a wholly useful complement and is in no way opposed to the wording of Article 46 .
Madam President , I have checked the documents again and established that we already voted on the issue addressed in Amendment No 28 when we voted on Amendment No 7 .
For that reason this amendment is redundant .
I would imagine that we will be able to discuss the quite specific problem which is the subject of this amendment with the Council at a later stage .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in the Middle East
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on transatlantic relations
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the state of transatlantic dialogue
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0147 / 2001 ) by Mr Cercas , on behalf of Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication on The Future Evolution of Social Protection from a Long-Term Point of View : Safe and Sustainable Pensions ( COM ( 2000 ) 622 - C5 ­ 0011 / 2001 - 2001 / 2003 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0114 / 2001 ) by Mr Casaca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control on the European Court of Auditors ' Special Report 11 / 2000 on the support scheme for olive oil , accompanied by the Commission ' s replies [ C5 ­ 0009 / 2001 - 2001 / 2001 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0166 / 2001 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of the European Parliament for the financial year 2002 ( 2001 / 2062 ( BUD ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Thank you , Madam President , I just wanted to say , in accordance with the customs of this House and the recommendations of the Quaestors , that , in line with the legal position expressed just now , my colleagues and I would not be participating in the final vote of the Schleicher report .
There , that was very simple , that was nothing much , and I will add just one small comment .
Madam President , do not be afraid of us , do not be afraid to give us the floor , we will only take it to refer to the rules and conform to the customs of this House .
All in all , we are not nearly as nasty as people say we are .
Mr Gollnisch , I note that it is also an explanation of vote , really .
So you are quite entitled to present it now .
Thank you , Madam President , for giving me the floor after suggesting that the audience leave the Chamber .
I want to make a comment , invoking the Rules , on the way you personally have been presiding over the sittings for two days now , on the Schleicher report , on the vote on Strasbourg yesterday , when you caught us on the hop as you very well know , and on the way you decide who to call , for example , refusing the floor just now to the excellent Mr Gollnisch .
I challenge the way you carry out your role as President and I would inform you that we , I and some of my colleagues , will be sending you an open letter on the matter , for which we shall be ensuring wide publication in the French press .
Thank you very much , Madam President .
Fine , I do not think I need to respond to those remarks .
I am delighted that you are planning a letter , and I shall make it a duty and a pleasure to answer it point by point , Mr Coûteaux , particularly about catching you on the hop for the vote yesterday .
I think everyone can testify that the way that vote took place was perfectly objective .
It is not my fault if you were not at the sitting at the time of the vote .
I do apologise !
Mrs Doyle presented a procedural motion , and we waited some time .
I can understand your being embarrassed , Mr Coûteaux .
This is all rather stupid , really !
Of course I understand your embarrassment as a Frenchman , but that is not my business .
I am the President of the European Parliament .
I do entirely understand your embarrassment , Mr Coûteaux , believe me .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Figueiredo report ( A5-0155 / 2001 )
Madam President , the document by Mrs Figueiredo is very important .
Combating and overcoming poverty in Europe is certainly a goal that nobody in the world has yet managed to achieve .
Will Europe succeed ?
I really hope so , for the sake of all the poor people in Europe , among whom there are unfortunately many pensioners .
If we succeed , then it will be said that in Europe there are three fairy godmothers for the poorest citizens : the President of Parliament , Nicole Fontaine , who represents us all ; Commissioner Anna Diamantopoulou , who proposed this programme ; and Mrs Ilda Figueiredo , who has carried it through to completion .
Mrs Ilda Figueiredo 's report on the programme to combat social exclusion deserves our support .
In fact , cooperation must be encouraged in order to make it possible for the European Union and the Member States to fight against social exclusion and to eradicate poverty - social realities still unfortunately deeply affecting some Member States , such as my own , Portugal - in accordance with qualitative and quantitative targets to be agreed by the Council and Parliament .
The Commission is to provide Parliament and the Council with information on the progress made within this programme annually .
Encouraging dialogue with our partners in this area at European , national and regional levels so as to combat poverty and social exclusion more effectively , and maximising financial support for innovative projects with a European added value are determining factors for its success .
In order to give full practical effect to the programme , providing for field inspections , the involvement of those suffering from social exclusion and poverty and funding for operations carried out by NGOs , it is essential to raise the reference amount to 100 million euro , including technical and administrative expenditure .
Core funding for key European networks involved in these actions should also be considered .
The preparation of an annual Round Table Conference of the European Union on social exclusion , organised in close collaboration with the Presidency of the Council of the Union and in consultation with all the actors concerned , is another essential initiative .
Finally , I should like to alert you to the insufficiency of the NGO financial control mechanisms , which will require closer supervision to ensure the strict and judicious application of public funds .
The European Commission ' s proposal , which is the subject of the report we have discussed today , aims to establish a programme of Community action to support and encourage cooperation between Member States to combat social exclusion .
The aim of this programme is to encourage the Member States to combine their efforts to combat poverty and social exclusion in Europe in a framework of open coordination .
To be more effective , this coordination must be based on national action plans to combat exclusion , with guidelines established at European level .
The European Parliament examined this text at first reading in November last year under the French Presidency , which promoted a number of social affairs initiatives and was intent on making the fight against poverty a priority on the European social agenda .
The Council ' s common position fully or partially incorporates 25 of the 47 amendments adopted by Parliament during the sitting of 16 November 2000 , while the Commission accepted 31 amendments .
To my great regret , the Council has rejected some of the most important amendments .
It has rejected the reference to the revised Social Charter ( 1996 ) of the Council of Europe , to which the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union must now be added .
It does not want to retain the 90 % funding for the activities to be carried out by the NGOs under the programme to combat poverty and social exclusion , bearing in mind that the same level of support has already been approved for the programme to combat discrimination .
The funding of the programme also represents a stumbling block .
Believing that resources on a par with ambition are needed , the European Parliament hoped to increase the budgetary envelope from EUR 70 million to EUR 100 million , but in vain !
Just as questionable is the refusal to involve the European Parliament explicitly in the monitoring of the programme .
I have naturally voted in favour of the amendments seeking to reinstate the provisions which were not endorsed by the Council and / or the Commission .
Indeed , I think the programme ought to be as determined as possible .
It should be an instrument for promoting equality of opportunity amongst all men and women , and send a strong political signal from the European Union .
Just because our statistics for growth and employment are satisfactory overall , that is no reason to forget that far too many people still live on the margins of society .
The main focus of this report relates to supporting greater cooperation between the fifteen Member States of the European Union to combat social exclusion .
I believe it is very important that we all work together in a spirit of cooperation so as to ensure that the problems of social exclusion are solved within our community .
In this regard I fully welcome the setting up of the new Social Protection Committee which is included as one of the changes within the Treaty of Nice .
A Programme of Community Action to combat social exclusion must be fully supported .
The European Union is economically strong , but there are still key social problems in many rural and urban areas .
The fact of the matter is that long-term unemployment and youth unemployment is quite concentrated in particular areas within the European Union .
It is in fact concentrated in many specific blackspots .
Putting in place initiatives to solve social exclusion and to give opportunities for the disadvantaged in our society must be a central policy of any government within the E.U.
The principle underpinning this new Community Action Programme is to create an open method of coordination between the Member States to help eradicate poverty and social exclusion .
This will be achieved by setting specific objectives to be integrated into National Action Plans and to implement policies to promote equal opportunities .
The implementation of the Social Policy Action Programme 2000-2005 as published by the Commission will also help in combating social exclusion .
Particular emphasis will be placed on setting up schemes to help the long-term unemployed as well as to help early school leavers .
There will also be continued national support for local job creation programmes under the principle of subsidiarity .
There will also be improved coordination of policy programmes in the area of the Information Society , modern telecommunications services and Internet-related activities .
We do not want to build a two-tier Europe , or a Europe of the haves and have nots .
It is very important that education and training opportunities are given to those without skills .
It is equally important to give retraining opportunities to those in the existing workplace .
Partnership is the key at all times and consultation between all interested parties is very important if the problem of social exclusion is to be solved sooner rather than later .
- My group is happy to support the Figueiredo report , and congratulates the rapporteur on her dedicated approach to the issue .
We feel that the higher amount of funding proposed is essential if we are to be able to do serious work in tackling social exclusion and poverty .
It is obvious that the current economic system is not delivering an adequate standard of living for many people within the EU , and before we push applicant countries in the same direction we have to know what we can do that is more effective in meeting people 's needs .
It is clear that we have a considerable number of working poor and people who will not be able to work at all , or work full-time and we need to see what can be done to ensure that they have an adequate income and other opportunities which allow them to participate in society .
We cannot assume that work is the only activity that implies that you are a worthy citizen .
Young people , those from minority ethnic groups , the elderly , people with disabilities , the homeless , the mentally ill and many others find themselves excluded in our societies in many different ways .
Therefore , we support the rapporteur 's view that there is a need for a wider body to evaluate the working of the action programme .
We reject the view that only Member State governments should evaluate their own choices of research and other activities .
They are not the poor and socially-excluded , so there is a role for civil society being involved in the evaluation to help ensure that the Commission and Member States are on the right lines in their approach and to provide greater transparency .
Members of the European Parliament represent many of the poor and socially-excluded and also have valuable experience to bring to any evaluation .
It is essential that we are given this opportunity .
Ferber report ( A5-0138 / 2001 )
This , Madam President , is an adjustment of the budget for the systems and administrative organisation of the European security and defence policy .
General White , an Englishman , of the future European rapid reaction force , meets Captain Rossi , an Italian .
They are both veterans and pensioners of the future European force .
' How are you ? ' asks the captain .
' Fine , and you ? ' answers the general .
' Not so good , ' says the Italian .
' Why ? '
' Because my pension is too low , ' says the Italian captain .
' But no , ' continues the Englishman , ' my pension is quite high , actually . '
' How much is it ?
Oh , three times as much as mine !
But how come the pensions of generals who have served in the European reaction force are so different ?
Let us remember to tell Mr Fatuzzo to bring up the fact that it would be good if pay and pensions in the future European army were the same for everyone . '
The Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget ( SAB ) 2 / 2001 presented by the Council aims to continue and to speed up the development of the common European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) by setting up three new directorates within the General Secretariat of the Council , recruiting 51 staff , paying daily allowances for military experts and purchasing telecommunications and data protection equipment .
In this way , the ESDP management structures will be created , helping speed up the militarisation of the European Union , a process we reject and which is sufficient justification in itself for rejecting the current SAB and the Ferber report .
Besides , Mr Ferber not only fails to question this process but he also ' welcomes the Council ' s decision to launch with this SAB a new European defence policy ' and also ' regrets that this policy is not more integrated in the first pillar ' .
There are also , however , institutional and technical issues to examine .
Firstly , the entering of this operating expenditure as administrative expenditure of the Council both confuses the nature of the expenditure and removes the possibility of democratic control over it , specifically by Parliament , which , in practice , is thus giving up its budgetary power .
However , in addition to the issues of democracy and transparency , there is increased pressure on the ceiling for expenditure under heading 5 - administrative expenditure - at a time when the European Union is preparing for enlargement .
The motion for rejection tabled by the Group of the Greens only deals with these last two issues but essentially accepts the position of the Ferber report , without commenting on the basic issues of the ESDP .
We cannot , therefore , vote in favour of this rejection .
Schleicher report ( A5-0167 / 2001 )
Madam President , the Pensioners ' Party , represented by me in this House , has voted in favour of the statute and financing of European political parties .
I am convinced , as Mr Maaten said in the report he described for us when he spoke on behalf of the Liberal Group , that Europe is also and most of all constructed through the European political parties .
In my opinion , it would be appropriate if the European political parties took part in national elections , rather than having national political parties take part in European elections .
Europe is being constructed by beginning to construct European centres for doing politics .
As long as we have national parties , we will never have a Europe .
I hope , therefore , that there will soon be a register for European elections , with at least ten per cent of us elected at a European level .
Madam President , the Treaty on European Union and the Charter of Fundamental Rights recognise the importance of and need for political parties at European level in order to promote integration .
I think , however , that the requirement to have representation in at least five Member States , that is in 33 % of them , in order to obtain funding , is excessively restrictive and gives the impression of wanting to close the doors to new ideas and new ways of understanding politics .
What would happen if , within a Member State , a party were required to obtain parliamentary representation in 33 % of the constituencies in order to be considered an established party with the right to a presence and to public resources and funding ?
Firstly , many of the parties from Federal States and regions could not get into the State parliaments , and we would therefore have less democracy , less integration and less Europe .
The same applies to European parties .
If we want to promote integration and the shaping of the broadest political awareness and will , we have to decrease this limit and immediately make representation in three Member States sufficient to be considered a European party .
Moreover , the small parties of today could be the big parties of tomorrow .
We should not close the doors on the future .
Through this vote the large parties have tried to snatch the contributors ' money to finance themselves .
We are not , in principle , against the public financing of parties ; but we are against this form of discrimination based on two factors : numbers and territory .
In fact , this measure excludes the parties that support territorial identities , even if they are sizeable .
A party could even represent 80 % in its own country , but if it does not have European connections it will be excluded .
It would be like saying that , in Italy , for instance , the Südtiroler Volkspartei or the Union Valdôtaine should not have access to public funds .
It is a profoundly unfair measure , and that is why we have voted against it .
Madam President , I would like to thank you for your skilful and impartial management of the sittings .
My remarks concern Mr Schleicher ' s report on the financing of European political parties .
It states that parties ' own funding amounts to just 25 % , and , thus , 75 % is from subsidies , which is why I did not think the support of companies was necessary .
We have to accomplish things through being active and , furthermore , support must be obtained from members .
For this reason I voted against donations by companies .
In any case I think that the excessive use of money has started to distort elections , an excellent example of which is the Italian elections .
It might distort elections in the future too , and for that reason a limit must be found to the use of money in elections .
Madam President , the Schleicher report takes us down the road not just of corruption but of institutionalised corruption .
The big parties , the departing parties , the establishment parties will have the oligopoly , if not the monopoly , of funding for their electoral campaigns and propaganda .
Of course , they will deprive those not large enough of that funding .
Few speakers , however , have noted that it will not be enough to be a party with a European base - which is already questionable , as my colleague Mr Speroni has mentioned - it must be more than European , it must be pro-Europe .
As Amendment No 2 to recital 2 states , fundamental rights must be respected , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
What about those who would challenge the Treaties ?
What about those who will be challenging the Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
They are pariahs , vermin , scum .
They will be deprived of financing .
They will be prosecuted .
As in Belgium , they will be placed under police surveillance .
They will be dragged before the courts .
Today ' s totalitarian system is no longer behind any iron curtain .
As I explained in the main debate , there is no legal basis for the Commission ' s proposal on the statute and financing of European political parties or the Schleicher report supporting it .
The obstinacy of the main federalist groups in pursuing their adoption come what may shows exactly how far the law is respected in the Europe they are building .
The same can be said of the French government which , in its note of 9 May , sees no difficulty about using Article 308 in such a case .
In terms of content , the proposed text turns the logical progress of a free society on its head .
At national level political parties are created by the citizens and nurtured by their participation . They may eventually be granted public finance by law , but only later on .
With this new text , the reverse would happen at European level : public finance from the Community budget would be intended to make European political parties - which do not exist today , or not with any real substance - ' emerge ' .
The perversion , however , does not end there .
Next , these artificial creations will be used as evidence of the existence of a so-called ' European political scene ' , which will itself be produced as proof that ' European democracy ' is working well .
And this largely invented ' European democracy ' will in turn serve to justify the removal of powers from the national democracies , the only truly genuine ones .
This anti-democratic machine for despoiling the peoples is operating at full speed , activated in this case by the lure of gain , since the ectoplasms currently entitled ' European political parties ' , supported by their friends in the European Parliament , are waiting impatiently for the time when they can feed on public funds .
Added to these basic reasons for our opposition are many others relating to the irregularity of the text presented , because it gives a ' statute ' to political parties which ought to remain free , because it is biased in favour of the partisans of supranationality , because it establishes a real political law , and because it institutes indefensible discrimination to the detriment of national parties acting directly at European level .
Texts like these show how badly France needs a means of checking that acts derived from Community legislation are constitutional .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of Mrs Schleicher ' s report on the statute and financing of European political parties .
The Treaty contains provisions concerning the political parties .
The most important purpose of this statute is to create openness and transparency in the financing of the European political parties .
The European Parliament ' s amendment is a substantial tightening up of the Commission ' s proposal , which we can fully support .
An important point are the demands that European parties be representative .
We are of the view that the demands must not be so tough that it is only the major parties that are covered by the rules .
It is important to recognise that smaller parties too contribute substantially to European democracy , especially in connection with enlargement .
- ( DA ) We have voted against the report for two basic reasons .
The first reason concerns the content of the report .
It is contrary to democratic principles to favour larger political groupings over smaller groupings .
The idea is unequivocally to give the largest political groups in the European Parliament a financial advantage , without its being in any way apparent that they represent people in the different countries better than the smaller groups .
The second reason concerns the legal uncertainty and lack of basis in the Treaties , together with the President ' s completely unacceptable reintroduction of the proposal , even though it was agreed to throw out the reading in accordance with Article 143 of the Rules of Procedure .
It is well known that we are against the creation of ' European political parties ' or other forms of organisation with supranational characteristics , since going down this path clearly means one more step towards a strengthening of the federalist orientation of the European Union and foreshadows predictable measures to this end .
Although this European parties ' initiative is presented as a way of getting round the criticism from the Court of Auditors regarding the financing of political groups in the European Parliament , it has really been imposed by the dominant forces in the European Union without there being any real support for the creation of such ' European parties ' , since the Treaty of Nice has not yet even been ratified by any national parliament in a Member State .
Lastly , mention must also be made of our disagreement in principle with countless points included in the current proposal , specifically the criteria for their formation and funding possibilities .
All over Europe the funding of political parties is tainted by sleaze which is bad for democratic politics .
For that reason I believe that European funding for European-wide political activity , be it for or against the European Union , should be considered seriously , so long as that activity remains within the accepted parameters of Western values .
Nonetheless I have serious reservations about some of the detailed proposals in the Report , as well as considering it not to have a proper legal base .
. ( EL ) The Nice Treaty , which makes provision for a method to fund European political parties , has not yet been ratified by the Member States and therefore entered into force , and yet the Council and the parliamentary committee responsible have rushed to put a report on the statute and funding of European political parties to the vote in plenary .
The pretext for the hurry is the EU 's alleged concern at the increasingly poor turnout at elections .
There is not a grain of truth in this argument , as is clear from the huge turnout at the recent elections in Italy and all the relevant studies , which talk of the disappointment and apathy of voters ( due to the contradiction between what the bourgeois parties do and say ) as regards the machinations going on in Brussels and Strasbourg .
This alienation will increase even more when European parties with even looser ties to their voters are set up .
Mainly using economic incentives as bait , legislation is being passed on what are , to all intents and purposes , binding rules governing the constitution and modus operandi of European parties .
These strict binding rules concern both their statute and the electoral power which parties must have in order to qualify as ' European ' and obtain the relevant funding .
These parties must have clear European objectives , such as European integration , even if they appear to take the opposite approach .
The word ' appear ' is highly suspicious .
Will a party such as the Communist Party of Greece , which not only appears but is , in fact , clearly opposed to European integration be approved ?
Further on it says that a political party cannot qualify as European if it preaches intransigence .
In other words , is it prohibited to preach intransigence against fascism or , more importantly , against class enemies and the exploitation of the working classes ?
As far as electoral power is concerned , the proposal is that the party must either have elected representatives in the European Parliament or in the national parliaments in at least 5 Member States ( either in one third of the Member States or in one quarter according to today 's resolution ) or must have gained at least 5 % in at least 5 Member States at the last European elections ( either in one third or in one quarter of the Member States ) .
This is direct interference in the electoral system of each country , because higher electoral quotas are being introduced which , in practice , will exclude the voices opposed to the so-called ' European ideal ' , that is , the imperialist nature of the ÅU .
Finally , provision is made for contributions to be published for the sake of transparency .
However , as there is no limit on contributions , we must assume that even the names of the members and friends of a party who pay a subscription will be recorded .
The report considers the ban on donations to a party by public corporations to be something of an achievement in the transparency stakes .
Woe betide that it should say the opposite !
However , the problem lies in donations from the highly powerful private sector , on which it remains as quiet as the grave .
The attempt here to introduce compulsory European parties is tantamount to serious interference in the political system of each country , the aim being to weaken the role of the national parties , especially those which oppose the ÅU .
The parties are institutions set up to express the free will of their members , as regards both their programmes and their modus operandi .
By setting up European political parties as described above , they are trying to get the people to accept the imperialist integration of the EU as a one-way street , as destiny and as the only course available , to hit out at and - if they can - exclude any dissenting voices from the European Parliament and to distance the workers even more from the centres which take the decisions which directly affect them .
. ( NL ) Parties should be organisations ruled from the bottom up , not from the top down .
Real parties do not come into being because the structures of a state have a need for organising a competitive battle during elections , but because there are groups of people who share the same ideas , interests and activities .
However , those in favour of a European multicultural state have discovered that there is no European public opinion .
Artificially , from the top down , they now want to put forward leaders and structures which attempt to create an opinion of that kind .
Four cooperatives of more or less like-minded parties in different Member States have now combined into a European party , and they support that party to some extent with funds from their common groups in this Parliament .
In my view , this proposal is mainly a tool for legalising this unprofessional conduct .
The doling out of tax money to parties , as well as the imposing of rules on parties by the government adds to the mistrust on the part of the citizens against what they see as a political elite .
A centralistically organised European party could well create a situation where , within a joint political movement , member involvement , party democracy and the priorities which differ from Member State to Member State are being compromised .
Although I welcome the fact that this proposal does not discriminate on the basis of their political persuasion and their scale , and that gifts from businesses are prohibited , I will be voting against it .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports the proposal to lay down clear and transparent guidelines for the operation of European political parties and to regulate their finances .
European political parties already exist and obtain public funds via their political groups in the European Parliament .
It is therefore important that we regulate on this .
The new rules would make the system more visible , more open , more transparent and above that fairer .
Democracy requires parties to provide choice to the electorate and to articulate the views of voters .
At European level , they remind us that , on most policy issues our differences of view are not between Member States but between different philosophies and political viewpoints that exist within all Member States .
I have voted against the report for the following reasons : Article 308 of the Treaty does not provide the legal basis for giving the European Parliament the right to deal with the matter at this time .
The statutes have the effect of being democratically and financially exclusive and also appear to be discriminatory in as much as high thresholds are introduced for determining whether a party is to be counted as a European party .
Thus , they do not safeguard justice for minorities and the protection of the latter .
There is also an obvious danger , along the lines of American policy , in companies being granted the right to provide financial subsidy to what have been approved as European political parties .
Not until the end of 2001 at the earliest will all 15 Member States ' parliaments and governments have ratified the Treaty of Nice .
Only then will it be possible for the issue of the financing of European political parties to be dealt with in detail by the European Parliament .
Today ' s decision is premature .
The EC Court of Justice in Luxembourg will examine and ascertain whether Article 308 of the Treaty really can be invoked as a legal basis .
It is my conviction that today ' s decision will then be declared as being contrary to the Treaty and thus repealed .
Article 308 reads : ' If action by the Community should prove necessary to attain , in the course of the operation of the common market , one of the objectives of the Community and this Treaty has not provided the necessary powers , the Council shall , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament , take the appropriate measures . '
The European Parliament believes that , to be eligible for subsidy at European level , financed by taxation , a party association must have obtained at least five per cent of the vote in at least a third of the Member States or be represented in the European Parliament or national or regional parliaments in a third of the Member States .
The Commission does not want a relative number , but a fixed number , of Member States ( five , irrespective of the size of the EU ) .
The European Parliament has made the democratic threshold remarkably high , too high in fact .
Large groups of citizens , with representatives in the European Parliament , may be excluded from this financing of parties at European level through taxation .
The wording in Article 3 concerning the approach to European political associations and national parties bears witness to a view of the future which I cannot in any way share : ' the party or its national components ' .
In this way , the European Parliament has , then , established the national political parties as future ' national components ' or types of district organisation of what are being called European political parties and which taxpayers around Europe are expected to subsidise .
Developed as it was by pioneers with a strong spirit of self-sacrifice , perseverance and faith in the fundamental importance to society of the Christian ethic and view of human beings and of the family , Sweden ' s Christian Democratic Party , led by Birger Ekstedt at the beginning of 1964 and by Alf Svensson from 1973 , is far too significant and important in terms of democracy to be described as ' a national component ' .
The debates arising from examination of the Schleicher report in this part-session reveal extremely disturbing anti-democratic trends within the Community institutions and particularly within this Parliament .
Democracy means , first and foremost , respect for the law .
Everyone knows perfectly well , even those who claim the contrary , that this plan for financing European political parties has no legal base .
Article 191 , as Mr Berthu has shown , cannot be used as a base for implementing Article 308 .
Court of Justice case law on this point is as clear as day .
There is no Community competence .
The majority of this Parliament , however , like the Commission , pretends not to know that , because there is so very much at stake for the federalist parties and the federalist ideology .
What all this is really about is , on the one hand , the cash flow of several large parties whose members ' subscriptions no longer suffice to maintain their bureaucracies , and which are tightly confined by strict national anti-corruption provisions , and , on the other , the creation of a new instrument of forced federalisation which will limit the peoples ' freedom of choice .
Next , democracy means transparency .
There is a danger that the system of financing for supranational European parties proposed by the Commission and the Schleicher report will constitute an exceptional channel for corruption and in particular for money laundering , since companies can make unlimited donations and the conditions for accepting donations from individuals are extremely lax .
European financing would therefore make it possible to by-pass and thwart national efforts to clean up the funding of political parties and apply strict conditions to make it transparent .
Democracy is also respect for minorities .
It is extremely disturbing that the debate on the Schleicher report , after being declared inadmissible by Parliament , was forcibly restored to the agenda this morning by an arrogant majority with minimal concern for respecting the law , as shown by Mr Barón Crespo ' s alarming description of the minority in this Parliament as a ' commando ' .
The majority of a Parliament that prides itself on teaching the whole world to respect minority rights would do well to start by respecting the minority within it .
. ( NL ) It is important for a democratic Europe to have European parties .
They offer the citizen the opportunity to vote for a party directly .
The elections , with European lists and people heading the list of candidates , should serve as a basis for making up the European Commission .
In order to form major European parties , a sound legal basis is required .
In this connection , it is important to establish transparent financial criteria and guarantee the independence of politicians and political parties .
We cannot be bought .
It is impossible to accept money from public companies or industry , however small the amounts involved are .
We are at the service of the citizen who has elected us .
Brussels is an attractive base for industry to lobby from .
Lobbyists often perform the useful task of informing us .
However , given the sometimes conflicting interests between the European Parliament and , for example , the pharmaceutical industry ( the price of AIDS medicines ) or the car industry ( environmental standards ) , we cannot possibly accept donations from them .
As we are currently in the development stage of European parties , we might as well get it right from the outset by creating one European standard .
I would call on the Greens , the Liberals and the Christian-Democrats to support this standard .
Jové Peres report ( A5-0137 / 2001 )
It is almost time for lunch , Madam President .
Can you not smell the olive oil on the Neapolitan mozzarella , on the tomatoes from southern Italy , with a little parmesan and a good glass of red wine or beer ?
It is the Mediterranean diet which makes Italians live so long and makes them remain pensioners for so long too , although much to the regret of the finances and the treasury ministers of several governments .
Therefore , with this picture in mind , could I , Madam President , vote against a measure to increase the production of oil and regulate it so that we can always have olive oil in Europe ?
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted against Parliament ' s report on the olive oil scheme .
The report does not acknowledge that there has been extensive fraud involving the aid scheme for olive oil , and it is dismissive of the Commission ' s proposed changes in the aid .
At the moment , the EU provides aid per ton of olive oil .
This form of aid requires the monitoring of actual production .
Such monitoring has not operated at all satisfactorily .
The Member States have not been anything like good enough at doing the monitoring .
The Commission is proposing in the longer term to introduce aid-per-tree instead of per ton of olive oil .
Such a form of aid requires the introduction of what is called a Geographical Information System so that the producers ' cultivation declarations can be monitored with the help of aerial photographs .
The Commission proposes extending the present system by 2 years until such a system is in place .
We support the Commission ' s proposal and hope that the whole sector can be reformed , together with the rest of agricultural policy , during the Danish Presidency in 2 years ' time .
The amendments proposed by the rapporteur of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are an improvement on the Commission 's proposal , although they too fail to break away from the thinking behind the Regulation or address the basic worries of olive producers and the olive oil market , such as the abolition of intervention , the unaccountability and profiteering of the industry and the multinationals , the low quotas and the extortionate coresponsibility levies , that is , the disastrous consequences of Regulation No 1638 / 98 , which have caused the olive oil market to collapse , prices to hit rock bottom and incomes to evaporate for olive producers , all of whom are small or medium-sized farmers in barren and island regions .
The Commission deliberately and wittingly overlooks these consequences and does not even brook the idea of repeating intervention so as to secure a minimum wage for olive producers . It has not proposed any increase in quotas so as to at least cover existing production , preferring instead to focus on the quality of olive oil , as if the healthiest and most suitable product for consumers ' health has been totally unsuitable in the past .
The Commission 's alleged interest in the quality of olive oil is misleading and hypocritical .
If it is so interested in quality , why does it allow olive oil mixed with different seed oils to be marketed ? Because that way large quantities of seed oil are sold , which have nothing in common with the nutritional value of olive oil and because that way the industry and the multinationals make more profit .
What makes the Commission 's deliberate undermining and blatant hypocrisy obvious is that it examines the application of measures , such as the subsidy per tree , with total indifference as to the disastrous consequences which this will have on the olive groves themselves , the quality of the product and the employment and income of the producers .
And all this at a time when the Commission is arranging for mixing , that is , the adulteration of olive oil , to be legalised , is working to abolish the transportation and marketing of olive oil in cans of more than 5 litres on the pretext of avoiding adulteration , as if olive oil in cans of less than 5 litres cannot be adulterated .
In other words , this measure is not intended to improve quality but to allow the industry and the multinationals to monopolise the marketing and transportation of olive oil .
We need changes to the common organisation in the market in olive oil and for what is a catastrophic situation for olive producers to be reversed , not a few isolated interventions in secondary issues .
Unfortunately , the Commission is able to cover up its unacceptable action with the collusion of the Greek government .
Gebhardt report ( A5-0153 / 2001 )
Madam President , It was a deplorable feature of the document to which Mrs Gebhardt 's report responded that , as I said in the explanatory statement , Parliament commented in detail on the protection of individual rights , which did not feature at all in the Council text .
It seems to me that every step that we take and justifiably take in this direction must be , at the same time , one which recognises in the highest degree protection of the rights of the defence and of the rights of persons accused of crime in all parts of the Union .
This should not become a way of achieving a lowest common factor of protection .
It must be the case that at all points people involved in criminal processes achieve the highest level of respect for their rights of defence .
May I remark that the provision on national representatives allows for substitutes ?
I hope that the United Kingdom in appointing persons will take note of the fact there are two distinct systems of criminal justice in the UK .
Madam President , yesterday evening at the asparagus festival - which I attended and for which I thank the Mayor of Strasbourg for having invited us and you , Madam President , for having agreed and coordinated this important annual event of friendship - I found I was sharing a table with a retired judge .
Naturally , between one stick of asparagus and another , we chatted about various things and I did not let the opportunity slip of asking him for information on the significance of this report by Mrs Gebhardt , if , that is , it was a good thing to have Eurojust .
His answer was unequivocal : ' It is an important document .
Europe should proceed towards a European justice system , towards European cooperation , while looking forward to a European code . '
I followed his suggestion and therefore I voted in favour .
The Eurojust judicial cooperation unit , as presented today following an initiative by a number of Member States , is intended to ensure good liaison between the national authorities responsible for criminal prosecutions in cases of cross-border crime .
This cooperation excludes any action by an authority against Member States , and any desire to integrate national judicial systems .
Its purpose is to make all the various legal players work better together , and its context is clearly intergovernmental .
We approve of this approach , because it is the most realistic .
There is no dream of any general merging of national legal systems - an impossible dream , which would only delay practical solutions - but , on the contrary , a determination to work from the basis of the existing judicial networks , by removing technical obstacles which might hinder fluid relations between them .
For once a report by Parliament appears to rally to a realistic approach , and does not reject an initiative out of hand , as it has tended to do recently , under the pretext that it has come from the Member States and not the Commission .
The report does not make the customary demand for a supranational European public prosecutor , a unified body of law , or indeed federal criminal courts .
For once it seems to accept the intergovernmental approach as the most viable , and we can only rejoice at that .
This apparent moderation , however , conceals several traps .
First , the amendments proposed by the European Parliament seek to strengthen centralisation around the Eurojust unit , notably by seeking to eliminate the national correspondents , thus surreptitiously renouncing the ' network ' idea , on which the system is supposed to be based .
And above all , these amendments totally undermine the intergovernmental spirit , transforming the applications for investigations or prosecutions issued by Eurojust into decisions binding on the Member States , and eliminating their whole margin of manoeuvre in applying the law in their own territory .
As we see it , this surreptitious transformation of the original text is utterly unacceptable .
Obviously we must subscribe to a policy of strengthening the fight against all forms of corruption , both national and European .
Nor have we ever stopped saying so , especially since the Schengen Agreement eliminated Member States ' border controls .
All these serious issues , which affect the actual exercise of justice , public freedoms and public order , can only fall within the competence of the Member States .
It should be remembered that justice is a right bestowed and organised by national governments .
With all kinds of organised and cross-border crime on the increase , however , with growing insecurity and violence , intergovernmental cooperation between Member States ' police forces and judiciaries is desirable .
Lo and behold , though , Europe is trying to impose communitisation of our judicial system and our internal public order on the pretext of this cooperation , notably by creating a European public prosecutor ' s office .
The Nice Council of December 2000 adjudged this latter measure a danger to respect for individual ' s rights and democracy , and rightly rejected the creation of this supranational public prosecutor .
The European Parliament is once again treating the deep feelings of the Member States with disdain .
Following the old custom of coming through the back door in disguise after leaving through the front , it is actually trying , with the help of Mrs Guigou , French Minister of Justice at the time , to make Eurojust an embryo European public prosecutor ' s office .
A single prosecution service , independent of the Member States could therefore , at its convenience , decide to arrest , prosecute or extradite suspects , without any recourse to the judiciaries of the Member States concerned .
Is this progress in common security ?
No , more like another step towards confusion of powers .
Situation in the Middle East ( RC B5-0344 / 2001 )
Madam President , this is a very serious and important argument .
As you know , the Pensioners ' Party - like all parties , in fact - is for peace and is aware of the difficulties in achieving this peace in the Middle East .
You know that all over the world there are divisions between groups of people as a result of their race , their ethnicity , their origins and also as a result of the place where they have lived for so many years .
The Pensioners ' Party believes that these should not be the reasons that make us do things .
We must strive in this life for all of us - all the citizens of the world - to become better than we are now : we must argue over how to achieve this result but not over ethnic divisions , which may exist but which must not lead to war .
The dramatic events in Palestine over recent months , the heroic intifada of the Palestinian people and barbaric suppression by Israel have forced the European Parliament to adopt a resolution highlighting the responsibility of the state of Israel .
The joint resolution on the Middle East , as it now stands , recognises what has become an unbearable situation for the Palestinians in the occupied areas , who are being made to suffer unbearable and unfair collective punishment .
It condemns the illegal incursions by the Israeli army , the extrajudicial executions , the complete blockade of the occupied territories and the extension of the settlements there .
It makes special mention of Israel 's practice of marketing products from the settlements in the occupied territories as produce of Israel , so that it qualifies for Community preferences , and it calls for measures to be taken .
It considers that the disproportionate use of violence by the Israeli army and collective punishment are incompatible with the principles of the Association Agreement between the ÅU and Israel .
It calls for all settlement procedures to be frozen , including the natural increase in the population and it calls on the Member States to propose that the UN Security Council send observers and take a stand in favour of the creation of a Palestinian state .
However , on certain points , the resolution resorts to a policy of equal treatment which puts the sacrificer and the sacrificed on the same footing , it talks of terrorist attacks by the Palestinians , it urges all the interested parties to put an end to the violence and it calls on the Palestinian Authority to make every effort to combat the terrorism , limit the violence and control the terrorists .
Despite these shortcomings , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece supported the resolution , together with 57 % of the MEPs present , because this is the first time a European Parliament resolution has highlighted the responsibility and condemned the practices of Israel .
The situation of Palestine is extremely serious due to the occupation of its land by Israel and the brutal repression of its people by the Israeli army .
Since 29 September 2000 , the date of Ariel Sharon ' s provocative act in the Mosque compound ( Haram al-Sharif ) , the Israeli army of occupation has already caused hundreds of deaths , mostly children and adolescents , injured tens of thousands and arrested hundreds of Palestinians who are fighting to make their right to a have a State a reality .
In the escalating aggression , Israel destroys Palestinian houses , continues its policy of occupation and the illegal building of settlements , restricts the free movement of Palestinian communities , drops bombs , sets up road blocks , does not fulfil financial commitments or signed agreements , carries out selective assassinations , invades territories under the administration of the Palestinian authority and attacks Syrian forces in Lebanon , attracting the strongest condemnation .
As we all know , Israel has occupied Palestinian territories since 1947 . Since 1967 , it has occupied Gaza and the West Bank , forcing thousands of Palestinians to live outside their country , a situation which is condemned by the UN and only maintained through the support of the USA and with at least the connivance of the EU .
Peace will only be possible when the UN resolutions are fully implemented and the Israeli aggression comes to an end . This means that we should support all serious initiatives so that the Palestinian people can secure their own independent , sovereign state .
It is time for sanctions against Israel , Mrs Lindh .
In today ' s edition of the French newspaper , Libération ( 16 May 2001 ) , one of Israel ' s best known pacifists , the writer David Grossman , observes that , if one does not believe in miracles and does not approve of catastrophes , there is only one way to change the situation in the Middle East , namely through ' international pressure ' .
He also states that it is Israel , the occupying power , which is mainly responsible and therefore in greatest need of external pressure .
Because the United States never does anything that Israel does not like , there is an important international role waiting to be fulfilled in this area .
The EU has for a long time been the biggest provider of economic and administrative aid and the most important supporter of the Palestinian Authority .
EU politicians have complained that the EU does not play a corresponding political role .
Why , then , not take up the gauntlet and do what the United States does not want to do and what both Palestinians and Israeli pacifists are pleading should be done , that is to say bring specific pressure to bear upon Israel ?
Formal bases in international law for economic sanctions against Israel are to be found in the shape of those infringements of Israel ' s Association Agreement with the EU , demonstrated by the Commission with reference to the fact that goods from unlawful Israeli settlements on occupied land are being sold to the EU with ' Israel ' cited as the country of origin .
If , now , it really is the case that the EU ' s new rapid reaction force does not exist at all to protect the EU ' s interests as a superpower but , in fact - and as Mrs Lindh usually maintains - is there simply to be unselfish about making peace in the world , why not propose that it be deployed in the Middle East along the only lawful dividing line between Israel and Palestine , namely the 1967 frontier ?
Unfortunately , nothing of this was heard when Mrs Lindh presented the EU ' s Middle East policy before the European Parliament today .
There were a whole lot of words , but absolutely nothing concrete and nothing which could in any way put an end to the bloodbath and to the illegal Israeli occupation of Palestine .
The matter is made that much the more tragic by the fact that Sweden ' s own voice on the subject of Palestine has gone completely silent .
The work of the former Foreign Minister , Mr Andersson , is being carried on not by Mrs Lindh but by her Danish colleague , Mr Lycketoft , who now talks in no uncertain terms about Israel ' s violation of human rights and of international law .
Both in her capacity as EU President and as Swedish Foreign Minister , Mrs Lindh appears , rather , to have capitulated before those forces which do not dare to stand up to Israel and the United States .
That is deplorable .
It is the extremist and terrorist violence which is holding back the peace process .
It is the attacks that then provoke reactions from the Israeli state , which responds with measures that are perhaps disproportionate compared with the attacks that caused them .
Where violence rules , however , it is difficult to classify it according to a scale of values and condemn only those who use it to defend themselves .
I feel uncomfortable in approving the so-called compromise resolution . I find too many condemnations of Israel in it .
It is not a resolution that expresses an equal distance from the parties in question .
It is a document that upholds the rationale of just one side and belies the good will demonstrated on many occasions by the Israeli leaders .
Besides , it is easy to see that whenever the peace process was about to resume , the terrorist extremists went into action .
And Europe never spoke up at times like that .
The ' principle of reciprocity ' on which agreement was reached in Oslo in 1993 must be safeguarded .
Dialogue , mutual understanding , condemnation of violence are elements characterised by an action that favours resumption of the process .
Europe , and primarily our institutions , must not assume the role of judge but rather that of a credible and authoritative interlocutor , if it wants to contribute effectively to the peace process .
Trust and respect for the legitimate aspirations of both sides should be expressed in a balanced way in the text we are discussing , but I do not find in it the balance I would like to see .
State of the Transatlantic dialogue ( RC B5-0342 / 2001 and RC B5-0345 / 2001 )
Madam President , like , I am sure , many of us Members of the European Parliament , I consider the citizens of the other side of the Atlantic , in America , the citizens of all the Americas , to be our friends and my friends .
I myself , as you know , have often stepped onto the soil of the United States , even if only on Saturdays , when I left the cruise ship the Oceanic , on which I had embarked as a crew member .
I experienced the warmth , the enthusiasm , the creativity and the intelligence of the American citizens .
I hope , therefore , that this collaboration will continue , and will continue also between American pensioners and European pensioners , so that a way can be found for all of us to live better .
The transatlantic agenda reveals the special interest that exists in an in-depth agreement between the USA and the European Union on the major world economic issues , as is particularly evident in relation to monetarist and neo-liberal policies , policies of centralisation and concentration of wealth and exploitation of workers and peoples , showing greater concern for issues of interest to economic groups and multinationals and neglecting social issues , including health and education , the environment , development and cultural diversity .
An identical situation occurs in relation to so-called security and defence issues and the policy of interference in the internal affairs of peoples , examples of which are cooperation within NATO and the adoption of the new strategic concept , as , moreover , was made quite clear in the war against Yugoslavia .
Currently , however , the pretensions of North American imperialism for world hegemony and domination and construction of a ' new order ' to suit US interests - dismantling the legal and institutional order resulting from the second world war , tackling the UN Charter and international law and rejecting protocols like the Kyoto Protocol , taking on a more aggressive character with the new Bush administration - all this is making the world situation deteriorate .
It was in this context , then , that I supported the resolution that our Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left subscribed to on the state of the transatlantic dialogue and I voted against the rest .
Cercas report ( A5-0147 / 2001 )
Madam President , on this document regarding safe and sustainable pensions I could not fail to give an explanation of vote .
I voted for it , but I should like to draw everyone ' s attention to the fact that the Pensioners ' Party is asking for a European pension .
The pensions problem can only be solved when the European Union has the competence to decide on pensions too .
The Pensioners ' Party is asking that social security , which is financed out of our wages , out of workers ' pay , should be voluntary and not compulsory .
The Member States have shown that they cannot administer our money : therefore we should have the right to administer our own wages in order to have our pensions , freely and without being forced to give money to the state .
. ( NL ) The Cercas report has not received our backing for the following reasons .
First of all , the report turns social security into a Community issue in terms of policy development and policy measures .
In doing so , the report imposes a certain vision : the pursuit of social convergence .
Consequently , Member States are afforded little scope for creating their own solutions .
It is precisely the diversity of systems that requires every Member State to use its own tailored approach .
Many large Member States still need to restructure their provisions for old age in the light of the ageing population .
The supra-national aspects affect the pre-conditions , such as the budgetary implications and the requirement that saving for a pension in one Member State should not hinder mobility to another Member State .
We have more than enough to deal with .
If the reforms are to be accompanied by coordination efforts for a European social security system , this will seriously hamper the reforms , and will stand in the way of an effective solution .
It should be noted in this connection that the enlargement is already taking up a considerable amount of the limited resources .
As such , the report is not in touch with reality .
Pensions will thus become unsafe , untenable and unaffordable .
Indeed , no one wants to be worse off , and the system which offers most facilities should be taken as the guiding principle .
The document by the European Commission , on the other hand , gives a clear analysis of the issue .
The Commission document has a much more targeted approach .
The report is thus no improvement on the Commission document .
This is why we have decided against giving our support to this report , which is only detracting from the sound approach in the Commission communication .
. ( DE ) We take the current and future problems of pensions policy and social change very seriously .
The Commission communication and the report by Mr Cercas undoubtedly contain important and positive proposals .
The calls for better social protection for women are a case in point .
However , as regards the basic problem - defending and renewing social protection systems based on solidarity - the report conflicts with the fundamental positions held by our group .
We therefore cannot vote for the report .
The general emphasis on solidarity is clearly at odds with the specific proposals .
The majority of Members of the European Parliament fully support the shift away from statutory pensions schemes based on solidarity towards a three-pillar model of pensions provision .
The report does not develop any fundamental alternatives to the pensions reform initiated by the decisions taken at the Lisbon and Stockholm European Councils , which lacked a social framework .
I think it is especially tragic that by promoting the partial privatisation of pensions systems based on solidarity , European social democracy is breaking radically with its entire historical tradition .
For more than a hundred years , social democracy has fought for a redistributive welfare state based on solidarity . Now it is at the forefront of the campaign to dismantle it .
The emphasis on demographic arguments , such as the ' greying ' of the European societies , is not convincing .
Furthermore , no attempt is made to examine other options - such as the inclusion of all types of income in financing the pensions system , as in Switzerland - in terms of their viability .
' Live longer , save more , spend less ! '
These are the watchwords of the ' pensions reform ' . The Commission and the High-Level Working Party on Social Protection are calling for new regulations to push back the current retirement age .
In future , the statutory pension will no longer maintain a person 's existing living standards in old age , but will merely offer basic provision .
Maintaining pensions systems based on solidarity is possible even under current and future conditions as long as policies are guided by the principle of social justice rather than the self-seeking interests of banks , investment funds and insurance companies .
We therefore see no reason why we should go along with the proposed change of strategy .
Many of the children that are presently being born will live to the age of 120 or more .
This has been as a result of evidence which has been forthcoming by scientific communities , both in America and in the European Union .
The fact of the matter is simply this . People are living longer .
People are leading healthier lives .
People know what foods they should eat in an effort to promote healthy living and , in its simplest terms , people are living longer .
Many people retire from work at the age of 55 and the fact of the matter is that EU governments are going to have put in structures to ensure that future pensions can be paid to public servants .
Equally , those working in the private sector will have to look more carefully at their pension plans .
I welcome a recent study carried out by Merril Lynch , a leading US bank , which stated that Ireland tops the European league for safeguarding future pension payments .
One per cent of our GDP is now being put aside per annum into what is known as the National Pension Reserve Fund so as to ensure that pensions for our public servants can be paid after the year 2025 .
Per annum we are now paying as much as £ 600 - £ 700 million pounds into this fund .
I also believe it is important that we not only promote good savings programmes in our country but also ensure that people take out a pension at an early age .
I am aware that EU leaders discussed this matter when they met in Stockholm recently .
It is incumbent on all the governments of the European Union to bring forward legislation which can ensure primarily the payment of public service pensions into the future and secondly , to promote good pension programmes for the private sector .
If this entails giving more tax breaks for persons so as to encourage them to take out pensions in the private sector , so be it .
This report deals with a problem of the greatest importance for the future well-being of workers in the European Union , for whom it is necessary to guarantee safe and sustainable pension systems for the long term .
Now as is well known , there has been no lack of catastrophic visions for the future of social protection , based on the ageing of the population and increased life expectancy .
Although the report does not distance itself enough from the more negative positions of the Commission , particularly when it refers to the need for greater flexibility in pension systems , it does highlight the importance of the rise in the employment rate and of public systems based on intergenerational solidarity , and a fair balance between proportional contributions and benefits , on the one hand , and the principle of solidarity , on the other , in order to prevent poverty and social exclusion .
It also takes up the 1992 recommendation concerning the minimum income to be guaranteed by the social protection systems , by supporting initiatives for its implementation .
However , the report does not go far enough regarding what needs to be put into practice in terms of economic and social policies so as to effectively ensure that public systems are sound enough and guarantee worthwhile pensions .
For that reason , I abstained .
So there you have it !
Despite all the hypocritical posturing , maintaining our pension systems by dividing them up is the least of your worries .
Even if we agree that the vital demographic challenge facing Europe as a whole today is a crucial issue for the Member States , the very least we can say is that we disapprove of the pseudo-solutions which you propose in your report .
The rapporteur has managed to duck the issue in 31 convoluted paragraphs .
At no point is there any talk of encouraging the birth rate in Europe or promoting real family policies .
The only talk is of how best to manage the demographic collapse and ageing in the Member States , with pension funds authorised in a passing nod to global finance .
Après vous , le déluge , provided that , until such time as Europeans are replaced by immigrants , we maintain a modicum of inter-generational ' solidarity ' by putting women and pensioners out to work , encouraging social breakdown by developing private insurance and promoting the dumbing down ( or , to use the rapporteur 's new-speak , the open coordination ) of pensions .
With the exception of a few paragraphs , the whole report invites a reaction somewhere between anger at how you cave in before what you think of as fate and disgust at the financial , mercenary solutions which you recommend in order to resolve such a challenge .
You prove in the most striking manner , however , that the nation state is by far the only viable and reliable framework within which to organise solidarity and social protection .
. ( DE ) I am most grateful that in its resolution on safe and sustainable pensions , the European Parliament has included a number of ideas and demands relating to women in particular for which I have worked actively for many years here and in Luxembourg .
The debates about the equal treatment of women and men in social security , which have been ongoing since 1975 , have borne witness to the usefulness and importance of the European Union 's support , through its equal opportunities and equal treatment policies , in dismantling discrimination against women in pensions provision .
I hope that our proposals will be taken seriously by governments facing the challenge of safeguarding living standards through adequate pensions for all , and that they will lead to Europe-wide cooperation on pensions issues .
One of the goals of the Lisbon Process is to increase the number of women in the workforce .
Those who lament the low numbers of working women - in my country too - often forget the millions of ' invisible ' women working in the 15 EU countries , namely the wives who work in family businesses and who do not appear in the employment statistics .
For many years , we have called for framework legislation at European level for spouses who work in family businesses , especially to guarantee their statutory participation in pensions schemes .
I should also like to call attention once more to our demand that women 's derived rights to a widow 's pension be safeguarded , especially for the generations who had no access to employment and who worked solely in the home .
Naturally , I believe that women should increasingly build up their own individual pension rights .
However , this means that spouses who take a break from or opt out of paid employment to care for children or dependent relatives must have guaranteed pension entitlements based on the right to continue paying their social insurance contributions during maternity leave , parental leave , etc .
. ( NL ) People outlive their productive lives by quite a margin , at least if their health care , housing , food , working conditions and social security are adequate .
Now that working is threatening to turn into a kind of elite sport , people end up being burnt-out at a younger age , and the need for a lower pensionable age is growing .
In addition , due to small families , younger generations are outnumbered by the older generations , as a result of which , fewer people will be working per pensioner in future .
The wrong answer to that has come from most governments and businesses over the last few decades .
They wanted to reduce the number of people entitled to pensions , by , inter alia , abolishing widows ' pensions , and by starting the old-age pension at an older age .
In this way , it was hoped that taxes and pension premiums would drop .
It has now become clear that skimping on pension rights only leads to poverty in the long run .
The only way to stave off that poverty then is to suddenly raise government spending sharply .
The real answer is to start saving in good time for a general pension right for everyone at the age of 60 , and to improve pensions caused by inability to work at a younger age .
This report still leaves something to be desired but is moving in the right direction .
. ( EL ) Surely the title of the report under discussion - safe and sustainable pensions - is meant euphemistically , given that it is obvious both from the spirit and the letter of the report that its concern is for companies and employers and to radically dismantle social security and pensions in a way best in keeping with interests of big business .
Using the " challenges posed by the ageing of the population " , which extends the period of retirement and has an adverse effect on business activity , as a pretext , it promotes the gradual implementation of the Stockholm decisions on drastic intervention in social security systems : part-time employment , the abolition of early retirement , benefits indexed to contributions , harsh cuts in benefits , a longer working life and an increase in the retirement age or the number of years ' contributions required before full retirement , the gradual dismantling of the welfare state and the promotion of alternative private care and welfare systems .
This endless list of harsh , anti-grass roots measures which may fail to persuade us about ' safe and sustainable pensions ' is a knee-jerk reaction to the other part of the report , which is the " future evolution of social protection from a long-term point of view " .
Fleecing the workforce , insecurity , expensive private care , commercialising the pension system , poverty and social exclusion .
That is what is in store for the workers , while big business , which demands that the social security system be sacrificed in order to safeguard its competitiveness , can look forward to a more robust , completely unaccountable and hugely profitable future .
The break up of the social security system , in conjunction with working time arrangements geared to employers ' interests , that is , part-time work and ' flexible ' working times , are the terrifying reality of what was so cynically referred to in Stockholm as " the need to reduce bottlenecks in the labour market " , that is , the creation of a huge army of employable people with no rights and no demands who must dance to the tune of big business with its speculative , competitive interests .
The reaction of Greek workers and the Greek people as a whole to the abolition of the welfare state , the mass , combative rallies and strikes taking place , even as we speak , are a most resonant and categorical response to leaders laying disgusting plans without any thought for the people affected .
The Greek workers have said the first resounding and steadfast " no " to the poverty and insecurity in store for them .
We are positive that all the workers of Europe will say the same and we shall be at their side .
You are sowing an anti-grass roots storm and you will reap a grass-roots hurricane .
However , you can be sure that what you are trying to do will not wash !
Buitenweg report ( A5-0166 / 2001 )
Madam President , before leaving for Strasbourg from Bergamo airport , I was followed and greeted by some pensioners .
One of them , however , did not trust me and followed me by plane to see and hear how I would vote in this round .
He is that gentleman in the red jacket you can see amongst the people in the public gallery ; if you cannot see him it is because pensioners can only be seen when they are amongst themselves .
I want to reassure him that I also voted for the European Parliament budget for 2002 , although I still think that part of this funding should be used to have our plenary session seen on television throughout Europe .
I think we should finance live broadcasts of the sittings of the European Parliament with all its trials and tribulations but also all its importance .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Situation in Algeria
The first item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0350 / 2001 by Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
B5-0361 / 2001 by Swoboda and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
B5-0366 / 2001 by Flautre and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
B5-0368 / 2001 by Ferrer and Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
B5-0373 / 2001 by Malmström and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
B5-0384 / 2001 by Boudjenah and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
B5-0394 / 2001 by Caullery , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in Algeria ;
Mr President , as an ex-journalist , freedom , as well as ethical responsibility , of the press are close to my heart .
Islamic fundamentalists and state authorities threaten , and are determined , to extinguish the flame of the freedom of the press in Algeria .
Nevertheless , it is still burning , despite the numerous killings and detentions among independent Algerian journalists .
However , a tightening up of the clause on defamation in the Code of Criminal Procedure forms a fresh attempt on the part of the Algerian government to kill that flame .
As a result , it is possible to lock up Algerian journalists more quickly and for longer .
The extent to which the freedom of the press is at stake in Algeria is also patently obvious from the official resistance which the newspaper publisher , Omar Belhouchet , has experienced over the past couple of months when he imported a new printing press from Germany .
His statement speaks volumes : ' To Algeria , that piece of equipment represents a technological , but mainly a political , revolution .
At long last , the state printing office can no longer prevent our publications .
We have taken a portion of the power from those in power . '
How exactly ?
By not succumbing to the contempt of the citizens and their rights by the current regime , by openly defying the arbitrariness of political authorities , police and justice , which act in the interest of the ruling clans .
The Algerians sum up this abhorrent government attitude in a single word : ' hogra ' .
It is precisely this ' hogra ' , according to critical Algerian minds , that drove their own young people into the terrorist tentacles of the fundamentalists .
' Hogra ' is , in other words , the key word in Algeria ' s tragedy today .
By way of healing social antidote to ' hogra ' , the Algerian independent press - referred to as ' the incorruptibles ' at home - deserves the support of the European institutions .
As and when possible , they must provide the vital oxygen for this pilot light of the Algerian freedom of press , not least during the negotiations involving the country ' s authorities .
For in the final analysis , only the independent press in Algeria raises the issues which are really preoccupying the minds of the citizens .
And what does this country , weighed down by so much violence , need more than an honest , public , political debate ?
Mr President , since December 1991 , Algeria has been in a situation of permanent violence .
According to the official figures 100 000 people have died during that period , which represents around 1 200 deaths per month , and the figures that the non-official organisations are giving are even worse .
In April 1999 the new President , Abdelaziz Bouteflika , ordered a partial amnesty , a law of civil concord , and promised fundamental reforms in order to put an end to the ongoing crisis in the country .
So far , however , this policy has had a very limited effect .
It does not seem to have been accepted as a true policy of total democratisation and reconciliation .
The terrorist activity of the violent fundamentalists has continued , and the situation has been aggravated by the violence of the last few weeks in Kabylia , where demonstrations by hundreds of young people , following the violent death of one of them in a police station , were very violently suppressed in a real bloodbath , which left more than 60 young people dead from police bullets .
The situation is really very critical .
It is , of course , an Algerian problem , which can only be resolved by Algerians and between Algerians , through a process that democratically restructures and gives greater legitimacy to the institutions and the State , through the agreement of all the political and social sectors who reject violence , from whatever source , and which can , in the face of the violent fundamentalists and also the sectors of the current ruling power that are resistant to change , achieve greater transparency and the participation of all the peaceful forces in the reconstruction of the country .
This is a very complicated and difficult task , and the European Union should not miss the target in its support for those in positions of responsibility in the country , supporting all those who are coming from the point of view of peace and democracy .
We should act without seeking to interfere , but with firmness and a positive spirit to promote human rights and the democratic process .
Tomorrow , a delegation from this Parliament will travel to Algeria .
I hope this debate will help to clarify our attitude , which is an entirely positive one , supporting the whole democratic political field in the country , in the institutions and in society , in finding a way out of this violent situation when there does not seem to be one .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the outburst of violence which rocked the region of Kabylia was , unfortunately , predictable - or even inevitable .
Instead of worrying if this sort of social explosion might happen , we should have been forecasting when it would happen .
The region of Kabylia is a microcosm of all the ills which beset Algeria , with its unfortunate colonial parentage , a microcosm of the national cohesion which has never quite made it and is based on democratic and legal institutions and a rule of law which have never been credibly founded .
And , centre stage on this Algerian social scene , masses of young people , the life force of the nation , crammed into a few urban centres facing nothing but mass unemployment .
What choice did they have other than to rebel and bemoan their fate ?
Are they supposed to keep quiet as well ?
And what policy can the Algerian government engage in other than to establish proper rule of law , starting today with committees of inquiry .
Is the government supposed to turn a blind eye as well ?
Surely - and this is vital - it should at long last offer Algerians a real future by introducing economic reform .
Otherwise , this fire will continue to smoulder beneath the surface of Algeria .
Mr President , Algeria has a turbulent history .
Colonial rule , which destroyed the country 's traditional structures , was followed by a brutal war .
After this brutal war , a socialist one-party system was established which finally collapsed as a result of corruption .
Today , the country of Algeria - this large and important country - faces two major challenges .
Firstly , there is a youth revolt in progress , for Algeria is a young country , and its young people are rebelling because they feel that no one cares about them and they have no future .
When social exclusion is combined with national sentiment , the result is powerful and explosive .
Secondly , there is the danger of Islamism , which is systematically fomented by certain groups .
We must therefore give the country our support , but we must proceed very sensitively .
President Bouteflika has taken steps towards opening up Algeria .
He has moved towards reform .
A few weeks ago , he held a landmark ceremony to honour St Augustine .
We might regard this as gesture politics , but he wanted to show that St Augustine 's origins lie in what is now Algeria .
In doing so , he also wanted to tell his people that as Algerians in an Islamic country , they have cultural links with Europe and therefore also with the Christian world .
These are signs of openness , and they are important .
This kind of gesture politics , however , is not enough .
Real and substantive reforms are required .
They must include press freedom , the rule of law , but also tolerance towards different nationalities and ethnic groups .
Traditionally , Berbers have cultivated their own culture and identity and have maintained a substantial measure of independence in Kabylie .
This third major revolt among the Kabyle people sends out an alarm signal , for it is a revolt by young people who feel marginalised by the Algerian state .
What is required , therefore , are sensitive reforms , respect for diversity , respect for freedom , and strengthening the rule of law .
However , we must also ensure that measures are taken which we must support through dialogue based on equality and an absence of tutelage .
Mr President , the slaughter of the Berbers is a fresh reminder of Algeria ' s horrific reality .
Once again , our courageous foreign affairs ministers have decided to put their heads in the sand .
The entire world is being condemned , except for Algeria .
However , neither the oil interests , nor the current negotiations are enough to keep the gross human rights violations under wraps .
The MEDA agreements demand respect for diversity .
One third of the Algerian population are Berbers .
Pluriformity should form part of the state fabric .
Cultural , linguistic , but mainly social rights must be recognised if Algeria wishes to become a Treaty partner .
It is questionable whether we should enter into an agreement with Algeria where human rights are being violated on such a massive scale , even by government officials .
In my view , this can only be done if the government assures us that it will make every attempt to prevent the wrong-doings , and to prosecute and bring to justice those responsible , from whatever quarter .
An agreement on judicial cooperation is only meaningful if this is given substance by the Algerians .
At this moment in time , I still have grave doubts as to whether that is the case .
If I look back on ten years of oppression and extreme violence , I am shocked by the statistics .
One hundred and fifty thousand killed and on top of that , 10 000 people who have disappeared without a trace , and Europe remains silent .
President Bouteflika constantly promises to contain the violence .
He pledges to investigate the recent tragedy in Kabylia , but will the guilty be punished ?
I should like to reiterate it : the State ' s most fundamental task is to protect its population .
It is shameful that the Algerian authorities should not be able to put an end to the abhorrent reality in their country .
Mr President , for ten days the region of Kabylia was the scene of a series of very serious incidents .
Following the death , on 18 April , of the young high school student , Guermah Massinissa in the police station at Beni Douala , impressive peaceful demonstrations were held at several locations , demanding that the persons responsible for this ' mistake ' be brought to justice .
In addition , thousands of demonstrators , often very young , turned out to demand important social measures in this region , which has been hard hit by unemployment , poverty and even a housing shortage .
Without doubt , the roots of this discontent lie in the serious social crisis which has affected the whole of Algeria .
One rightly wonders if speeding up the process of liberalisation and privatisation already under way risks exacerbating the situation .
There is also a strong cultural demand in this region for the Amazigh language and culture to be respected , especially since the Berber Spring in 1980 .
Provocation and other abuses of authority by the police with respect to the population also seem to be at the root of this positive outburst of anger .
So these were peaceful demonstrations calling for more social progress and greater freedom and democracy .
The marches turned into clashes which were put down by the security forces with a great deal of violence over a period of several days , leaving dozens dead and hundreds wounded .
Numerous eye witness accounts printed in the newspapers talk of outright brutality .
President Bouteflika and the national assembly announced that committees of inquiry would be set up .
We can only hope that they will be set up as quickly as possible and will have the means needed to work efficiently - and , more importantly , transparently - so that sanctions can be imposed on those responsible for the repression .
In another indication of the seriousness of the situation , the Rally for Culture and Democracy Party said that it was ' impossible for it to stay in a government which fires on young people ' and withdrew from the coalition .
I am positive that the future of Algeria , whose people have courageously resisted barbaric pressure from Muslim fundamentalist terrorist groups , lies not in repression but in heeding the people 's social demands and the often very courageous action of the various associations acting to defend women 's rights , secure the repeal of the family code , care for traumatised children , keep solidarity alive in the face of serious social difficulties or defend human rights .
Nor does the future reside in the worrying restrictions on the freedom of the press which will result if the planned amendments to the penal code are adopted .
The European Parliament delegation travelling to Algiers tomorrow will certainly help us to gain an insight into the Algerian situation from our various contacts and listen in return to their expectations of the European Union .
In the same spirit , it will inspire the Commission to continue negotiations with a view to an Association Agreement , while taking better account of the opinion of political , trades union and community organisations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have followed the fate of this crisis-torn country since I was young .
I was a member of the parliamentary delegation which attempted to break the ice in the relations between the European Union and Algeria .
Yet many of our hopes have not been fulfilled .
Even our hopes of the new President Bouteflika , who has undoubtedly shown some signs of courage , and of the RCD 's inclusion in the Algerian government have been disappointed .
In my view , the basic problem in Algeria is that the powers-that-be - le pouvoir , as the Algerians say - have failed to make genuine efforts to reach a consensus between the social groups in the country .
Contrary to the frequent accusations made against us , I do not mean a consensus with terrorists and murderers .
There can be no consensus here .
I mean a consensus with all the groups which do not wish to witness the victory of the radical Islamist terrorist forces .
However , the powers-that-be - or at least some sections of the military - have no interest in achieving this consensus . They want to maintain the status quo , and unfortunately , they are heavily implicated in corruption .
This is why there are so many incidents like the recent events in Kabylie , with their shocking death-toll and the resulting alienation between the country 's young people and its ruling class .
I hope that the delegation which will be visiting Algeria in the next few days will be able to foster at least some understanding of what is required to give the young people of Algeria fresh opportunities and restore their sense of hope .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission deplores the recent incidents in Kabylie .
The many dead and hundreds of injured bear witness to the fact that the reform process in Algeria has still not achieved the desired results .
Yet it is also clear that there is no alternative to the policy of calling for and consistently supporting this reform process .
The European Union regularly addresses the issues of human rights violations , arbitrary arrests and torture in its political dialogue with Algeria .
At the 57th Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva in March 2001 , the EU called upon Algeria to take substantive measures in this area and allow the UN Special Rapporteurs on the question of torture and on extrajudicial , summary and arbitrary executions to visit the country .
The issue of the disappearances of individuals is of particular concern to us .
During the troika 's most recent visit to Algiers on 24 April 2001 , the Algerian authorities were presented with a consolidated list of thirty old and new cases .
The Commission will continue to pursue this issue vigorously in future .
The Association Agreement currently being negotiated with Algeria contains a clause on democratic principles and human rights .
The speedy conclusion of this Agreement will equip the European Union with an effective instrument with which to engage in more intensive dialogue with Algeria at institutional level .
Since 1996 , the Commission has committed EUR 300 million from its MEDA budget lines and under the financial protocols to support economic and social reform in Algeria .
In 2001 , our aim is to promote balanced social and economic development , and we are therefore preparing two comprehensive projects for local development in rural areas and for rehabilitation measures in the regions affected by terrorism .
Human rights projects are also being funded through separate dedicated budget lines .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken today at 6.30 p.m.
Situation in Bosnia / Herzegovina , particularly Banya Luka
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0357 / 2001 by Lagendijk and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina ;
B5-0362 / 2001 by Swoboda and Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the attack against the rebuilding of the Mosque ( s ) in Banja Luka ( and Trebinje ) ( Bosnia ) ;
B5-0369 / 2001 by Pack and Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the attack against the rebuilding of the mosque ( s ) in Banja Luka ( and Trebinje ) ;
B5-0375 / 2001 by Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the incidents in Banja Luka and Trebinje ;
B5-0385 / 2001 by Morgantini and Brie , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the incidents in Banja Luka and Trebinje ;
Mr President , Commissioner , Bosnia-Herzegovina is , in fact , the touchstone of our dream about stability and peace .
So far , the international community has made efforts to support the peace forces in those countries .
Needless to say , there are also opposing forces , and those claim victims .
In addition to the fact that attempts are still being made from different quarters to have the last word , and to threaten Bosnia-Herzegovina as a unit , there are also religious conflicts , of course .
Conflicts which are related to the symbols , and anyone who is politically active appreciates the significance of symbols .
That is also very much the case in a country which is torn by war .
It is therefore of key importance for us to join forces in a resolute manner , with all international , and particularly local , forces which strive for peace on the ground .
It is therefore also of key importance for us to be able to offer the guarantee that our presence there is not short-lived , that we persevere in our commitment , and that we can persuade the United States , which , with its new Bush administration , is forming a threat to that lasting stability , to continue its commitment to peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the West , or the European Union , became actively involved in Bosnia-Herzegovina because it wanted to promote peaceful relations between the different social , religious and ethnic groups .
We did not want to accept that in today 's and tomorrow 's Europe , conflict and war could be caused by ethnicity or religion .
Dayton was the result , and led - as we believed - to the founding of a new state . This was and probably remains the only option to bring peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina at this time .
Many of us here in this House are not satisfied with Dayton , but as I said , it was a chance to end the war .
What we cannot accept , however , is that we are now retreating from Dayton again .
There are some forces which actively support this development and want to create new or restore old ethnic divisions within Bosnia-Herzegovina .
First , there were the Croat extremists who , having lost Zagreb 's support , have attempted to join forces and create their own new Croat ( mini- ) state in Bosnia .
Then there are the Serb extremists , who can undoubtedly count on continued support from Belgrade and perhaps even from President Kostunica on occasion , and who also believe that the time has come to settle old scores and prevent some elements of life in a multi-ethnic community from being restored , like the mosque where these incidents took place when the foundation stone was to be laid .
This development has undoubtedly been caused by the fact that refugee return and thus the ' mix ' of the various ethnic groups have not taken place on the scale demanded by the international community , and especially by this House .
Moreover , the hindering of refugee return at various levels has undoubtedly also fuelled hopes that the mono-ethnic orientation and focus of the individual entities , especially the Republika Srpska , can be preserved .
We cannot be deterred now , however .
We must call upon everyone in a position of responsibility in this region , and of course in Bosnia-Herzegovina in particular , to ensure that Dayton at least - which is the very minimum we can or should achieve at this time - and multi-ethnicity are restored on the scale or in the direction which formerly existed .
To this end , it is essential that Croatia also takes measures with regard to its property laws , but also conditions at local level , to encourage refugees to return .
Above all , however , it is vital that Republika Srpska plays its part .
There is the agreement between the Croatian Foreign Minister and the former Prime Minister or President of the Republika Srpska .
The President is no longer in office , but even during his incumbency , little was done to comply with the provisions of this Treaty or these agreements .
This House must call on all sides and groupings in Bosnia finally to fulfil their commitments , and the commitments which were adopted on their behalf by the international community , because we - after all - were the ones who helped them end this dreadful war and the dying .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing an incident concerning a mosque .
This mosque was not destroyed in any war .
This mosque stood in Banja Luka , where there was no war .
It was razed to the ground in 1993 , its foundations were torn up , and a car park was built on the site .
This mosque was destroyed - like hundreds of other Muslim and Catholic places of worship - on the orders of Karadzic and his henchmen .
Not only were these places of worship destroyed ; hundreds of thousands of Muslims and Croats were forced to flee their homes at a time when there was no war in this region , namely between 1991 and 1995 .
As Johannes Swoboda has already pointed out , the Dayton Agreement has now been in place since late 1995 .
We never liked this Agreement .
It ended the war , but it has not yet brought peace to the region .
Six years have now passed , and we have to recognise that Dayton contains few promises and has achieved even less .
It has divided the country into two ethnic entities , a mono-ethnic Serb entity , and a Muslim-Croat entity .
This situation has proved highly problematical in practice .
In essence , we have created an artificial product .
Do we really expect Bosnia 's inexperienced politicians to cope with this state of affairs today ?
It is extremely difficult .
What 's more , we do not always help each entity equally .
The numbers of people returning are still too low .
Hundreds of thousands of people were expelled , and there are still half a million displaced persons in Bosnia who have not returned home .
I think we must appeal to everyone to take action here .
The Republika Srpska lags behind the rest of Bosnia-Herzegovina with regard to refugee return , and this is obviously one reason for the situation which we witnessed ten days ago in Banja Luka . At the laying of the foundation stone of this ancient mosque , and eight days earlier at the laying of the foundation stone for another mosque in Trebinje , hardliners from the SDS , the Serb nationalists , were yet again able to drum up supporters who interrupted the ceremonies , set fire to buses , and threatened the lives of participants .
The President of the Republika Srpska and his government and Prime Minister must make serious efforts to condemn this incident and create an atmosphere which fosters peaceful relations between the communities , which were the norm in this region until 1991 .
In my view , we should also have no qualms about coupling financial assistance with conditions at last .
We made it quite clear to Milorad Dodik , the previous Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska , that he could count on our financial support if he encouraged refugee return .
We supported his work when he was in office , yet he did not allow any displaced persons to return .
There is now a new government in office , and we really must proceed with caution .
We are talking about taxpayers ' money here , and we must be sure that it is used to achieve the goals set by the international community and the European Union .
Refugees wishing to return must be able to do so .
The same naturally applies to the neighbouring region of Croatia as well .
In Croatia , there is a law preventing the restitution of property to Serb owners who fled from the region .
Admittedly , many Serbs no longer want to return , but their property should at least be restored to them , and they should be given support to enable them to return to - or from - Croatia .
We have addressed a number of other issues in our motion as well .
In the Muslim-Croat Federation , hardline Croat separatists are also disrupting peaceful relations between the communities and trying to set up a breakaway mini-state in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
They will never be successful .
The moderates are stronger , and we must give them our support .
However , given that the international community has a certain amount of power in Bosnia and Herzegovina , we should not use it arbitrarily to amend an electoral law in a way which discriminates against a specific ethnic group .
This simply reinforces the hardliners ' cause and increases support for them .
I realise that this step is now regretted , but it is important to address this issue so that it does not happen again .
I hope that we will do everything possible within the scope of our CARDS programme to ensure that the refugees are able to return to all parts of the region .
This is the best contribution we can make to promoting peaceful relations between the communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Mr President , what is the European Union ' s task with regard to Bosnia ?
That is , of course , not difficult to answer .
We need to lend our support to the principles of multi-ethnic tolerance and cooperation , and support those who advocate these principles .
We also need to underline the importance of building democracy and the role of democratic , political parties in that region .
We also need to call a spade a spade .
This is done in this resolution , and the Republika Srpska is being urged not only to hand over Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic at long last , but also to mount a full enquiry into how the violence has actually been able to take root ?
Finally , I should like to take this opportunity to urge the Commission , and particularly the Member States , to implement the recently concluded Stability Pact in its entirety and swiftly , including the pledged funds , since in that area , it seems as if things are not always running as smoothly as we would have liked .
Mr President , Bosnia-Herzegovina will either be a three-nation state , or it will cease to exist .
The country will only survive if - at least in the medium term - all three communities want to live in this state .
That sounds simplistic , but it is a fact which we very often ignore .
I therefore believe that the time has come not only to take action against the hardliners of all nationalities , but also to ask ourselves self-critically for once what we have done wrong .
In my view , Doris Pack pointed the right way forward here .
Dayton was a step towards the absence of war .
Now it is time to start moving towards genuine peace .
Moving towards peace ultimately means creating a tripartite federation in which all three communities enjoy equal rights .
Believe me , I do not want to justify the actions of the Croat extremists in Mostar , but one reason why they are popular , of course , is that they do not see why the Croats , as an ethnic group , do not enjoy the same rights as the Republika Srpska , for example .
This is an enormous problem which we must address , for in this respect , there is no equality or symmetry within the Federation .
The second point which we must be clear about - as Doris Pack has already mentioned - is refugee return .
In this area too , there must be no double standards , and the same applies to the issue of cooperation with the Tribunal in The Hague .
There is a considerable lack of symmetry as regards the extradition of indicted persons to The Hague .
In the long term , the people in this region will only be prepared to cooperate with the Tribunal if they are confident that the perpetrators from all three communities will be extradited and convicted on an even-handed basis .
This means that we cannot always point the finger at others ; we must be self-critical for once and admit that for a whole range of reasons , we very often apply double standards .
I should like to thank Mr Swoboda for openly addressing an issue which we must all be clear about : that unfortunately , President Kostunica also appears to be encouraging certain forces in the Republika Srpska to pursue nationalist policies .
I believe that we must make it quite clear to Belgrade that there are conditions attached to the assistance we provide , and that this type of support for the nationalists in the Republika Srpska is unacceptable .
There must be conditionality across the board : not only in our assistance to Bosnia-Herzegovina but also to Serbia or Yugoslavia . We made this quite clear in the case of Croatia .
As for Yugoslavia , our euphoria about the ousting of Milosevic - which we naturally welcome - threatens to make us lose our perspective to some extent .
Unfortunately , that distorts our view of what is important in the region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares Parliament 's horror and revulsion at the incidents in Trebinje and Banja Luka .
My colleague Chris Patten , who is responsible for this area of work , is visiting Bosnia this afternoon .
He has issued a statement condemning the violence and demanding that the Republika Srpska authorities find those responsible and make sure they face justice .
As regards the Croats ' ' self-rule ' within the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Commission fully supports the High Representative 's decision to remove Mr Jelavic from his position as a member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and his appeal to the Bosnian Croats to support the development of a stable multi-ethnic state .
Let me make one thing quite clear : the recent incidents do not further the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into European structures in any way ; nor do they enhance the country 's international reputation , especially among donors .
On the contrary , the incidents make it even more difficult to attract the funds which Bosnia so urgently needs , and on which it continues to depend .
The European Union will not withdraw from Bosnia and Herzegovina .
We will continue our efforts to promote the reconstruction of the country and support the many citizens who yearn to live a life in peace .
However , the country 's internal problems cannot be resolved merely by concluding a Stabilisation and Association Agreement or offering the prospect of closer relations with the European Union .
Instead , a key prerequisite for the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the European Union is that the country itself undergoes a profound transformation at domestic level and that in doing so , it respects the fundamental values , such as human and minority rights , on which the European Union is founded .
This transformation process is indispensable if integration into the EU is to bring additional benefits in terms of stability , security and economic development .
In the European Union 's view , the progress achieved by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the stabilisation and association process are the test of the country 's willingness to complete this transformation .
Above all , we expect progress in implementing the specific measures agreed a year ago as part of the ' Road Map ' , which include refugee return .
Of the 18 measures in total , just 5 have been fully implemented so far .
A further 9 have been partially implemented , while 4 have still not been addressed at all .
Yet the next phase of the process , that is , the feasibility study , cannot begin until all the measures have been implemented .
As part of the CARDS programme , the Commission will continue to focus its assistance on target groups which promote refugee return and the reconciliation process .
Out of a total of EUR 105.3 million in funding for Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2001 , EUR 37.3 million - by far the largest individual amount - will be used to support refugee return .
Of this figure , around 16 million are earmarked for the fostering of integration , reconciliation and institution-building , which includes strengthening the constitutional court and three human rights bodies .
In line with the calls voiced here by the honourable Members , the assistance provided within the CARDS framework is linked to conditions .
As there have been more obstacles to refugee return in the Republika Srpska than in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Republika Srpska has received less funding in this area .
When deciding on the restructuring or cancellation of assistance , it must be borne in mind that the CARDS programme provides support for major structural projects - such as refugee return , human rights , judicial reform , and the development of an independent media - which are a priority for the EU .
Abandoning these projects would merely give fresh impetus to the extremists in Bosnia , who are also hostile to projects of this kind .
In contrast to CARDS , the Commission 's reciprocal macrofinancial assistance is not linked to specific conditions .
The assistance is provided as part of a coherent macroeconomic package which was agreed by the authorities in the region and is supported by the international financial institutions .
Due to the specific conditions in Bosnia and Herzegovina , however , the Commission tries to ensure that the overall political environment , that is , the political reality on the ground , is as favourable as possible and that the macroeconomic assistance ties in with other measures taken by the Community .
Commissioner Verheugen , thank you very much for your statement .
Following on from your comments about all the problems faced in Bosnia-Herzegovina , I should just like to ask whether it is true that Bosnia-Herzegovina is scheduled to join the Council of Europe at that body 's next or subsequent meeting .
I should like to ask whether this really is true , and whether all 15 of our Member States can shake hands on it before all the conditions which you have described are fulfilled .
Mr President , I am sorry , but my answer is simply that I cannot answer the question .
As you know , the Commission is not a member of the Council of Europe .
I must ask you to address your question to the committee which coordinates the position of the 15 Member States in the Council of Europe .
I would be very happy to assist you , of course .
Ladies and gentlemen , we were all witness to a rare event - a Commissioner not knowing the answer .
He is only human , and we must accept that !
Mr President , apart from the fact that yes , if Bosnia-Herzegovina is admitted , the country as a whole will be admitted , I would like to address the following question to you .
Like Mr Posselt and various other honourable Members , I voted for the Friday in Strasbourg .
This was rejected yet again , so we only have the Thursday .
Could you tell us why we will be voting at 6.30 p.m. when the debate is likely to finish at around 5.10 or 5.15 p.m. ?
I assume that it is too late for you to change these arrangements for today .
However , I would ask you , Mr President , to ensure that when we discuss topical and urgent subjects on Thursday , we vote at the end of each debate , as used to be the practice .
It will make no difference to our views for or against the Friday if we could vote immediately after the individual debates about topical and urgent subjects .
We have already had this problem several times on Thursdays .
We set the agenda and then the debate proceeds faster or slower than expected .
We obviously need more practice !
As far as today 's debate is concerned , it is difficult to tell at this stage when we will be finished . If we have a lot of interventions like yours , Mr Swoboda , it is quite likely to be 5.30 p.m.
Then there is the debate about three reports .
No break is scheduled between 5.30 and 6.00 p.m.
The debate about the reports will take place during this period .
Human rights
Mr President , Commissioner , until recently , Ethiopia and Eritrea were locked in war .
Fortunately , that is now over , and this proud and wonderful Ethiopian people can once again start deciding on its own fate .
Sadly , we are forced to note that human rights are being violated , that people are being tortured and locked up in prisons at random , and that students are calling for academic freedom , to no avail .
This is painful .
As international community , we have concluded a partnership deal .
We will sign this as ' the Cotonou Agreement ' .
In that document , we aim to establish good relations by entering into a dialogue with each other .
This also applies specifically to Ethiopia , a country which time and again appears on the list of countries which quality for emergency aid .
I hope that we , along with Ethiopia , can now finally turn over a new leaf , and that Ethiopia will be prepared - and I believe we should press for this , Commissioner - to free the people who are behind bars at present , because they are human rights activities , namely Messrs Woldemariam , Nega and Lidetu Ayalew , to allow students to return to their campuses in complete freedom and to observe the fundamental freedoms .
Mr President , the resolution is right to condemn a number of matters , and also calls for action on the part of Europe .
This is , in fact , possible within the framework of the Cotonou Agreement .
That is done in a country , Ethiopia , which is occupying an important position in East Africa . It has , under Mengistu , experienced a horrific period , and has , following a fierce civil war , eventually found peace .
Ethiopia is being governed by people originating from the resistance movement . At times , they still display characteristics of a certain ' bush ' mentality and find it difficult to share power with others , as it were .
Tigreans play a major role in the government and do so very expertly .
The government also plays a crucial role in a number of peace-promoting initiatives , but is , at the same time , struggling to achieve good relations in Ethiopia , in its interaction with Eritrea , and also within Eritrea .
Attempts are being made to build a regional autonomy within the countries , coupled with a certain level of ethnicity , with respect for minorities .
This is a painstaking process and is also often accompanied by resistance from certain groups within Ethiopia .
We simply have to establish that it is still costing them a great deal of effort in order to build a more powerful , stable democracy .
In a way , I appreciate the efforts that this is costing them . At the same time , however , we as international community can hardly ask anything else from them here than that they understand that if they do not observe human rights , do not show respect for groups who think differently , react with violence and violate human rights , this will eventually seriously damage their own status and our position , as well as our chance to support them .
I believe we need to operate within that context of understanding and insight , and must also be very clear . That is why we will give our unqualified support to this resolution .
Mr President , few African leaders have been able to count on so much international goodwill when taking up office as the Ethiopian leader , Meles Zenawi .
The end of the military dictatorship , the peaceful separation of Eritrea and the formation of a government of national unity turned the country at the time into a fine example of a successful transition from dictatorship to democracy .
Unfortunately , this image has been brutally shattered .
The bloody border conflict with Eritrea , the government ' s inability to prevent another famine and the repression of the past couple of weeks have seriously compromised Ethiopia ' s image .
It is correct that unemployed young people have taken advantage of the student protests earlier this month to start plundering , but that in no way justifies the excessively harsh police action which claimed at least 30 lives .
Neither does it justify the gulf of repression during which students , journalists , human rights activities and opponents were rounded up and accused of inciting violence .
Ethiopia is facing two fundamental problems : firstly , the government ' s insubstantial ethnic basis , and secondly , poverty .
As far as the first problem is concerned , an inter-Ethiopian dialogue must be established urgently , representing all political and ethnic groups . Europe can play a crucial role in this .
As for the second problem , the Ethiopian government must pledge its unconditional support to a peace agreement with Eritrea , so that the necessary funds for development are no longer diverted to defence expenditure and weapons .
Cameroon
Mr President , I cannot myself claim intimate familiarity with circumstances in Cameroon , but together with other colleagues in this House I have been approached by friends and acquaintances whom we trust in non-governmental organisations , notably the International Federation for Christian Action Against Torture , drawing to our attention matters of the gravest concern , which merit the attention of the institutions of the Union and in particular of this Parliament .
We have well-attested reports of the discovery of 2000 mass graves , of the arrest of senior officers of the gendarmerie , of inquiries into an organisation known as the Operational Command and generally matters of real concern .
It has been put to us that what is required is : an independent commission of inquiry to shed light on human rights violations , acts of torture , disappearances and extrajudicial executions , a commitment to protect adequately human rights defenders and local organisations working on this issue and the appointment of some special rapporteur on extrajudicial summary and arbitrary executions , with the working group on forced or involuntary disappearances being invited as soon as possible to inquire into matters in Cameroon .
By coincidence , today 's Le Monde has a special supplement on Cameroon , the opening sentence of which tells us that all the evils of Africa are to be found in Cameroon and yet also all the reasons for hope for the better .
What has been revealed to us here suggests that both of these propositions are true : both the reasons for hope and the present evils .
Also , this week in Le Monde in relation to General Aussaresses we have been reminded that torture , disappearance and evil-doing and the use of humans as means and not as ends in themselves have terribly scarred the history of our own continent , both during the war of 1939 to 1945 and afterwards .
We are not in a position to hold ourselves up as being somehow superior but we can , as concerned human beings , share the concern of our fellows in Cameroon who are raising these points and members of international non-governmental human rights organisations who have been drawing it to our attention .
I strongly commend this resolution to the House and hope it will be adopted unanimously this evening .
Mr President , it is not the first time that NGOs and human rights organisations have sounded the alarm with regard to the human rights situation in Cameroon .
They are referring to disappearances , extra-judicial executions , tortures , mass graves and overcrowded prisons .
The special unit that controls banditry , in particular , is reported to indulge in the systematic violation of human rights .
The UN Committee against Tortures called for the swift dissolution of this unit , with good reason , in fact . However , that is not enough , of course .
Cameroon suffers from an enormously huge problem of lawlessness .
We welcome the fact that the President , Mr Biya , set up an inquiry committee which led to the arrest of a number of suspected officers .
It will take more than that , however , to restore the confidence in the rule of law , such as an independent inquiry into the disappearances and into the mass graves , and especially into punishing the guilty .
Europe could help in this by making resources and expertise available to the legal system in Cameroon .
Without wanting to let the Cameroon leaders off the hook , I would , by the by , like to draw your attention to one of the fundamental problems of Cameroon and , in fact , of large parts of Africa , namely the dramatic slump in the price of raw materials .
Oxfam presented a report today in which it is assumed that the reduction in those prices of raw materials costs the developing countries more than the total amount that they receive in development aid .
I would therefore urge the Council and Commission to take the recommendation of the Oxfam report seriously , and perhaps we can organise a debate on this issue before long .
It is at any rate promising that the Belgian Presidency announced today that it wants to make Africa one of its priorities . We welcome this , and will give our full cooperation .
Mr President , I am in complete agreement with my fellow members and would even add that the UN Committee against Torture has found that torture is rife in Cameroon and that this has been confirmed in the testimony of a former Cameroon minister who considers that the prison system is inhumane in Cameroon and that physical and mental torture are an everyday occurrence .
All this leads me to believe that the government of Cameroon , and it is perhaps this which worries me most today , no longer has any control over the special forces which it has set up , the special forces which appear to be responsible , among other things , for the disappearance of 9 young people who allegedly stole a cylinder of gas in the Douala sports district .
In order to prove good faith on the part of the government - my colleague said earlier that there were plenty of reasons for hope in Cameroon - I think that we have to go along with the UN proposal to set up a committee , as a matter of urgency , to look into all the extortion , torture , disappearances and extrajudicial executions identified over recent months .
I think that , today , Parliament cannot make do with adopting texts which are not respected and verified on the ground , especially as Cameroon has signed the Cotonou Convention of 23 June 2000 requiring that the parties undertake to promote and protect fundamental freedoms and all human rights .
We must call on Cameroon to respect this convention and find ways of excluding this country and any other country which violates the conventions which it has signed .
No difficulty , be it economic , social or demographic should or could justify torture .
Mr President , we in the Socialist Group and the European Parliament need to send a clear message to the Cameroon authorities .
In order for the Cotonou Agreement to be effective and credible , the European Union needs all the ACP countries , including Cameroon , of course , to use actions to demonstrate their unequivocal commitment to democratic values .
The governments and in particular the State security forces of all the countries associated with the European Union need to have a clear understanding that security and public order cannot come before the exercise of people ' s freedoms , not to mention their physical safety .
Cameroon is an important country in the regional context , whose indicators paint a hopeful picture of the economic situation , but we are obliged to look beyond this positive outlook and ask the government of Cameroon to make a greater effort to maintain the rule of law and to respect the rights of its population .
Similarly , we must ask the government of Cameroon to comply with the recommendations of the United Nations , which has already asked it to reform the structure and activity of its security forces , in order to ensure that they are made up of regular members and always act within the limits of the law .
Cameroon must understand that by making this effort , not only will it be satisfying the European Union and the other countries , but it will also be working in the interests of its own people .
Also , it is good for the whole of the African continent that European cooperation with Africa , both under the Cotonou Agreement and under bilateral cooperation with our countries , should be governed by respect for the values of freedom that we all profess to share .
I would like to finish by doing what my colleague Mr MacCormick did and also recognise the work and action of some non-governmental organisations such as FiACAT , which has passed on information and concerns to us in its constant monitoring of the situation in Cameroon .
We want to encourage local organisations even more , such as ' Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture ' , which are on permanent alert on the ground and have consequently been victims of injustice .
They deserve and have our solidarity .
Press freedom in the world
Mr President , freedom of the press and freedom of opinion are the cornerstones of democracy .
People who have lived under totalitarian regimes know how important it is to establish and build on this cornerstone to its fullest capacity in every state .
They therefore also understand that manipulation of the press is an assault on democracy . In other words , when the press is compromised and manipulated , or when it loses its political plurality because it is a corporate monopoly , democracy is jeopardised to a high degree .
We must therefore not only put our finger on the wound in third countries , in the reform states , in order to foster democratic development by promoting freedom of the press . We must also look at ourselves .
I think it is especially important to ask ourselves whether an election can genuinely be described as democratic if a large number of the television channels are compromised .
Should we not also consider whether this is an area where we can make a contribution ?
I think this applies to Russia as much as the EU Member States .
I therefore believe that it is important to include press freedom as an indicator in the human rights report .
Press freedom must be part of how we judge the clauses in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , how we judge how close the relations with Ukraine and Russia will be , but also how we judge the development of democracy in our own states .
Mr President , press freedom is one of the keystones that underpins real democracy .
This freedom is lacking in many dictatorships due to the fear on the part of those in power of informed citizens , debate , opposition and disclosure .
Europe needs to take a stand in favour of press freedom and those who fight for this , in a consistent manner .
Understandably , our attention turns to the developing countries and the former centrally governed countries which are now in transition .
This is with good reason , for we can often lend these countries real support with our aid and resources to local NGOs , civil society and the different media involved .
As Social-Democrats we consider this topic of press freedom to be a cornerstone of our belief .
However , within Europe , we would draw your attention to a particularly disquieting phenomenon , namely the concentration of ownership and control of media in Europe in a limited number of countries .
That affects diversity in a fundamental way .
This becomes even more serious if economic power and political power are combined .
That is when freedom is at risk .
I do not need to name any names to make myself clear .
The European Parliament ' s socialist group will take the initiative for proposals which resist this threat of press freedom .
Unfortunately , the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats has announced that , despite the fact that it has taken the initiative for this resolution , it refuses to back this resolution .
In fact , it has threatened to vote against this resolution if this section were to be adopted .
Does the power , or the fear , of the aforementioned person extend so far that he already has the People ' s Party in his clutches ?
We would ask the People ' s Party to consider urgently whether it would like to defend press freedom or the concentration of power .
It will make for an interesting outcome of the vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a good time to reply immediately to Mr van den Berg .
The debate is the result of an initiative for a resolution taken by the group of the European People 's Party .
When the world day of the freedom of the press was held on 3 May , we were anxious to show our solidarity with the journalists who fell victim to their own dedication during 2000 , 36 of whom died and a further 77 of whom were imprisoned while on the job .
As we are all aware here , to scorn the freedom of the press is to attack human dignity , violate man 's quest for truth and thwart his full potential and we wanted to express this in the simplest terms possible .
Unfortunately , this very simple idea was hijacked by other political groups , as Mr van den Berg has just told us , who used the occasion to restart a pseudo-political argument with one of our colleagues and a future leader of one of the fifteen Member States of the European Union .
Regrettably , although I instigated the initial project , because the calendar of plenary sessions has been cut and we are all forced to run around like headless chickens here in Strasbourg , I was unable to attend the conciliation meeting which resulted in the joint resolution which is about to be put to the vote .
At the time I was in the House taking part in the very important debate on the future of the Middle East .
A small majority of honourable Members has dictated that we cannot be in two places at once , a fact which I cannot but deplore .
That is why - because I would have opposed the paragraph which has now been included in the joint resolution - I asked our fellow members in the group not to sign this joint resolution and to put the initial text of our resolution to the vote in all its simplicity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , one of the vivid memories that I have of my youth , when I began my career , was a comment from one of my bosses who said that the greatest thing that God had given to humans was freedom of expression .
This comment had such an impact on me that I have always remembered it and applied it to what I do .
I am therefore taking part today in this motion for a resolution on the freedom of the world press , which I am , of course , defending at a time when many of our writers , journalists and photographers are risking their lives right across the globe for a variety of reasons .
I must make a special mention today of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , and make a heartfelt mention of a Basque journalist , Mr Landaburu , who unfortunately , like some of his colleagues , was the object of an attack by terrorists who wanted to end his life and therefore prevent him from freely expressing his ideas .
I therefore agree with the amendment tabled by my fellow Members , Mr Galeote and Mr Salafranca .

Mr President , I speak as a journalist .
I must say that everything that has happened regarding this resolution has left me somewhat disconcerted and also highly perplexed .
General Morillon has just reminded us that , as the European People ' s Party , we had decided on this initiative on the occasion of World Press Freedom Day on 3 May .
I think it is an excellent initiative because it supports those who commit themselves on a daily basis to the fight for freedom and put their own lives at risk to tell the world what is happening in vast areas of the Least Developed Countries or even - it is worth remembering - in Eastern Europe .
Then something absolutely regrettable happened . Someone thought of exploiting this excellent initiative for their own ends , bending it to a partisan political position , a political position that has emerged too often in this House , in my opinion .
I do not even want to waste words on this .
Last Sunday , 18 million Italians gave their answer .
I just want to see the result of all this . The likely result is that a fine , important testimonial will lose much of its importance because of the aloof detachment of the world of the media , which prefers to report conflict rather than the exchange of ideas .
Above all , the role of this institution has been renounced and less and less respect is shown for politics .
We only believe in the politics of values and the exchange of ideas ; we do not believe in the politics of venom .
Venom has never produced anything in history , and in general it has never rewarded those who have used it .
We only believe in positive values .
Mr President , it is unlikely that a government that imprisons its own journalists should be democratic to such an extent as to guarantee a fair trial in accordance with international standards , and so I shall have more confidence in monitoring .
To insist on the principle of the freedom of the press is obviously right and proper , but I remember the comments when the first law on the freedom of the press was passed in the Soviet Union .
The journalists then asked : who will give us the money to publish newspapers ?
The matter has still not been settled .
I mention this problem since our draft resolution notes the decline imposed on the press in Russia and also deplores the attacks on diversity and freedom .
I should like to add that the problem of the press is part of the struggle for power .
In Russia the press subsidised by millionaires put Mr Yeltsin into the presidency , but the political line of that time is not to the taste of today ' s leaders and the same millionaires are now either in the dock or abroad .
Freedom of the press certainly played a part in the event , which , nevertheless , is primarily a stage in the struggle for power .
I should also like to add that media science increasingly points to the so-called editorial routine as something that affects the free press .
Individual journalists accept work where they can find it , and they adapt to the prevailing editorial climate and ideas even when these contrast with their own personal ideas .
Turning conformists into saints , however , is not a job that can be regulated by resolutions .
Here , of course , I should like to remind you of point number 10 in the draft resolution concerning conflict of interests , an issue that , as we all know , has been talked about a lot recently on the occasion of the Italian elections .
It is said that governments should keep a scrupulous eye on conflicts of interest and ambiguous relations between editors and the proprietor .
However , when the president and the proprietor are the same person , what can be done , Mr President ?
Mr President , thank you , also for this piece of advice .
Freedom of expression and particularly the independence of the media help guarantee and promote democracy in the world .
The persecution of journalists in their profession is a sign of incapacity to respect a democratic structure , but this is a rule rather than an exception .
Even today , journalists around the world are the subject of censorship , physical sanctions and infringements of personal dignity .
In many cases , the journalists involved get killed .
The problem lies , of course , in Russia where , since Putin took up office , we have seen fresh developments in Russia ' s post-Soviet media market .
The trend is clear .
The Kremlin is trying to impose its will on Russia ' s national networks ORT , RTR and NTV , and to develop an ideology in which the media will only be able to advertise State interests .
We were able to witness this again recently when on 10 May , the Attorney General burst in on Echo Moscow , a radio station , and confiscated all financial and commercial documents .
Where this will end in Russia , we do not yet know , but it is clear that that country ' s democracy is in crisis .
Needless to say , we also need to keep a watchful eye on democracy in Europe .
The President of Italy has been mentioned a moment ago , who owns a company which owns , inter alia , three television channels , as well as the largest national publishing house , which , in turn , publishes magazines that support that politician .
I find the initiative of Mr Van den Berg ( PSE ) an interesting one to contemplate .
In fact , we should also be aware that this phenomenon not only occurs in Italy , of course .
Maybe in England too , there is a media monopoly , and that is to the advantage of the Social-Democratic government in the light of the pending elections .
There are similar developments in other countries too .
It seems to me to be a good idea for the European Parliament to look into this issue and to see what it can do about it , for it concerns us all .
Mr President , press freedom is undoubtedly one of the bases of any functioning democracy .
I believe - also in my capacity as a journalist - that this is summed up very neatly in the motion .
Yet if we look at freedom of information , we need to go a step further than simply guaranteeing that every journalist can practise his or her occupation without external influence .
The public 's freedom of information , however , is restricted to some extent even in some countries which guarantee freedom of the press .
This is due , for example , to the financial relationships between media owners , but also an absence of journalistic responsibility .
For example , it is worrying - even if it does not constitute a direct restriction on press freedom - that some magazines have now set up their various departments , including their political departments , as profit centres , which means that the political editors are now responsible for generating advertising revenue in their sections of the publication .
There are also implications for press freedom if - as in Austria - a daily newspaper changes the political focus of its reporting when it is saved from bankruptcy by a bank with close links to a particular political party .
There is one further problem in particular , namely the growing tendency to separate information from commentary .
The result is a kind of ' readers ' letter ' journalism , which means that even in supposedly independent newspapers , we are tending to find little else but the opinions of journalists who are influenced by the owners and their interests .
However , in order to guarantee the right to information , it is essential that there is freedom of information for the general public as well as freedom of the press .
As the European Parliament , we have an obligation to monitor compliance with press freedom in all countries of the world .
Perhaps we should respect the public 's right to diversity and freedom of opinion to a greater extent in future too .
Mr President , a resolution on the freedom of the world press makes no sense unless it contains , firstly , the solidarity of this Parliament with a Basque , Spanish and European journalist , Mr Gorka Landaburu , the recent victim of an ETA attack immediately following the Basque elections . Secondly , it should contain a clear call for the protection and guarantee of the freedom to exercise the profession of journalist , threatened as it is - and this is something that Parliament should be aware of - in a part of Europe , the Basque Country .
Mr President , the political wing of ETA was severely punished at the ballot boxes , and what was its response ?
The immediate response of this criminal organisation , once again , was to intimidate , threaten and make an attempt on the life of a journalist who was doing nothing more than defending the values on which European society is based , defending peaceful coexistence and defending the freedom of the Basque people .
The enemies of freedom of expression , of democracy and of life do not deserve to be citizens of the Europe that we are building on such strong foundations as freedom , security and justice for those who live and move around in European territory .
This , ladies and gentlemen , is the aim of the amendment that my group is tabling and which I hope will receive the support of the political groups in this House , and I also thank Mr Sánchez García for announcing it .
Mr President , I should like to start by making a brief comment on Ethiopia .
The Commission welcomes the fact that this issue has been tabled for debate here .
The Commission took part in a diplomatic representation to the Ethiopian government on behalf of the Union on 26 April , during which it expressed its regret at the loss of life during the riots which took place last month in Adis Abeba and elsewhere in Ethiopia .
It also regretted the violent action on the part of the security forces .
The diplomatic representation called on the government to clarify recent events by carrying out a comprehensive , neutral investigation .
As far as the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea is concerned , the Commission is still urging both countries to give the peace mission under the patronage of the UN and the OAU their unrestricted support .
It expects both governments to guarantee the UN mission full freedom of movement , actively help with mine clearance , release all prisoners of war and internees and start demobilising a large part of its strike forces .
The EU has supported the efforts of the UN mission by monitoring developments in both countries continuously and maintaining close contacts with the parties involved .
It has made declarations proposing the process and - where necessary - voicing its concerns .
The Commission thinks this is the best way of supporting the efforts of the UN .
The Commission expressly welcomes the initiative of the religious leaders to visit areas on both sides of the border and start a reconciliation process .
This decisive process should , in its view , be promoted and shaped by the people concerned .
At the present time , the Commission considers a formal summit organised by the international community to be premature .
On Cameroon , I should like to say that the Commission is monitoring the human rights situation in Cameroon closely and notes that this country has started democratising its society and institutions .
There have been very positive developments in the area of human rights and civil freedoms .
We also note , however , that the various players still have insufficient knowledge of and fail to respect these new rights properly .
Cameroon has ratified the convention against torture and was the subject of a report by the committee against torture presented in November 2000 .
In addition , a national committee on human rights and fundamental freedoms has been set up in Cameroon , albeit with restricted functions , and a regional centre for the promotion of human rights has been set up in collaboration with the United Nations .
The European Community has supported Cameroon within the framework of the Lomé Convention with a grant of EUR 6 million for institutional reform in the area of the rule of law , democratisation and respect for human rights .
It has also examined a support programme in the area of the criminal justice system .
We are supporting reform of the justice system and stronger responsible leadership of the institutions in coordination with Bretton Woods , with a special endowment from the preliminary financial framework of the ninth European Development Fund .
Specific funding is also being granted under the ninth European Development Fund in order to support non-state players , especially associations and non-governmental organisations working in the government and to promote human rights and strengthen the rule of law .
As part of the Cotonu agreement , the Commission is pursuing a positive approach based on dialogue and does not feel that there is any justification for starting consultations under Article 96 of the Cotonu agreement .
The situation is being monitored on the ground together with the Member States .
The government has set up a committee of inquiry , the findings of which will be carefully analysed by the Commission and the Member States .
I should like to say on the last topic in this human rights debate that freedom of opinion and the freedom of the press are , without doubt , absolutely vital to a democratic society and that the freedom of the press and freedom of opinion can only be exercised where there are several media .
Where this is not the case , there is either no democracy at all or democracy is under threat .
Threats to the freedom of the press and freedom of opinion throughout the world are one of the most distressing aspects of our international work .
Like Parliament , the Commission also takes rampant persecution and the repression of freedom of opinion and the freedom of the press very seriously .
It starts with conditions in the media , as some members of the House have described in connection with Russia , and ends with terrorist attacks on journalists , as reported yesterday from the Basque country .
However , I am in the happy position of being able to tell the House that the Basque journalist , Mr Landaburu , the youngest brother of the Director-General of the Commission responsible for enlargement , has survived the attack .
He is seriously injured but , thank God , he will survive .
This clearly illustrates that journalists are the target of terrorist tactics because all extremist organisations throughout the world rightly perceive freedom of the media and freedom of opinion as their most serious threat .
I should like to report briefly that the Commission took a position on freedom of opinion , freedom of worship and freedom of belief at the 57th session of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
The EU not only represents its point of view on the international stage , it also provides practical help from the Community budget .
For example , the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights makes provision for considerable sums to support independent media throughout the world .
Assistance ranges from training measures for journalists to media monitoring .
Over EUR 5 million was provided out of the 2000 budget for projects relating to freedom of opinion , freedom of the media and protection and training for journalists .
A major project in Asia and Africa , which is being implemented in collaboration with Reporters sans Frontières , addresses some of the main risks to which journalists are exposed , as listed in Parliament 's resolutions .
The project makes provision for an assessment of the situation of imprisoned journalists , financial support for these journalists and their families and information and public awareness campaigns .
Support under the European initiative should continue .
The call for proposals in January 2001 expressly included the subject of freedom of opinion as one of the priorities .
Thank you , Commissioner Verheugen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Forced labour by African children
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5 ­ 0359 / 2001 by Mrs Maes , Mrs Lucas , Mr Rod and Mrs Schörling , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on trafficking in children ;
B5 ­ 0365 / 2001 by Mr Van den Berg , Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mrs Carlotti on behalf of the PSE Group , on forced labour of African children ;
B5 ­ 0372 / 2001 by Mr Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on trafficking in children ( ship from Benin ) ;
B5 ­ 0379 / 2001 by Ms Thors , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on child slaves in Africa ;
B5 ­ 0389 / 2001 by Mr Sylla , Mr Miranda , Mr Herman Schmid , Mrs Morgantini , Mrs Frahm , Mr Alavanos and Mr Alyssandrakis , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on forced labour of African children ;
B5 ­ 0393 / 2001 by Mr Andrews , Mrs Muscardini and Mr Segni , on behalf of the UEN Group , on forced labour of African children .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if 43 children are found on board a ship , which is taking them away from home to work in plantations in another country , our hearts bleed , with good reason .
We thought that slavery had been stamped out , but it continues to exist , and the most shocking form of slavery is , of course , the trafficking in children and the trade in child slaves .
Children are being shipped off to work on plantations .
Children are being abducted to be trained as soldiers , to carry weapons , to become a killing machine or to provide sexual services .
Children are orphaned at an early age if their parents die of AIDS , and are then hired as house slaves of those who supposedly take care of them .
In short , children are often slaves .
Nevertheless , Africa is not traditionally considered a continent where it is customary to sell children .
Abject poverty is at the root of child slavery , and child labour contravenes the Treaty on the Rights of the Child .
Echoing what is stipulated in the resolution , I would therefore call on the Commissioner to focus on , and put an end to , the networks which set up the trafficking in children , to launch reintegration programmes for rescued or escaped children , but also for former child soldiers and street children , and above all , I would urge you to help ensure that the products of Africa are sold at a fair price , so that the parents can work , and can let their children go to school , as that is what is supposed to happen .
May I ask the ladies and gentlemen in the galleries not to clap .
It is not customary in a Parliament , although it is , of course , very nice of you to show your support for Mrs Maes ' speech .
However , I must ask you to observe the democratic rules of play here in Europe .
After all , we are all Europeans .
Mr President , over the past few months , we have witnessed the sad fate of children , uprooted from their homes , travelling on a slave ship off the coast of West Africa .
As we established when we attended the parliamentary meeting in Gabon within the framework of the ACP-EU , these children are from various neighbouring countries and are taken to elite families in Gabon , for example , where they work in the household .
They are farmed out by the ' aunties ' - for that is the nice word for it , go-betweens , if you like - among those families .
That means that they end up being slaves in those households , that they do not get any schooling , that they have to work from early in the morning until late at night , and that they are simply being robbed of their freedoms as a child .
That contravenes all kinds of ILO Treaties .
It is also fundamentally at odds with the Cotonou Agreement .
One could at least expect that the elite itself , which often forms part of governments in the relevant ACP countries , would not take part in this practice .
One could at least expect that according to the statutory rules of that country , action would be taken , or that they would take action amongst themselves .
That is not done , however .
I would therefore urge the countries involved not to classify this phenomenon under the heading of poverty , cultural tradition or ' that is how things are around here ' , and therefore difficult to stamp out , but to see this to be in conflict with human rights .
Children have human rights , which are fundamental agreements .
I hope that we will be able to take a pro-active stance and penalise those countries , should this appear necessary .
That is a situation which simply cannot be tolerated .
I would also like to broaden the topic and include child labour , but I explicitly focused on this well-defined problem in West Africa .
The violation of children ' s rights should finally be a thing of the past .
Mr President , according to UNICEF , 200 000 children are traded annually in West and Central Africa .
Poor families in debt give their children on loan to the creditors as deposit , or to pay off their loans .
However , because they cannot get out of the red , the children are often sold and moved to other countries .
There they are used as household helps , unpaid workers on cocoa or cotton plantations , or employed in the sex industry .
Child traffickers rarely get caught or punished .
The discovery of the Nigerian ship Etireno in the port of Cotonou is probably only the thin end of the wedge .
The international labour organisation estimates that there are 250 million child slaves worldwide .
Surely it is unacceptable that practices such as trafficking in children and slavery still exist , and even thrive , in the twenty-first century .
We should therefore put more mechanisms in place to track down and punish the trade in and use of child slaves .
The legal apparatus in situ should be given far more resources and be better equipped to fight malpractices of this kind , and multinational companies must abide by the moral code not to abuse children for commercial purposes .
At the same time , we must have the courage to tackle the underlying causes : poverty and unemployment .
Let us hope that the pledge of debt discharge which was made at the Conference of the Least Developed Countries in Brussels this week is kept , and that our markets will at long last be opened up to agricultural products from those countries , so that we can give those people something to sell other than their children .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we have just heard , UNICEF estimates that there are 250 million children under the age of 14 in the world who are still working .
In Africa , thousands are in forced labour in the coffee and cocoa plantations , the produce from which is often destined for export .
That makes us indirect accessories to what is happening .
Many of these countries , it should be said , have signed the convention on children 's rights or the convention banning child labour .
I think that Parliament cannot simply continue to take note of the multiplicity of legal instruments intended to ensure that children 's rights are respected at international level or to issue a sort of good conduct label under the various conventions which these countries have signed unless there is a binding force somewhere .
It is up to us to react rapidly , as has been said , by punishing or even excluding any country which violates these conventions .
I should , however , like to point out that there are different debates , which take place at three different levels .
There is the first level , which is the direct result of misery and unemployment , as we have heard , and it goes without saying that the IMF and the World Bank cannot continue to burden Africa with so-called structural adjustment policies .
We know full well today that this debt hangs over Africa like a sword of Damocles and the IMF in particular needs a clear policy here .
However , there is another debate which I think , as a parliamentarian , involves questioning if it is conceivable nowadays to keep all these conventions , all these different conventions , and accept that these countries are not going to comply with them .
What is the point ?
Finally , I think it is important for us to think about much more potent matters .
In particular , I think that we should introduce a European social label which requires products from Africa and Asia to indicate their exact origin , so that we can see if they come from countries which exploit children or violate the labour code .
Finally , I think that , as my fellow Member has said , the summit of Least Developed Countries is being held at this very moment with the European Parliament , including European leaders .
I think that it is important for us to be able to call on them and for them to be able to take urgent measures on this form of modern slavery which affects children , children the same age as our children in Europe .
Mr President , naturally I share what was said by my colleague Mr Fodé Sylla in his speech and by the other Members who have spoken here this afternoon .
This problem has come to public attention due to the voyage of a boat , the Etireno , from Benin to Gabon .
However , UNICEF had already clearly said that more than 200 000 children in Western and Central Africa were growing up in this awful way .
When we see how European children grow up , we have to think about these African children .
It is terrible to think that children aged between 7 and 15 are used as modern-day slaves in a wide variety of work , and sometimes for the sexual perversions of certain people .
I completely agree with the measures that are proposed in the resolution : we need to inform consumers not to buy products that are known to be made or produced through the work of these children .
We need to ask for a fair price and practice fair trade .
I fully agree with the amendment tabled by my colleagues from the Green Group on the revision , with this in mind , of the World Trade Organisation standards .
The Council and the European institutions need to work together with the countries that these children come from and go to in order to fight this horrific trafficking . Also , at the next sitting of the United Nations , which is devoted to children ' s rights , the European institutions need to adopt a belligerent approach to this problem .
As my colleague Mr Fodé Sylla was saying , recital G talks clearly about the effects of growing poverty on this problem .
I think that we should ask ourselves if it is ethically acceptable to support a system that has such an awful effect on a sector of the population that is as weak as children are .
Mr President , I think that we need to start thinking about whether we can allow this to happen .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like the European Parliament , the Commission is deeply concerned about the problem of trafficking in children in West and Central Africa .
According to UNICEF figures , over 200 000 children are victim to cross-border trafficking in West and Central Africa .
We call on the governments of these countries to do everything in their power to combat and punish the criminal practices of child traffickers .
The Commission 's strategy to combat trafficking in children and child labour is based mainly on its measures to reduce poverty in Africa .
This is the primary objective of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement .
I should also like to stress that the Commission is pursuing a strategy to promote food security and rural development in the countries of Africa , focusing mainly on the situation of women and children in its bid to bring about sustainable development in the countryside .
At the same time , the Commission is funding measures which will help directly to resolve this problem .
For example , over EUR 1.2 million have been provided to promote the rights of children and to protect children from violence and exploitation in Gabon , Benin , Togo and Nigeria .
In addition , the Commission is funding a special project in this area in Benin , the objective being to build up a so-called brigade to protect minors , help ensure laws are implemented more efficiently and raise public awareness of this issue .
Protecting and promoting the rights of children is one of the focal points of the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights in 2001 .
A host of other measures is being implemented by the relevant international organisations , especially UNICEF and the International Labour Organisation .
A positive sign recently is that other countries will probably ratify the ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention No 182 .
Benin ratified this convention last Monday , on 14 May , and Côte d 'Ivoire should follow suit by the end of this month .
The Commission emphatically supports these initiatives .
The communication on human rights which the Commission adopted on 8 May 2001 contains concepts for political dialogue with partner countries .
Most importantly , it states that , during discussions , the parties should examine how basic human rights instruments and other international agreements based on human rights can be ratified and implemented effectively .
As far as the trade agreement is concerned , the European Union is currently enlisting support from its trading partners for these basic labour standards to be applied to child labour .
The Commission feels that consideration should be given to additional trade preferences under the general preference system for countries which implement these standards efficiently .
Thank you , Commissioner Verheugen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
I have an announcement to make .
The services are trying to bring the debate on the Di Lello Finuoli report forward to 5.10 p.m. , as suggested earlier .
The speakers and rapporteur will be called and informed , so that we can make better use of our time .
Floods in France
The next item is the joint debate of the following motions for resolutions :
B5 ­ 0381 / 2001 by Mr Le Pen , Mr de Gaulle , Mr Gollnisch , Mr Lang and Mr Martinez , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the floods in the French département of the Somme ;
B5 ­ 0382 / 2001 by Mrs Berès and Mrs Ferreira , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the floods in France ;
B5 ­ 0383 / 2001 by Mrs Grossetête , Mr Morillon , Mr Lamassoure and Mrs Fourtou , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the floods in the Somme ( France ) ;
B5 ­ 0390 / 2001 by Mrs Ainardi and Mr Alyssandrakis , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the floods in France ;
B5 ­ 0391 / 2001 by Mr Butel , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the floods in the Somme ;
B5 ­ 0392 / 2001 by Mr Marchiani , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the floods in France .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , France has suffered serious flooding for several months now .
First it was Brittany , now other départements have been affected , but it is the département of the Somme , and the town of Abbeville and the surrounding communes in particular , which have been hardest hit .
Hundreds of residents have been forced to leave their homes , have lost all their possessions and are destitute .
Every economic and social sector has been hit : road and rail infrastructures have sustained tremendous damage , shops and businesses have closed and farms are in serious trouble .
There is much uncertainty as to whether they will be able to regain their original production levels .
The persons hit hardest are those who were already the worst off and who have no family to give them financial or moral support .
And just as we thought that things were quickly getting better , another disaster has struck and may last for several more weeks .
The financial consequences are unquantifiable as yet .
There is a great deal of solidarity between the local residents and a great deal of intervention on the part of the government and the French administration , the local authorities , the police , the army , rescue organisations and the community , but it is unable to absorb the effects of this disaster .
That is why I think that Europe needs to do more than just offer words of support and compassion ; we need to send out a strong message of our desire to stand by the people suffering the physical and psychological effects of this disaster .
In order to do so , the European Union needs to provide one-off financial aid so that infrastructures can be quickly restored and economic activity can resume .
It is also important for us to reaffirm our concern at the rise in the number of serious natural disasters over recent years both in Europe and across the planet as a whole .
The European Union owes it to itself to do everything to respect and ensure that others respect the Kyoto commitments by the stated deadlines and to implement a policy of sustainable development .
Mr President , having rightly expressed our sympathy and solidarity with the people who have been hard hit , especially in the département of the Somme in France , we should think about the numerous floods which have occurred not just in France , but also in Portugal , Spain and elsewhere , and about the fact that other countries may yet be affected .
First there is the question of urgency ; the previous speaker reminded us of the need to take into consideration the financial cost of the crisis in people ' s lives .
However , we also urgently need to take the measures needed to prevent the disaster caused by exceptional climatic conditions in France from turning into a crisis which permanently affects the families and enterprises in question .
I obviously welcome the financial efforts already proposed and I hope that Europe will not be absent from them .
We also need to strengthen our means of detection , so that we can react rapidly , and develop the best possible technologies , so that we have means of intervention which can be mobilised at once in any country of Europe .
We have seen how far rapid reaction facilities are lacking .
Parliament therefore looks forward to receiving the text on European civil defence , which could form the basis for transnational monitoring and solidarity .
However , most importantly , we need to study the issue in depth .
These disasters remind us , not that we need reminding , of just how important it is to review our regional planning policies , which will take a great deal of courage , and to implement the commitments made in Kyoto .
Europe should not relax in its efforts to persuade its partners that a lack of respect for nature can have terrible social , environmental and economic consequences .
For months we have heard that incessant rain has caused serious flooding in numerous regions of France .
In the département of the Somme , where there was three times the normal rainfall between October 2000 and April 2001 , several dozen communes are still under water .
Thousands of people have been evacuated , often having lost everything .
The damage to infrastructures , houses and crops has been put at several billion francs .
Human and material resources have been deployed at all levels to cope with the crisis which families have been suffering for months now .
This wave of solidarity , however , which many citizens have been involved in , is still not enough .
The European Union should , I think , as others have already said , take an active part in this solidarity by paying emergency aid to the people affected , so that infrastructures can be restored and economic activity restarted .
This is the main demand in the resolution by our group , which also stresses the need to step up action to protect ecosystems and fight the pollution which are partly to blame for increasingly frequent climatic disasters .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by saying that this debate is of particular interest to me because I myself live in Abbeville , the town at the heart of the area affected .
The floodwaters are abating very slowly , as you have heard and , as I speak , 140 communes are still affected , with nearly 3 500 homes under water .
The floods have caused huge damage - estimated at several hundred million euros .
Houses are subsiding .
Numerous infrastructures have been damaged or destroyed , companies have lost and must replace their means of production , not to mention the damage to the countryside itself .
At local level , solidarity has been in evidence for a long time , providing humanitarian , food and material aid , but what the region needs most now is money .
It is because I really am close to the ground and have been directly affected by this disaster that I called for European solidarity in Brussels on 2 May .
Madam President gave me a positive reply and I thank her for that .
I should also like to take the opportunity to thank the honourable Members who finally rallied to this initiative .
For my part , I have asked the prefect of the region to allow me to help with any changes to the single programming document for the Structural Funds in Picardie , so as to find a suitable response to the problems encountered .
I expect the same on the part of Europe : an urgent and , more importantly , a specific response to this disaster .
This initiative should not - I repeat should not - be a simple declaration of intent .
It should be backed as quickly as possible by practical decisions and tangible action .
Consequently , I am delighted that the Commission , in collaboration with the local authorities , has authorised changes to the zoning of the Structural Funds so that appropriations can be channelled to all sectors of activity and to all the communes flooded .
At the same time , I hope that it will speed up payment of these appropriations , which should normally be staggered up to 2006 .
In addition , one-off financial aid should be released by the European Union , to complement local , regional and national aid and meet the most urgent demands .
Finally , measures should also be taken to fight the consequences of climatic change .
The international commitments made in Kyoto should be respected by all countries without exception and I trust that the conference to be held in Bonn in July will be where this happens .
That is the purpose of my amendment .
Mr President , I would , of course , like to join my fellow Members in voicing our deep sorrow and our solidarity with the people who have been seriously affected by this disaster , which is unprecedented in terms of its scale and its duration .
I am from a neighbouring region , and my father was born in Abbeville .
I have regular contact with the département of the Somme .
It is to be expected that we should express our desire for solidarity with this resolution .
We are bound to express our sorrow when confronted with an urgent situation , with a crisis and with suffering .
However , as well as this urgent situation , I think that we really must understand that the European Union will face problems of this kind over the long term , since the fundamental characteristic of this tragedy is , in fact , that it is not exceptional , that these events are no longer exceptional occurrences .
We are faced with a future of sustained , unsettled weather in the same way that we talk about sustainable development .
This crisis is not exceptional because it is going to continue .
This is a disaster that is going to go on and on , and it will not go away .
And this crisis is not an exception in itself , because the Somme has not been the only place in France or in Europe to be affected by the floods .
In our capacity as Europeans responsible for European policies , we directly face the need to take action in the three main areas , namely the common agricultural policy and rural development , structural planning and structural actions , and lastly , international action designed to put into practice the commitments given in Kyoto .
We must take both immediate and long-term action .
The proposed resolution must not be something that we simply consider for ten minutes and which we then forget .
We have given commitments over several years to eliminate this type of danger , to prevent this type of threat and to solve the awful problems that people face .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to join my fellow Members , who have signed this resolution , to express , on behalf of my group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , our unwavering solidarity with all the people affected by the flood , and I am aware that even today , whole families are waiting to be relocated to safe new homes .
Everything must be done in order to assist these people , who have suffered considerably .
We can also support the observation in the resolution , which pinpoints disastrous flooding as the cause of these increasingly common situations and we have to look into the natural character of these happenings .
The exceptional levels of rainfall do not explain everything and it is easy to attribute the repeated disasters to thoughtless planning policies which have disregarded and , all too often , still disregard the important role of the natural environment and the instability of high-risk zones , such as those liable to flooding , in alleviating flooding , for example .
It is a sign of progress that everyone here today acknowledges this .
It is absolutely imperative , however , that future regional planning policies incorporate this new information on environmental considerations and sustainable development , particularly within the framework of the Structural Funds and the common agricultural policy .
I therefore appeal today to my fellow Members , who are aware of these dangers , to bear in mind , when they come to vote on the guidelines for the common agricultural policy , the Structural Funds and the ERDF , the consequences of the policies that we are implementing when we provide aid packages .
Mr President , 114 municipalities in the Somme region are flooded , 2 800 homes are affected , more than 1 000 people have been evacuated and placed in temporary accommodation and the local economy has been paralysed . This is the toll inflicted by the floods that have hit the Somme valley .
In addition to the understandable solidarity that has been shown towards the people who have been affected and the businesses that are , to all intents and purposes , out of action , these people are waiting for compensation to be paid out as soon as possible - in other words , as soon as the committee of inquiry into natural disasters has completed its report and issued its conclusions .
Once the water levels have subsided , it will be time to work out who is responsible .
For example , why has the Somme ' s maintenance department not maintained the region ' s riverbanks and why has the river not been dredged for decades ?
Why have the municipalities allowed building in an area at risk from flooding , disregarding the most basic rules of land use planning ?
Why have embankments , hedges and ditches been destroyed as part of land consolidation , which has , moreover , been carried out in favour of intensive farming ?
Why has a reservoir not been built in the Somme bay and why have no real measures been implemented to prevent rising water levels and flooding ?
To cite fate , high tides or exceptional levels of rainfall is not enough .
People who are isolated , re-located in precarious conditions , deserve more than fine-sounding words from the French President or the few million given grudgingly by the French government .
Insurance policies should , of course , pay for the damage caused by natural disasters within a reasonable timeframe , but , for the future , we must learn to respect and take account of the necessary and incontrovertible laws of nature , and prepare ourselves to prevent these natural disasters .
The only way to respond to the suffering of the people is with practical , swift and effective action .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission would like to thank the House for its understanding of the consequences of the floods in France .
The Commission regrets the problems and damage caused by the bad weather , which were particularly severe in the département of the Somme in the region of Picardie .
The Commission has said that it is prepared to use all the measures at its disposal to facilitate the reconstruction of the area affected and the restoration of economic productivity .
I refer here to measures within the framework of regional policy , agricultural policy , rural development policy and state aid policy .
Within regional policy and rural development policy , much of the département affected is eligible under Objective 2 of the Structural Funds for the 2000 to 2006 programming period .
The programme for the region of Picardie , which has a Community contribution of 1.7 billion francs for the period from 2000 to 2006 , already contains measures against natural disasters .
The Commission is waiting for suggestions from the French authorities and calls on the French authorities to present these proposals , so that the means provided for in the programme for the economic restoration of the areas affected can be supplied .
As far as agricultural policy is concerned , the Commission has already taken the initiative to give producers a great deal of flexibility as regards the eligibility of aid for large scale arable farming and set aside .
For the rest , the Commission has approved certain interpretations of current legal provisions by the French authorities .
The Commission has also introduced measures to extend the seed time beyond 15 June .
As far as state aid for the areas affected is concerned , the Commission shall do everything in its power within the framework of legal provisions to deal quickly with notifications of and approval for any state aid to remedy the damage caused .
A few members of the House addressed the question of immediate assistance for families in the areas affected .
Unfortunately , the Commission cannot see how it can accommodate this request .
As you know , it is several years since state posts for disasters and immediate aid in the Member States were reported in the budget of the European Union and I do not think that Parliament will call on the Commission to make payments which it is not legally authorised to make .
In view of the fact that there are other ways of providing Community aid for this sort of disaster , the Commission takes the view that it would be premature , given the financial and human resources currently at its disposal , to re-table such a proposal .
Thank you , Commissioner Verheugen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
I should just like to thank all the members who took part , especially the rapporteur and the speakers , for being so flexible and attending earlier than the scheduled time of 5.30 p.m. , thereby allowing us to make better use of the time available .
Mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0145 / 2001 ) by Mr Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters poses many problems , which we have tried to face and solve in the best way possible , thanks also to the input from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and its draftsman , Mr Joachim Wuermeling .
This report has not had any amendments , and this is evidence of the solidarity we felt over the proposal .
I hope the solutions proposed may find a broad consensus in Parliament in order to give greater strength to the arguments of all those in the Council and the Commission of the European Union that share them .
A common area of justice will only make sense if , within it , the court decisions of one Member State are effective in all the other Member States .
In concrete terms the intention is to allow the execution in one Member State of a final decision issued by the competent authority of another Member State .
Until today , the recognition of decisions among the various Member States has been achieved through the request mechanism , a slow , complicated process with an even more uncertain outcome .
In addition to the obvious aim of legal certainty inherent in the rapid and effective implementation of the law throughout the territory of the Union , mutual recognition seeks to achieve not only the social rehabilitation of those sentenced , who are no longer uprooted from the country in which they have chosen to live , but also the protection of victims ' rights .
In order to set up a mutual recognition mechanism , two possible solutions could be put forward : either moving towards harmonisation of the legislative and judicial systems in the Member States , or basing the mechanism on mutual trust in the adequacy of the laws of individual states and the proper implementation of those laws in specific proceedings .
We have opted for this latter solution , both because it is more feasible and because we are faced with legal systems which , although diverse , are based on a system of procedural rules that guarantee criminal decisions which are reliable and hence amenable to being enforced throughout the territory of the Union .
We are , however , aware that , at least in the short term , it will be difficult to reach an agreement on a procedure for automatic recognition , since no Member State will ever be willing to associate itself with recognition of any final decision that does not respect certain essential common guarantees .
The question is , precisely , that of the identification of these essential guarantees , such as respect for the principle of ne bis in idem , or respect for the right to an effective and not simply a pro forma defence , or respect for victims ' rights .
It will also be necessary to have common rules on jurisdiction and competence in order , above all , to prevent duplicated proceedings , just as there must be common rules for the application of penalties for re-offending or for the accumulation of penalties .
It will , however , be necessary to remove some obstacles that today prevent full recognition of final decisions in criminal matters , and among these obstacles are the requirement of dual criminality , which often allows the competent authority in the enforcing state to re-examine the decision issued by the authority of another Member State in both form and substance .
The dual criminality problem must be put into perspective since , in all Member States of the Union , the acts that arouse the greatest social condemnation are subject to criminal sanctions .
There is still the option - favoured by many of us - not to apply mutual recognition to a limited number of crimes , such as euthanasia , on which it would be difficult to reach an agreement .
This report signals a first step towards the creation of the common area of justice , freedom and security .
The course has been traced out ; now we need to find the will and the political strength to press on to the end , elevating the guarantee system to the highest possible level .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for introducing this difficult topic of the mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters .
The House may be interested to learn that , according to a survey in my country , a large majority of the people are in favour of mutual recognition .
Mr Posselt , as you see , the suggestion which you have made on numerous occasions , namely not to allow any periods to arise during which plenary has to idle , so to speak , has been applied by the parliamentary administration in a flexible manner today .
As a result , it is again your turn to speak .
, deputising for the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market . ( DE ) Mr President , first may I say that I am delighted at this decision although , in this case , I am the one to suffer from this decision .
I am standing in today for Mr Wuermeling , who drafted the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , in which he says that it is important to make progress in relation to the recognition of final decisions in criminal matters .
However , he also warns against overhasty and hurried centralism and considers that the Commission needs to define exactly what this means .
Most importantly , the Commission should work out precisely what disadvantages have arisen so far because this system has not yet been developed to the extent called for in the Commission communication .
We must admit that this is a very delicate subject .
Because one thing we do not have in Europe is uniform criminal law .
In my personal view , we never shall have uniform criminal law .
That need not be a bad thing because even the United States of America , which are basically more centralistic than we imagine the European Union will ever be , even in the final stage of its development , have very different criminal laws .
There are states which have the death penalty and there are other states which do not .
In this respect , the EU is far more uniform .
There is no place here for countries with the death penalty .
Even England and Scotland have very different criminal laws and legal traditions .
This means that not only must we be very careful in furthering unification and harmonisation while respecting diversity , we must also be very careful in how we recognise final decisions in criminal matters .
We talk a great deal about a European community of values . And what complicates matters still further is that this European community of values is in fact drifting apart .
One specific recent example is the euthanasia legislation in the Netherlands , with which the Netherlands have taken leave of the European legal culture hitherto , as has Great Britain on the question of cloning .
So we are drifting apart in fundamental areas which are also relevant to criminal law .
This will make mutual recognition more and more difficult .
This too is a question which has to do with the different systems of values and with the different legal cultures .
So we welcome progress in this area , but are very sceptical and simply see the problem of our drifting apart here , which is why we urgently call on the Commission to proceed carefully here , give precise definitions and simply say exactly what the need for unification consists of or what the disadvantages of the present system are .
Of course we know that there are considerable problems today .
However , the cases which I have quoted - and I could also have cited drugs policy as an example - show that , as far as criminal law is concerned , the European legal systems are drifting apart rather than moving together on particularly sensitive issues subject to intense public debate .
This shows how important it is to continue our work on the area of freedom , security and justice , concentrating on the points which are really important to Europe and on the points where there is also real agreement between the Member States as regards standards in criminal law .
Mr President , I would first like to stress that I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party , as this is a special report , because of the subject , because of its importance and because of something that the rapporteur highlights : it is a report to which there have been very few amendments in committee and none in the plenary sitting , which is by no means usual , particularly with reports from the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and this , Mr President , is due to the rapporteur .
It is your report , rapporteur , but all of us , and of course the Group of the European People ' s Party , see ourselves in it , which is why I want to highlight two major issues .
The first is that , if the European Union faces one challenge at the moment , if we really want to move from a market-centred Europe to a Europe of values and of citizens , that challenge is to build this area of justice .
And if this is a big challenge , what can be more important , in this context , than for a rapporteur to take up the great tradition that has built Europe ?
This great tradition that has led to men and women from different origins , different political ideologies and different parties , placing this general vision , this European vision , this constructive vision , above their individual interests , and combining their efforts in pursuit of a goal .
We have before us one of those reports , and I think that this House should be proud to have produced a report which will be the point of reference over the months and years , for the work that awaits the institutions : the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
It is a report that , like all great reports , combines vision , realism and ambition .
The rapporteur used the word ' vision ' , and I am going to do nothing more than repeat what he said , but this is the essence of the report : it firmly backs mutual recognition .
Mutual recognition , which is also based on the principle underpinning the European Union , namely mutual trust between States , which is in turn based on the Member States providing an equivalent level of protection of human rights , and in which they are seen to share the same procedures .
Obviously , there are differences , and there are differences that need to be preserved ; and that is where the rapporteur ' s experience , realism and knowledge of the field come in .
I could quote many examples .
I have personally learnt a great deal from his thoughts on the scope of dual indictment , which he very rightly extends to dual criminality , and I hope that this will be a subject for discussion in the work that follows .
In particular , the rapporteur mentioned the principle of ne bis in idem or double jeopardy and the solution that it offers to this considerable problem .
I would also cite Paragraph 22 , which refers to the need for common minimum standards for certain aspects of procedural law .
As he said , we cannot expect them to be automatically recognised tomorrow without any controls or filters , but we need to move towards the recognition of some common minimum standards that will allow acceptance by means of a very rapid procedure .
In other words , the rapporteur says ' no ' to harmonisation , ' yes ' to mutual trust and ' yes ' to mutual recognition , but on some points there will have to be harmonisation , if not unification .
I could also quote the comment made by Mr Posselt , that in Europe some conduct needs to be kept outside this context of mutual recognition , because it is based on very different cultural roots , such as euthanasia for example .
I think that we have before us an important report .
I am sure that it will receive overwhelming support in Parliament , and I hope that the two or three institutions take good note of this report , which without a shadow of a doubt , will be a milestone in this area in which we need to make progress .
Mr President , I fully agree with Mrs Palacio .
The excellent report by Mr Di Lello deals thoroughly with all the important aspects of a complex problem which , however , needs to be solved swiftly so that the European Union can become an area of freedom , security and justice .
The problem of mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters arises of course from the irreducible - at least in the short term , and here I agree with Mr Posselt - diversity of the legal and judicial systems of the various countries in the European Union .
It can therefore be solved only if on the one hand we start from precise , shared definitions of the notions of final decision and criminal matters , which can apply to all the various systems - thorough definitions that are fully satisfactory are given in both the Commission communication and the Di Lello Finuoli report - and on the other hand if mutual trust is created among the Member States regarding the adequacy of each other ' s systems of laws and the correctness of their procedures .
Now , this trust may be founded on the shared respect for fundamental rights , ensured by , amongst other things , the supervision by the European Court of Human Rights , which may be further guaranteed by common minimum standards that may be adopted on specific aspects of procedural law in matters of respect for the right to a defence or victims ' rights .
In addition , to overcome the irreconcilable nature of certain ideas of principle as regards the punishability of controversial acts - the examples of euthanasia or abortion have been given here - one simply needs to exclude mutual recognition in relation to a few limited and exceptional criminal acts .
In this way we can overcome the traditional requirement of dual criminality and avoid the slowness and difficulties of having to decide on recognition for every decision in every country , which , I can personally assure Mr Posselt , is a slow process that really hinders the proper application of penalties , as my former experience as a magistrate can testify .

Well , having thus properly set out the solution to the basic problem , the Di Lello Finuoli report then deals with technical and sensitive issues regarding the various ways of carrying out a sentence , the costs of carrying it out , and the system for calculating penalties in the event of multiple sentences , since they cannot always be simply added together when the crimes are connected , and suggests appropriate solutions , which can all be fully shared .
I too therefore invite Parliament to approve this important and thoroughly well argued report without reservation .
Mr President , in order to avoid repetition , I should like to start by referring and subscribing fully to everything that Mr Posselt has said .
I understand the importance of the objective of the report , but am unwilling to join in the general rejoicing because I see a whole series of inconsistencies .
This applies , for example , to the somewhat blurred use of the terms recognition , which has already been implemented in Europe to a considerable degree , and execution of final decisions .
The discussion of certain definitions appears to be random rather than systematic , as far as I can see .
I fail to understand why , when there are several decisions which violate the ne bis in idem principle because they deal with the same fact , the decision that is most favourable to the offender should be applied .
I also fail to comprehend why the call for the dual criminality rule to be waived is , unfortunately , gaining ground .
A criminal justice system which - hopefully - feels bound by the principle of legality , that is , the nullum crimen sine lege principle , cannot accept the consequences of deeds which are not punishable in its area of jurisdiction .
Otherwise this principle would be broken and procedural convenience would take priority .
And then it would be curtains for the rule of law !
I should like to add my voice to those of Ana Palacio Vallersundi and the speakers in general in their entirely justified praise for the work of the rapporteur , Mr Di Lello Finuoli .
As he knows , despite our political differences , we are pleased to point out the high quality of the work he has produced and the legal rigour of his proposals .
In this debate , as in the one we had this morning , we are taking steps along the path traced out in Tampere to create the area of freedom , security and justice .
In a Union where there is freedom of movement enjoyed by all the citizens , including those who act outside the law , it is important to prevent the possibility of there being penal countries .
In relation to this legal framework on judicial decisions in criminal matters , the report deserves our applause and gives a very balanced view .
Allow me to highlight the precision of the final judgment concept , the register of pending procedures , the idea that nobody can be judged twice for the same crime , but , on the other hand , the fact that a sentence in one Member State should be taken into consideration as a case of recidivism in another Member State , the solution in which the implementation of custodial penalties should be governed by the State that implements the sentence , whereas pardons , amnesties and declarations of the existence of the penalty or of the offence should derive from the law of the State which delivers the judgment .
Mutual recognition , ladies and gentlemen , is only effective if it can be achieved without great administrative obstacles .
A degree of mutual trust is therefore required between Member States concerning their judicial procedures .
We also know that the recognition of judicial decisions in criminal matters is a matter of great sensitivity that raises delicate questions and reaches to the core of values protected by law in our various societies .
There are differences between our Member States , despite their extremely substantial , noteworthy common cultural and legal heritage .
We must therefore recommend that the Commission should be cautious in this matter and adopt a policy of taking small steps .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . I should like to start by offering Mr Di Lello Finuoli my warmest thanks for and expressly welcoming this remarkable report .
As the European Council in Tampere stressed , the concept of the mutual recognition of decisions by the courts and judicial authorities is an important cornerstone in the area of freedom , security and justice which we hope to create in Europe .
The concept originates from the internal market .
It is based on mutual trust in the various systems of the Member States and a number of common , underlying legal principles .
Which is why it cannot be considered in isolation and must be complemented by other measures , such as greater harmonisation of substantive and procedural criminal law in the Member States , better mutual understanding and better training and further training .
The Tampere conclusions called on the Council and the Commission to present a programme by the end of last year .
The most important contribution by the Commission was last summer 's communication on the mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters , in which we set out the Commission 's approach to this section of the more comprehensive area of mutual recognition .
As this is a new and complicated issue , our communication does not aspire to find final , binding answers to the questions raised , it simply tries to point the way to possible solutions .
What we tried to do was ask the right questions and offer possible options as to how to proceed .
I was delighted that Mr Di Lello Finuoli 's report basically shares the Commission 's view and calls on the Commission to keep on the same track .
Implementing the principle of mutual recognition in judicial cooperation on criminal matters is an ambitious task which entails a fundamental shift in perspective from traditional forms of cooperation to a cooperative division of tasks .
This new attitude will result in a series of substantive and practical initiatives , as cited in the joint Council and Commission programme of November 2000 .
Some of the projects proposed in the programme have already been started .
The Commission undertook in its programme of work to present proposals on facilitating extradition , including the idea of a European arrest warrant , before the summer recess .
We are also considering whether joint standards could be implemented to protect individual rights in criminal proceedings .
I cannot go into all thirty points of the motion for a resolution here and now .
Although the Commission 's attitude towards it is very positive overall , I should like to mention one point on which we have our doubts and which was also addressed during the debate .
The resolution calls for full application of the ne bis in idem principle .
The Commission supports this , especially as this principle is included in our new Charter of Fundamental Rights .
However , the Commission entertains some doubt as to whether it makes sense , in cases in which there are in fact several decisions in various Member States , only ever to apply the decision that is most favourable to the offender .
The European Council in Tampere adopted ambitions plans in the area of justice and home affairs .
We must face the fact in our daily work that the devil is in the detail .
Numerous details illustrate that mutual trust in the various judicial systems of the Member States has not yet developed to the point needed in order to exercise mutual recognition .
Obviously it would be helpful to push this development forward .
I am sure that we shall achieve the necessary political momentum if Parliament comes out clearly in favour of developing the principle of mutual recognition .
This would perhaps add the political weight which we need , and which is lacking , in order to tip the balance in favour of more comprehensive recognition of decisions .
It is time we put flesh on the bones of the theoretical concept of mutual recognition .
Works councils and redundancies
The next item is the Commission statement on works councils and redundancies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . The health and safety rules applicable to me are obviously not being applied today .
I have hardly sat down .
The recent persistent wave of redundancies by numerous large companies as the result of closures or restructuring measures has reached worrying proportions .
Restructuring is often used as a euphemism for redundancies .
These redundancies do not only affect the employees themselves , they also affect their families and sometimes , where they depend on one or two main employers , whole regions .
As much of the recent restructuring announced has taken place at European level , there is urgent need for the Community to act .
A comprehensive Community concept should possibly combine innovative measures with an examination of existing instruments .
I intend at this point to confine myself to the legal aspects .
First a word on quickly adopting new and updating existing legislation .
In relation to the framework directive on informing and hearing workers , may I say that the Commission will complete its amended proposal on a general framework for informing and hearing workers in the next few days , so as to ensure that it can be quickly adopted in the Council .
The Commission will press for the Council to adopt the directive on 11 June .
We hope that a consensus will be reached .
However , if necessary , we shall endeavour to reach political agreement by a qualified majority .
We cannot wait for ever , especially in the present climate of insecurity created by the restructuring plans of numerous companies .
I should like once again to emphasise a decisive aspect of the Commission proposal in this context , namely the question of sanctions .
I know that Parliament emphatically supports this action and shares the Commission 's satisfaction with the progress made recently in this sensitive area .
With Parliament 's support and the Council 's strong political will , we can wrap this process up by the end of the year , which will be a decisive step forward .
Now to the Statute for European Companies .
We also achieved another important , long-awaited result at the end of last year : the Statute for European Companies with provisions for worker participation .
One of the most excellent and positive aspects of the Statute is the fact that it contains joined up provisions on worker participation which reflect the progressive approach taken at national level in the proposal on informing and hearing workers .
This will certainly help ensure that better account is taken of the social dimension when European companies are restructured .
I am positive that the European Parliament will do everything to ensure that this legal act is adopted immediately after the summer recess .
Finally , to the revision of the directive on European works councils .
The Commission will revise the directive on European works councils in 2002 but will continue to examine the practical implementation of the directive in the run up to the revision .
Globalisation and industrial change bring social problems in their wake .
However , they can also be a source of prosperity for people and regions , if the change is designed and controlled appropriately .
The main concern for governments and the Community is to strike a balance between promoting corporate innovation and growth , on the one hand , and preparing people for change and , possibly , the necessary protective measures , on the other .
This was why my colleague , Mrs Diamantopoulou , announced a check list for corporate restructuring last week .
This check list includes political instruments already available , namely legislation , monitoring procedures , financial help and tried and tested procedures. governments and companies must make optimum use of these instruments or devise new instruments .
Dialogue , transparency , suitable participation of workers , anticipation , risk prevention and developing employability are the key elements in a European response to this challenge .
Let us do our very best to develop these legislative and other instruments which will help us to put our ideas into practice .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank the Commission on behalf of the PPE-DE for its explanation and also for telling us that the framework directive will soon be ready , as will the Statute for European Companies .
However , I should like first and foremost to refer to the European works council project , which our group has fully supported .
I think the Commission is right to criticise how companies are behaving at present .
The Commission report on European works councils , which we are currently debating in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - we have held a hearing on the subject - is most interesting .
It proves that works councils have , as a rule , fulfilled their duties .
We found out , interestingly , that restructuring , which may be necessary on occasions , can be implemented more efficiently if employees are informed and involved .
In countries with more codetermination , such as Germany , there are fewer disputes and hardly any strikes in connection with structural changes to the economy .
The spirit of cooperation and partnership which Parliament brought to bear at numerous points of the directive is such that closures and relocations cannot take place in the form of commando attacks but must be preceded by timely and comprehensive information for and consultation with the workers .
This is often not the case .
Ensuring there is timely information and consultation , before company decisions are taken , is a very important aspect and must be taken into account when the directive is revised .
I hope that the Commission will introduce an initiative this year which at least ensures that the social partners are informed and involved .
I agree with you , Commissioner , that the current rules must be tightened .
It is not enough for sanctions to be imposed solely at national level ; we also need measures at European level .
As you rightly stressed , we need the framework directive , because in numerous cases restructuring takes place solely at national , rather than at transnational level .
The directives on mass redundancies and safeguarding employee rights during takeovers also belong here .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , if there are any plans to revise these two directives as well ?
I think that the Europe of the future is also a Europe of the workers .
Information , consultation and codetermination rights are in keeping with the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few months , a growing number of sudden decisions has been taken to make mass redundancies or to close down companies ' sites .
These decisions are usually taken without any consideration of alternative solutions for safeguarding jobs , and are sometimes taken by businesses making large profits , such as Danone , or they may even come about as a result of mergers , which have just been authorised by the Commission , as in the case of ABB Alstom Power .
In several cases , employees learnt that they were to be made redundant on the radio , their representatives were only informed of the decision a few minutes before it was officially announced , and , in the case of Marks & Spencer , the decision was announced ten minutes before the opening of the Stock Exchange . I would like to welcome the Marks & Spencer employees ' representatives , who are seated in the public gallery .
These events , like those which happened at Renault-Vilvoorde , have again highlighted the shortcomings of Community legislation , when it exists , and the urgent need to adopt , at long last , a general framework to guarantee workers ' rights to information , consultation and collective negotiation , in order to safeguard their rights and to enable solutions to be found , other than those that put their jobs and future at risk .
Employees faced with these decisions must be able to count upon the European Union , on its legislation and on its institutions .
The European Union cannot remain a framework within which the only restrictive rules are those of the internal market , competition and budgetary discipline , whilst social rules remain woolly , can be avoided and have no facility for imposing penalties if the rules are breached .
I shall let Mrs Ghilardotti speak about the general framework on behalf of my group , and I shall focus on the two other aspects , which are the revision of the 1994 Directive on a European Work Council and procedures for mergers and acquisitions .
The definitions of information and consultation given in the Directive on works councils are so vague that they provide no guarantee .
To define consultation as ' the exchange of views and establishment of dialogue ' is far too imprecise .
We therefore need another guarantee to ensure that consultation does indeed take place at the right time , in other words , before decisions are taken , during the working-out phase , to ensure that the works council may give an opinion , propose other solutions , and that negotiation can be based not only on the management ' s plan , but also on counter-proposals from workers ' representatives .
I believe that we must at last ensure the possibility of referral to a competent public authority on a national level , as already laid down in the 1998 directive on collective redundancies and , if required , on a European level , particularly in companies with a Europe-wide presence so that , if the procedure of information and prior consultation is disregarded , or if the decisions are blatantly unfounded and other solutions could be considered both on a social and an employment level , the competent public authority can declare the redundancy plan null and void .
The 1994 Directive must therefore be revised - I share your view , Commissioner - otherwise this text , which was pioneering when it was adopted , will end up being obsolete in the light of the new drafts adopted by Council , on the European limited company , or by Parliament in 1999 , at first reading , on the Directive on a general framework for informing and consulting employees .
Genuine consultation obviously requires information to be readily available to workers ' representatives and to be of practical value , such as the opportunity to hold meetings , to have access to experts , or to request support from unions .
My second and final point relates to mergers .
I do believe that we should really be able to take the dimension of employment into account , and that is possible without amending the Treaties , simply by adapting legislation , because the Treaties already set the Commission the task of monitoring the effects of these decisions on employment .
I therefore believe that the proposed questionnaire is essential but also that workers ' representatives must be able to refer to the Commission if , in their view , the merger plan is putting jobs or industrial plants at risk . I also believe that it is not only the Commissioner for Competition , but also the Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs who must , if necessary , be able to question the conditions specified if they do not provide adequate guarantees for job security .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall present the ideas of my colleague , Hélène Flautre , who has had to leave in order to prepare for her visit to Algeria with our delegation .
One year on from Lisbon , the outlook is bleak .
The dream of a Europe in which the words ' new economy ' are synonymous with growth and full employment is fading .
The suddenness and the increase in redundancy programmes have made employees think seriously about the delays in building a social Europe .
All companies are affected : market leaders who are long established in their fields and which act as windows onto society , such as Ericsson , Danone and Philips ; players that have appeared in the wake of the liberalisation of transport , such as AOM and Air Liberté , who are making their employees pay for their failed merger and companies who carry off all the prizes for showing contempt for their employees , such as Marks & Spencer , whose employees are demonstrating today in London . We offer our support to these employees , and to those that are here in the House .
According to the Commission , a total of over a quarter of a million redundancies have been announced across the world in the last few weeks .
The Commission has just announced its plan to introduce a package to provide effective legal guarantees to workers regarding information and consultation .
This is good news at a time when employees who are up in arms are joined by a public which disapproves of unilateral action by employers . We have the responsibility of setting this high-speed train in motion .
At the same time , we must quickly adopt the directive on the information and consultation of workers , in order to put an end to the scandalous practices of companies that challenge the social legislation of the Member States .
We must revise the 1994 Works Councils Directive , give them real rights to receive advance notice of plans and to receive expert advice , and make them compulsory for all transnational companies of more than 500 employees . We must adopt the directive on worker involvement in the European company and ensure that their representatives participate in supervisory committees and boards of directors where the decisions are taken .
Lastly , we need to reform our legislation on mergers and acquisitions , which takes no account of their social and geographical impact .
The objective we need to pursue is a European social law that is comprehensible , workable , progressive and on a par with competition law .
Our objective is to have a Europe that works on two fronts : economic dynamism and genuine social democracy .
The Commission has demonstrated its will to make progress on this issue .
All we need to do now is persuade the Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my group , I insisted that we should have the opportunity to hold this debate in light of the tidal wave of restructuring programmes announced in countries across the Union .
It is particularly timely today because , following the recent mobilisation of employees from the Danone group in Calais , the employees of Marks & Spencer are now holding a large European demonstration in London .
In the eyes of the public , Marks & Spencer , following its decision to close 38 shops and to make thousands of employees redundant has , like Danone , come to represent one of the most abhorrent symbols of the strategy known as ' shareholder value ' , of shareholder law and of the social irresponsibility of major companies .
This is the eighth time since the Michelin affair in October 1999 that I have spoken in Parliament to warn the Council and the Commission of the urgent need to confirm the social responsibility of companies and to establish meaningful rights for employees .
Until now , we have merely received evasive answers extending the due date and the long-awaited revised directive on informing and consulting workers has been our Loch Ness monster : everyone has been talking about it but no one has seen hide nor hair of it .
The European public is now demanding practical and meaningful measures .
I feel that as far as the workers who are affected and many other people are concerned , the Union has staked part of its credibility on this issue .
Therefore , Commissioner , I would like you to give clear answers to three questions .
First of all , a draft , revised directive on informing and consulting workers has existed since 1998 .
You mentioned it yourself and it is cautious and to my mind , quite inadequate .
Nevertheless , the Council , to this day , refuses to review it .
If I have understood you properly , Commissioner , you are going to push for the Council of 11 June to override the veto exercised by the United Kingdom , Ireland , Denmark and even Germany , whose Chancellor has just tried to pass himself off as a European visionary .
You also intend , if I have understood correctly , to introduce a system of penalties for companies who breach the directive ' s provisions .
Have I understood correctly ?
My second question is this : the directive on establishing a European works councils dates back to 1995 .
To this day , only a minority of companies concerned has implemented the directive .
Incidentally , these bodies are basically talking shops without any real power .
The Nice European Council stipulated that this directive should be revised , and I quote , ' by 2002 ' , which would require setting the procedure in motion immediately .
I feel that the Commission ' s working programme for 2001 ignores this problem .
Why is this the case , Commissioner , and what do you intend to do now ?
Do you plan to give this future works council real prerogatives , such as the right to suspend a restructuring plan and the time to examine an alternative project to the one laid down by the management ?
Lastly , and with this point I shall conclude , the European Parliament has declared itself to be in favour of systematic verification that social and employment obligations are being met by every company that benefits from Community aid .
Parliament has also requested that , each time the Commission makes a statement on a company merger plan , it makes its assent conditional on the employees ' rights being respected .
What are your plans on this matter ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I was pleased to hear that for the next Council the Commission intends to insist that the Council assume its responsibilities with regard to the directive on employees ' rights to information and consultation .
As several Members have already pointed out , it is now three years since Parliament gave it its first reading .
In these three years we have several times in this House debated problems of redundancies , mergers and company relocations , but the Council has never assumed any responsibility , has never had the courage to face up to this subject and make a decision , adding something to the laws and other instruments that the Union has and can use to strengthen its own intervention regarding companies ' social responsibilities .
Now it seems that some countries have dropped their reservations , and so the conditions are right for the next Council to take up a position .
The information and consultation problem is one that has something to do with the possibility of intervening in a preventive manner so that the consequences of unilateral company decisions are not such that they place jobs , working conditions or the living conditions of workers at risk .
For this to happen , however , it is necessary to reach a precise agreement , and Parliament ' s positions from this point of view were highly specific even at first reading on the methods , times and content of consultations and information .
In addition - and I am pleased that the Commission has remembered this - there is a fundamental instrument which , paradoxically , is regarded as a fundamental element in all laws except those concerning workers , i.e. that of penalties .
There is no law on any subject that does not lay down penalties for breach of the law .
Only in the case of workers ' rights does this still not happen in Europe .
The directive on the right to information and consultation does lay down sanctions , and I am pleased that the Commission is maintaining this position .
Parliament not only upholds the Commission ' s position but supports the Commission in its position and I believe this matter of penalties will not only be confirmed in the Council ' s positions on the directive but will extend to other legislation as well - works councils , mass redundancies - otherwise without a penalty instrument all these laws too will be less effective than we would like them to be .
Mr President , Commissioner , this morning , the President of the European Parliament received employees from the Strasbourg branch of Marks & Spencer .
They are seated in the gallery and I should like to welcome them .
My fellow Members and I thought this morning that we would be able to reassure them that the dossier of the works councils and the information of workers was finally back under discussion .
I hope that this evening ' s debate clearly demonstrates our will to produce a piece of work that is consistent and which will lead to the directives in this field being updated .
As you pointed out , Commissioner , we can no longer wait a new crisis to be announced to reassure ourselves that the legal instruments from which employees should benefit are at last appropriate , effective and provide for penalties in the event that European-level regulations are not respected .
The Marks & Spencer employees , like those from the other companies mentioned by Harlem Désir , demand , as European citizens , that Europe establishes frameworks for protection and for organising collective action , which as we all know is the only guarantee of individual rights in the field of employment law .
They are demanding that these frameworks be established , recognised and protected and they are placing great hope in your words , Commissioner .
The Commission and Parliament should also , however , demonstrate their political will by making any further development of economic union and of any new regulations conditional on the implementation of social provisions that stipulate new forms of regulation such as those that we are expecting today with the revision of the directives that has been announced .
The workers of the European Union , Commissioner , must not suffer as a result of European integration .
They must instead be the main beneficiaries of it .
Respect for workers ' rights and the building of a social Europe are the pillars which , unless strengthened , could dash all our hopes for building democracy in our Union .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the members who took part in this debate .
The Commission sees this debate as important support for its initiatives .
I have the feeling that a real political tail wind is blowing and that we are in full agreement on the objectives .
For which I also thank you .
I should like to comment on the specific questions asked .
First , Mr Menrad 's question as to whether there are any plans to revise the directives on mass redundancies and takeovers as well .
There are no plans to revise them , nor does the Commission consider it necessary , because the scope of the rules planned in the new directives on information and participation is such that the two directives which you mentioned will then be able to demonstrate their real worth .
The requirements of the new directive relate to the subject of the two directives which you mentioned , and we therefore do not believe that these directives need to be revised .
As far as Mr Wurtz 's question is concerned , the honourable Member understood me perfectly correctly .
The Commission is firmly resolved to do everything in its power now to advance acceptance of the directive on information and participation and to meet the deadline which I mentioned .
I did indeed say that , if a consensus cannot be achieved , we shall work on getting the directive adopted by a qualified majority .
You also understood correctly that the Commission takes the view that this directive must contain sanctions .
You then asked if the directive on European works councils was to be revised .
Yes , this is planned for 2002 and we have already begun to organise the preparations .
As far as your third question on mergers is concerned , we still have to examine if and to what extent account must be taken of social aspects during mergers .
The results of this examination are not yet ready .
That brings us to the end of that item .
Gas directive
The next item is the oral question to the Commission ( B5-0170 / 01 ) by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , pursuant to Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure , on implementation by the Member States of the Gas Directive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the EU gas directive was adopted by the European Parliament and the Council in June 1998 , i.e. nearly three years ago , and entered into force on 10 August 1998 .
The Member States were required to transpose the directive by 10 August 2000 .
Since the directive entered into force , all the Member States have transposed it with the exception of France and Germany .
Germany has transposed parts of the directive and is expected to complete transposition in the next few months .
The Commission is currently examining the situation in Germany in order to ascertain if further measures are needed in this respect .
On 17 May 2000 , the French government tabled a bill to transpose the gas directive .
However , this bill has yet to be passed by the French government .
Until then no date for final acceptance has been set .
According to the information received by the Commission from the French administration , no decision has been made to postpone the transposition of the directive until 2002 .
However , contrary to expectations , it was decided not to include the bill in the outstanding order of business of the French parliament for this spring .
Even if , as we have been told , this is due to the huge workload of parliament , this delay represents a serious and regrettable development .
The Commission therefore decided on 8 May 2001 to take France to court for failing to transpose the directive .
Given the call by the European Council in Lisbon in March 2000 for the liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets to be speeded up and , given the progress made in transposing the directive in the other Member States , it is regrettable that a legal basis for transposing the directive has yet to be created .
This is seriously obstructing the development of an internal market and the creation of equal conditions of competition in the European Union .
Even if the delays in the transposition of the gas directive in France are extremely regrettable , they are no reason to relax our efforts to speed up the liberalisation of energy in Europe or to delay the creation of an internal energy market .
On the contrary , the delays demonstrate that further steps are needed and that these steps must be selected in a balanced manner in order to safeguard equal terms of competition .
That is why it is especially important for France to get on and transpose the 1998 directive .
The new Commission proposals are still important and urgent with respect to competitiveness , low prices for private consumers and employment .
The Commission is therefore determined to continue to make decisive progress with this file .
Mr President , it is a matter of great sorrow that we have to point the finger at one Member State - one of the founder Member States of this Union - for not fulfilling its solemn undertakings , for being prepared to act against the laws of the European Union and indeed for taking the law into its own hands .
It is with real concern that we also have to point the finger yet again at the Council of Ministers : while it knows full well that Member States are not fulfilling their existing undertakings , it glibly goes on producing communiqués of fine words , which advocate even further moves to liberalisation , completion of the single market , increased cross-border trade and fair competition .
Only this month , after the Energy Council of 14 / 15 May , the presidency concluded : " There is broad consensus ... " ( does that consensus include France ? ) " ... that the market opening concerning both gas and electricity should be actively pursued and accelerated . "
The presidency also declared , on behalf of the energy ministers - did that include the French energy minister ? - : " A fully integrated single market for gas and electricity cannot be achieved without efficient cross-border trade . "
Regrettably , we hear the hollow echo of those fine but increasingly empty words at Lisbon about making Europe the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world .
And yet in so many critical areas the will is just not there at Member State government level to implement the essentials which have been agreed through all the Union 's checks and balances .
Why should France expect the other Member States to fulfil their side of the bargain and let France take over their markets and companies , when it procrastinates repeatedly or refuses to pay its dues to the club ?
Why should France , or any other Member State which acts in like manner , expect to reap the benefits of membership when it blatantly disregards its obligations ?
The irony is that France is not only disadvantaging its fellow members ; it is not just undermining the very essence of the European Union , the single market and fair , open competition , it is also disadvantaging its own energy-using industries .
It is also disadvantaging its own people , especially the less affluent , who are being denied the price and the service benefits which would flow from allowing competition and liberalisation of the gas market .
Worse even than this , however , is the cynicism of the Council 's communiqué after the May Energy Council .
It did not dare to mention this impasse caused by one of those members actually sitting at the table , but glibly committed itself , including , I assume , the French energy minister , to further , bigger and faster liberalisation of the energy markets .
Can we believe a word it says ?
Where stands the credibility of the Council and the whole European Union ?
At the very least , it is the Commission 's solemn duty to uphold Community legislation and not to be browbeaten in any way by powerful and intransigent Member States or arrogant political forces .
If Member States cannot be trusted to fulfil their obligations , then , sadly , the only option is to bring to bear the full force of Community law and to exact substantial retribution .
Will the Commissioner please assure us that such steps will be pursued assiduously without any grace or favour ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question that was asked directly concerns the French situation and the answers that have been given make this quite clear .
Although it is quite true that the French government has not yet begun , even now , to incorporate the European directive on liberalising the gas sector , it is nonetheless true that in practice , the conditions for exercising free competition have been met .
It is not quite accurate to say today that the French gas market is not open to competition .
The French government has opted to incorporate this directive in a measured and gradual way , which provides a greater opening for the major eligible clients , including the chemical , electrolysis or steel industries , for example .
This position is no different , however , from that of the German government , which expressed its views at the Stockholm European Council and thereby sought to demonstrate its concern to develop an alternative in Europe to what here we would call the British blueprint for totally liberalising the energy sectors .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us make no mistake about this .
What is at stake here is maintaining a public service in its role as a tool for social and territorial cohesion .
We take the view that incorporating the European directive must , therefore , be an opportunity to produce a precise , updated and ambitious definition of what we mean by ' public service ' , which is a concept we have often debated in this House .
I would also like to talk about energy policy , environmental protection , sustainable development , security , social and territorial solidarity and also about local development , about developing balance between geographical areas and about everyone ' s right to energy .
For all of these reasons , Commissioner , I ask the European Commission to quickly carry out a preliminary assessment , even before the second phase of liberalising the markets begins , so that we can preserve the European energy public service sector .
I have also taken good note of the European lesson given on this matter by my British fellow Member .
Where the dispossessed are concerned , however , Mr Purvis , those who would not benefit , as you say , from the gas sector being liberalised , I can reassure you today that , in my country , no one needs to suffer as a result of the situation in place there .
Mr President , the Commission has decided to haul France up before the Court of Justice because of its delays in liberalising the gas market , as laid down in the 1998 directive .
Opening up the energy sector to competition is indeed vehemently opposed by the unions , which reject the idea that the right to energy should be regulated by the dictates of money .
In 1997 and 1998 , our group opposed this directive .
Because we refused to accept the creation of a system based on competition , we proposed guaranteeing a fair supply at the best price , the fair treatment of users and a standardised system of charges .
Energy is of strategic importance to the Member States ' economies and should not , therefore , be considered to be a commodity like any other .
If we implement the directive suddenly , we risk putting all gas operations solely in the hands of huge multinational groups , and thereby seeing the conditions of public service deteriorate .
Once again , it has to be said that the Commission appears to be in more of a hurry to see the principles of free competition applied than to worry about the fate of employees .
Instead of contributing to speeding up the process of liberalisation and deregulation , should the Commission , when presented with any new proposal , not undertake a study of the consequences of plans for liberalisation on employment , on working conditions and regional planning ?
I therefore call on the Commission to renounce its dogmatic position and to withdraw its charges at the Court of Justice .
The debate is closed .
The Commission has declined to respond to any of the questions that have been put .
Therefore we will adjourn until the vote at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 6.20 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

VOTE
The next item is the vote
Report ( A5-0145 / 2001 ) by Mr Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters ( COM ( 2000 ) 495 - C5-0631 / 2000 - 2000 / 2295 ( COS ) )
Mr President , on a point of order .
I am not sure whether it is too late to raise this point , but there is a point concerning translation , given that Italian is the original version of the Di Lello Finuoli report .
Throughout the text , the word ' execution ' is used , meaning , of course , execution simply in the sense of carrying out a penalty .
However , in relation to criminal matters , in ordinary English ' execution ' has a very particular meaning and one which attracts considerable hostility in this House and goes against our views on human rights .
I think an equally good English translation of the Italian would be ' implementation ' r