Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 29 May 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the part-session of Thursday 29 May 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , the Minutes of 29 May show a considerably larger attendance than we get on the last day of a Strasbourg session .
I suggest that this is because the French authorities are unable to offer a decent service by air or any other means to get home after a meeting .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , I understand how every Monday in Strasbourg , we have the same question . I can only give the usual answer : that I refer this matter to the French authorities .
You know that the French authorities have responded with a proposal to the European Council on fixing the institutions ' seats and timetables .
Mr President , I have a genuine point on the Minutes .
You will recall that I raised the matter of the Norwegian salmon dumping case on Wednesday .
I returned to the matter on Thursday .
We have still not had an answer to our question which was why we as a parliament have been unable to gain access to the Commission to hear what was going on , whereas the Norwegian Government seems to have been able to talk to every single Commissioner .
I want to know when we can question the Commission on this issue .
The deal has now been done to Norway 's benefit and we are entitled to know when we can hear about it .
Thank you , Mr Macartney .
I shall forward your remark to the Commission .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , I want to ask about the management of this building .
Since we last met in Strasbourg , someone has torn down and removed a poster I had on my door commemorating French and German resistance to Hitler .
I see the difficult of policing an institution which contains the likes of Mr Bernard Antony , who was convicted on 15 May in Montpellier for racism , fined FF 50 , 000 and received a six-mont suspended jail sentence , and Roberta Angelilli who endorsed the re-enactment of the book-burning of Hitler 's Nazis in Rome , but can the President assure me that in future the security services will try to ensure we are protected from this kind of vandalism ?
Mr Ford , your complaint will be noted and referred to the security services , who must protect members ' posters from acts of vandalism .
Mr President , I should like to appeal to you personally , as a gifted lawyer and long-time leading member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , to intervene in the situation in the Netherlands which has resulted in various technical provisions of European law becoming null and void .
The country is facing a legal disaster as a result of an absolutely incredible blunder on the part of the government in failing to notify Brussels of some 340 provisions , which are therefore now cancelled .
For example , the breathalyser test can no longer be used in the Netherlands because the relevant provision is now void .
It was the previous government rather than the present one that was responsible for this .
What I would ask you to do - and I shall be discussing this with Mr Wijsenbeek this evening , since we two are the only Dutch lawyers here , and in the Legal Affairs Committee - is to urge the Council of Ministers of Justice ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Janssen van Raay , this is not the time to raise that question .
It is a matter for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Mr President , I should like to urge the Commission , in particular the Transport section , to bring forward a report on the transport of nuclear material .
At the present time aircraft carrying plutonium are flying over Member States including the UK .
It is a matter of extreme urgency that this matter is resolved as quickly as possible .
I would therefore respectfully ask you to prevail upon the Commission to bring forward an up-to-date report on the transport of nuclear waste .
Mr Morris , if you have put this matter to the Commission , I shall ensure that they answer you .
Mr President , the British Sunday Times on 1 June this year carried an article in which it indicated that the new British Government was maintaining a computer database on the activities , questions and speeches of Members of this Parliament .
Mr Hugh Kerr specifically was mentioned .
I am not aware whether other Members are being monitored and surveyed in this way by the British Government .
I wish to know whether this action constitutes a breach of the privileges of this House .
Mr Perry , I would rather interpret this information , if it is true , as a sign of the interest shown by a Member State Government in the European Parliament 's activities .
We are forever asking Member States to take an interest in the European Parliament 's work , and so it is a good sign that a new government should be concerned with these matters .
That is how I would prefer to interpret this .
Mr President , I raised orally the question of interpreting at interparliamentary delegations ' meetings , with reference in particular to the delegation for relations with Kazakhstan and the other central Asian republics .
I am the vice-chairman of that delegation . The trip was arranged for early May .
The meeting went ahead as scheduled , but even though I wanted to take part and thought that I could make a useful contribution I was unable to do so because I had been informed that there would be no Greek interpretation .
In addition to my oral query I wrote to you about the matter , and after an awfully long wait I have received a letter form you in reply in which you say that you do not know who decided that interpreting should not be available for all of the languages of the participants in interparliamentary delegations and that in the case in question interpreting from Russian and English suffices .
I do not know on what criteria that decision to exclude all of the other languages was taken .
I am concerned about Greek , because as a member I must be able to participate .
Why do I raise the matter ?
Firstly because I had to wait so long for your reply . But that could be excused , perhaps , bearing in mind your workload .
The real issue , though , is that we cannot do our job .
Somewhere - in the Rules - there ought to be a stipulation that Members who wish to participate in the various bodies and committees must , inter alia , be familiar with English and Russian or have knowledge of German , because that is the reality of the situation .
Effectively you are sidelining us .
Mr Ephremidis , I think that this matter has been considered by the Conference of delegation Chairmen and you will be informed as to why only two languages were on offer in this case and the possible solutions to the problem .
Mrs McNally , of course the time limit can be extended but , as for the signing of written declarations , may I remind you that the relevant procedure is laid down in the Rules and any change would require a change to those Rules .
In Brussels , the place where written declarations are signed is just beneath the hemicycle and here in Strasbourg , if I am not mistaken , it is just next door .
Order of business
The final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents ( at its meeting of Thursday 5 June 1997 ) pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
No amendments have been proposed .
I give the floor to Mrs Green .
Mr President , following the meeting of my group this evening there are a couple of changes which we would like to put to you .
Firstly , as you know , we in the Conference of Presidents supported the movement of the McIntosh report on aviation safety from Tuesday to Thursday .
We did that on the understanding that the Commissioner would be available on Thursday to deal with this issue .
We understand now that this is not the case .
Whilst we understand the reasons why the report was moved and are in favour of being as helpful as we can , we would ask the rapporteur if she would consider moving the report to July so that it can be dealt with when the Commissioner is available .
It is a very serious issue and we want to make sure that it is properly debated and dealt with .
Thursday does not seem like a good idea .
The second proposal is that we currently have a deadline of 4 p.m. tomorrow for compromise motions and amendments on the IGC and the Amsterdam Summit .
The outcome of the vote which takes place tonight in the Committee on Institutional Affairs , where , as you know , there are 134 amendments to the text on the IGC , will not be available for consideration by the groups before the deadline for amendments expires .
I am therefore asking for an extension of that deadline for compromise texts and amendments until , perhaps , 10 a.m. on Wednesday .
That would allow all groups tomorrow evening to assess whether they want to make further amendments to the texts which will only emerge from the Institutional Affairs Committee tonight .
Mr President , I am rather surprised that we are still talking about the McIntosh report , which has now been moved to Thursday , since I assumed that if no written comments were received , the agenda would remain as it stands .
However , if as it now seems , the Commissioner is unable to attend , then I think we can agree to postpone the report to the July part-session , since the second June meeting is already full .
What we do have a problem with are the two resolutions on the IGC and the other items on the agenda for the Amsterdam summit .
I gather from Mrs Green 's proposal that if the amendments are to be tabled by Wednesday morning , the vote would be held on Thursday .
I do not think this is a good idea for such an important issue - we have already discussed it in our group - and I think it would be much better to set the deadline for tabling amendments at 7 p.m. or even 7.30 p.m. for once , rather than 4 p.m. , so that everyone has the chance of further discussion in their groups .

We would go along with the Socialist Group to that extent , but I do not think it is a good idea not to vote on Wednesday .
I would therefore ask how late it is technically possible to set the deadline so that we can still be sure of voting on Wednesday ?
Mr President , I have a point about the sitting on Tuesday .
About ten minutes before the start of this sitting , I received a copy of a letter addressed to you , presumably because I am the rapporteur for the agriculture budget .
The President of the Council of Agriculture Ministers informs us that he cannot attend the prices debate tomorrow afternoon , but proposes to come tomorrow evening instead .
I would suggest that we should vote on this point at 9 a.m. tomorrow morning , so that we can have time for discussion in the Committee on Agriculture and perhaps also with Commissioner Fischler .
I would therefore ask that we should decide at 9 a.m. tomorrow whether to postpone the debate on farm prices until 9 p.m. tomorrow evening .

Mr President , we also think it would be most unfortunate if we do not vote on Wednesday .
It would be sending out entirely the wrong political signal on such an important issue to hold the debate on Wednesday morning , but not to have the vote until the next day .
We therefore support the idea of being able to table amendments and compromises later , at 8 p.m. or 9 p.m. instead of 4 p.m. , depending on the technical constraints .
Let us take one part at a time .
Postponement of McIntosh report
First of all , we have Mrs Green 's proposal , supported by the EPP Group , to postpone the McIntosh report until the July part-session .
I am going to put the proposal to the vote . May I remind Mrs Green and other members that this is an exception because proposals for amendments should , under the Rules , be tabled one hour before the part-session begins , at the latest .
( Parliament approved the request ) - Deadline for tabling ( European Council )
The second point raised by Mrs Green concerns the deadline for tabling amendments on the Amsterdam European Council .
The deadline can be extended until 4 p.m.
Tuesday , so that resolutions can be voted on on Wednesday .
Groups must display responsibility and not table too many amendments , so that the vote can be completed , given the importance of this subject .
Mr President , I am trying to be helpful .
I understand why we would want to vote on Wednesday .
We could support that provided our Group and most of the other groups which meet in the evening on Tuesday have at least some opportunity to discuss the amendments and the text that comes out of the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
My Group meets at 7 o 'clock , so it is quite impossible for us to have the amendments in by 6 o 'clock .
We will try to keep them to an absolute minimum .
Even a deadline of 8 o 'clock will only allow us an hour to discuss these issues with a group of 214 .
You see the pressure we are under !
Obviously 9 o 'clock would make it much easier for us .
If we can all agree with that , then we will do all we can to facilitate matters for the services .
We will even give drafts in advance , which we can then perhaps adjust in minor ways afterwards .
We will do everything we can to be helpful .
Mrs Green , that means that we would vote on Thursday ?
Mr President , I would like to propose that if we can have a deadline of 9 o 'clock - and we will facilitate matters as much as we can for the services - we should vote on Wednesday .
We will try to do it .
But if it is technically impossible , because amendments are numerous and complicated , then we will have to hold the vote on Thursday .
We will know by Wednesday morning .
In any case , my services tell me that we can put 9 o 'clock if we have amendments by that time .
Requests for split votes must be in by 6 o 'clock , but we would accept amendments until 9 o 'clock .
Mr President , I do not have much experience of procedural debates here , but Mrs OomenRuijten has been extremely helpful in explaining matters , drawing on her own wealth of experience .



However , I would also refer to the practice adopted by Mr Hänsch in the past , whereby votes had to be taken as soon as possible after the debates .
This seems a very good rule to me , and as Mrs Aelvoet said , it would be sending out the wrong political signal if we held the debate on Wednesday morning but did not vote until Thursday afternoon .
I therefore agree with your proposal , Mr President , that we should have our meetings by 9 p.m. tomorrow night - our group too does not meet until 7 p.m. and that we should have until 9 p.m. to table any amendments .
I would urge most strongly that we should vote on Wednesday afternoon after the debate .
I agree , that is what I said .
Mr President , I entirely agree with the proposal that we should keep the number of amendments to a minimum and that we should have them in by 9 p.m.
However , what I cannot understand is why we need to decide which split votes we want by 6 p.m.
I do not see why it has to be so early , since there is really not a problem with getting things translated - the President of the sitting just reads out the split vote that has been requested - but simply of preparing the votes .
I honestly cannot see why , if the amendments are to be in by 9 p.m. , we cannot also have until then to consider which sections need a split vote .
I simply cannot see the reason for this .
This is an exceptional vote , and that is why we are exceptionally setting an 8 o 'clock deadline .
The European Parliament 's services will pull out all the stops so that we can vote on Wednesday .
Mr President , I am surprised at this result , because the groups are being very helpful to the plenary .
After all , we have to have the opportunity to consider what will only come out of committee tonight .
You are giving us one hour , which makes it extremely difficult not only to discuss the amendments we might wish to submit but to submit them in a form acceptable to the plenary .
That is very tough going !
I cannot see why , if we must vote Wednesday - and I accept it would be better to vote then - we cannot say that if there are too many amendments and it cannot be dealt with by lunchtime Wednesday , we will have a special voting session at 5 o 'clock .
After all this House is sovereign .
We need to be able to discuss these issues .
It is not just the vote that is important .
The whole issue is important .
The groups ' response to the discussion on the IGC is crucial .
So I would still ask that it be 9 o 'clock .
My Group has 214 members .
It is not easy to discuss this issue and submit the amendments in one hour .

Mrs Green , the deadline will be at 9 p.m. , but I take note of what you have said : if everything is not ready for the vote on Wednesday , late in the morning , then the vote will have to be at 5 p.m.
We cannot vote unless decent translations are ready and all the preparations have properly been completed .
Agricultural debate
The third point concerns the joint debate on agricultural prices .
I have just received a letter from the Dutch Agriculture Minister to the effect that he must attend a national parliament sitting in the afternoon .
I can suggest two scenarios : either the debate will be held from 9 p.m. to midnight on Tuesday - when he would be present - or we hold a debate with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I give the floor to Mr Colino , chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , I am surprised by this announcement , for reasons you have explained , that the Dutch Minister , President-in-Office of the Council , will not be here , and I think it would be preferable for him to attend the debate .
I would not oppose postponing the debate until 9 p.m. to midnight on Tuesday , in accordance with this request , as long as the Minister will attend in that case .
The Minister 's letter states quite clearly : ' I shall be able to attend the debate from 9 p.m. to midnight .
I would therefore be grateful if the debate on agricultural prices were postponed until the evening ' .
It seems quite clear .
I put to the House the proposal to postpone the debate on agricultural prices to Tuesday evening .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
The order of business has been adopted thus amended .
Mr President , it was actually intended that there should be a joint debate .
So are we now going to have a debate just on agricultural prices , or on the whole complex that is on the agenda ?
Thank you very much , for your question , which gives me the opportunity to make it clear that this is the joint debate that we are talking about .
Mr President , I must object .
We agreed on one point , and that was the discussion about agricultural prices .
It is simply not right that we should go on discussing this whole complex until midnight .
There will be no Members left in the House by then !
I understand your argument , as your Group voted against .
But the majority of the European Parliament has decided otherwise .
Mrs Lulling , you have the floor .
Mr President , my report also concerns agriculture , bee-keeping to be precise .
I do not see what it has to do with agricultural prices and we could quite easily examine it in the afternoon , like the Baldarelli report , as the agenda states .
Is that not possible ?
Mrs Lulling , according to the agenda , you report was not part of the joint debate .
It is therefore unaffected by this decision .
The decision was to postpone the joint debate but not the other items . In other words , not your report .
Petitions 1996-1997
The next item is the report ( A4-0190 / 97 ) by Mr Perry , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 1996-1997 .
Mr President , I present the annual report on the work of the Committee on Petitions .
I find that wherever people are in the world , they tend to perceive themselves as being at the centre of the universe .
I find that whichever committee in this Parliament colleagues are members of , they regard that committee as the most important , the most vital and central to the work of Parliament .
They can all make a good case , whether it is the Budgets Committee , Environment , Women 's Rights , Regional Affairs or whatever .
They are all doing important work .
I know that the Committee on Petitions is not universally regarded as the most important .
In fact I describe it to my constituents as the complaints department of the Parliament .
We do not decide policy , we make no legislation , we control no budgets , which are the ways you normally decide power and influence .
But we do listen to the people of Europe ; and in a democratic process can anybody tell me anything that is more important than to listen to the citizens ' concerns and problems ?
Citizens take their right to petition seriously .
In the last ten years the number of petitions has doubled from 500 to over 1 , 000 per annum .
There has been a slight decrease this year , which was to be expected with the advent of the European Ombudsman .
The committee has established good working methods with the Ombudsman and I pay tribute to the work and the good relations that exist .
The Committee on Petitions performs the role of listener on behalf of the Parliament .
Last year saw a petition with over 4 million signatures objecting to tests on live animals by the cosmetics industry .
But it is the opportunity for the individual to get redress of grievances that is important .
Colleague Mary Banotti works very hard on the issue of tug-of-love children , working as your representative to solve those very personal problems .
There was a young man in Luxembourg who got the tax authorities there to repay him tax .
Nobody can do a better job than getting the taxman to pay money back !
Even in my own constituency a petitioner complained that his pension had been miscalculated and he got several thousand pounds back pay .
The committee works in a harmonious way across our national and political divisions .
I certainly want to pay tribute to last year 's chairman , Mr Newman , and my political colleague , Mr Fontana , who is the chairman this year .
I also wish to place on record the committee 's appreciation of the work of its secretariat and the work of the Commission .
Their reports are invariably thorough , well-researched and presented in a helpful way .
Sadly my report is not all plaudits .
The Council of Ministers is often conspicuous by its absence .
I wonder whether they are in the debate this evening .
Yet a significant proportion of our petitions comes from citizens who believe that Member States are failing to honour their obligations to the European Treaties .
There might be issues of social security , respect for the environment - a whole myriad of problems arise because it is citizens who seek to put the Treaties into effect by living , working , studying where they wish in Europe .
It is not yet always as easy as we wish it to be , or indeed as we fondly might believe it to be .
Attendance by representatives of the Council frequently and regularly at meetings of the Committee on Petitions might obviate that sort of problem .
It is not just the Council I comment on .
Our own services - and even some of our committees - pay scant attention to the work of the Committee on Petitions .
To my mind , when a committee of the Parliament is asked by the Committee on Petitions for an opinion they should believe there can be no higher priority than heeding the pleas of the citizen who thinks Europe is not working .
In the report we have also asked the press and publicity offices to pay more attention .
These are human interest stories ; they show what Europe means to the individual ; they show that Parliament is the protector of the individual and we should be shouting our successes from the rooftops .
The report contains a proposed formula that sets out what European citizens are entitled to expect of bodies that administer regulations and directives , whether these bodies are national governments or the Commission .
They cover such obvious issues as transparency of rules , who is in charge of a service , the right to prompt attention to a case within a published timescale .
In Britain these administrative standards are contained within a Citizens ' Charter and this is a model which the Commission could well study and emulate where appropriate across Europe .
I hope we shall find a mechanism for establishing that formula of good administrative practice as a European citizens ' charter .
Finally , as a committee we urge that the ' Citizens First ' information campaign should not neglect to remind citizens of their worthwhile right to petition the Parliament to help ensure that the rights of the European citizen are respected .
First of all I should like to congratulate Mr Perry on his excellent report .
This annual report , and the way in which it has been drawn up , are a sign and expression of the excellent cooperation , above all party-political considerations , that characterizes our work on this committee .
The Committee on Petitions has been in existence for ten years now , and during that time it has received about 10 , 000 petitions with about 10 billion signatures .
We can quite rightly claim that the Committee on Petitions forms the link between the citizens of the EU and its institutions .
The people of the European Union come to the Committee on Petitions with their concerns , their negative experiences and their desires .
Often we are able to help them solve their problems , but often our hands are tied because , even when there is European involvement , the legal basis needed in order to take action is lacking .
In that case , the matter turns out to be a national problem after all .
Sometimes , however , the Committee on Petitions , as an institution , is completely misunderstood .
We are regarded , as it were , as the highest instance , along the following lines : I , the petitioner , have complained to my local authority , then to the regional authority , and then to the national petitions committee .
None of them upheld my claim , so I am now going to go to the European Parliament and complain there .
Of course , that is not what our competence is all about .
We are not the Supreme Court .
One problem that we still have to overcome is the problem of time .
Petitioners have to wait too long for a reply , or for the solution to their problem .
It takes some time , after a petition is first received by post , for it to be summarized , checked in advance to see whether it is admissible or not , and then translated into eleven languages .
Once the Committee has decided on a recommendation , then the real work begins .
The Commission , thank goodness , has finally complied with our request and is trying to process petitions very rapidly , but they are still being held up at the level of the Member States and the Council .
They operate very slowly , particularly when an infringement of Community law is involved .
Insufficient information is made available ; in other words , in most cases it is incomplete , and it is also too slow .
We are asking for more precise and more rapid information and replies from Member States .
We need firmly agreed deadlines , and all those people who are involved in the expansion and coordination of the electronic data-processing system could help here .
Because , since 1992 , the Committee on Petitions has been meeting in public , and because the petitioners are always asked whether they want their petitions to be handled in public or not , this should not cause any difficulties with data protection either .
The participation and hearing of petitioners by the Committee is often desirable as a matter of urgency , and we try to be fair in arranging for this to be done .
For example , on the petition about opencast lignite mining in Garzweiler , because we as a committee thought that the information provided by the petitioners was insufficient , we decided to send a fact-finding mission there .
The visit will be taking place next week .
Unfortunately too much of our work still goes on out of the public eye .
Many of the initiatives of the other committees , and legislative initiatives by the Commission , too , are closely linked to the petitions dealt with by the Committee , because people are constantly discovering defects and deficiencies in European Directives and statutory provisions .
So we are also requesting that the European Parliament 's offices should be better informed about the right of petition .
The public should be informed about the petitions that are being examined , and above all about the petitions for which solutions have been found .
Only in this way can we , as elected representatives of EU citizens , establish a closer link with them and put into practice our oft-quoted desire to be ' close to the people ' .
Mr President , this is an unexpected bonus for me .
I am replacing Mr Fontana and , as an active member of the Committee on Petitions , I wish to take this opportunity to inform Parliament that we have had some extremely good news in relation to children who have been abducted .
In the past year children who have been missing - in some cases for up to 18 months - have been recovered .
There was a very notable case where a German child had been abducted to Western Samoa and there were others abducted to France and North Africa .
With the considerable help of your office and of Parliament we have had some significant successes in returning these children to their parents .
This has resulted in some very good publicity for Parliament .
People recognize it as a human issue and , while we are not going about it strictly speaking as lawyers , through Parliament we have considerable influence in putting pressure on local authorities who might be ignoring these cases assuming them just to be domestic tiffs .
When we ring from Parliament I have noticed a considerable willingness on the part of many authorities , legal and social , to take these cases seriously and to give us wonderful help in the process .
Another matter on which the Committee on Petitions has been lobbied intensely is the difficulties many teachers experience working in other Member States .
Every Member State has its own sneaky little tricks for making sure that people do not find it too easy to go to other countries and practice their professions .
So , in the context of the directive on free movement and practice of the professions , we hope there will be improvements here .
I also had the honour of being the rapporteur for the report on disability .
A petition by over 3 , 000 people with disabilities throughout the Community resulted in my report which I am proud to say was passed unanimously last December .
Another petition also raised very serious issues .
Two of my constituents petitioned Parliament when their parents died in a carbon monoxide poisoning incident in a holiday apartment in Spain .
As a direct result of this petition we have discovered some very alarming things about some gas heaters , including the fact that 61 people died in Belgium last year as a direct result of carbon monoxide poisoning from water heaters .
Thus , issues far beyond the actual content of the petition have been raised .
As Mr Perry has rightly said , the people of Europe are effectively probing the laws of Europe , the directives of Europe and the issues that concern them most closely .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Perry for the report , which I think is an excellent piece of work .
It does seem true that , as Mr Perry says , people tend to think that the particular committee in which they are currently active is the most important one in Parliament .
But , that said , I think we can safely say that the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman together really focus on the most vital areas of the Union 's work .
There are very few other agencies through which citizens have the same direct contact with the Union .
This is where the individual citizen can get a concern addressed in an entirely concrete way .
Unfortunately of course , it is often because there is something wrong in the relationship between Member States - after all that is what the Committee on Petitions deals with - but it is possible for the citizen to lodge a complaint or raise matters more or less at no cost .
Where else in the Union is it possible to get a case off the ground without spending huge amounts on legal assistance ?
It is possible when the matter is raised with the Committee on Petitions .
But , precisely because this is where the individual citizen comes into direct contact with the Union , it is important that the procedure should be as effective as possible .
And , as we have the President in the Chair , I would like to say - and I hope the President is listening even though this is in Danish - that , when it comes to the use of information technology in the conduct of business in Parliament , there is a great deal lacking .
Things get almost completely impossible when one ventures into this area , and I think that , particularly when fifteen countries have to cooperate , it is absolutely vital to make use of computer systems and information technology .
Mr President , I want to start by congratulating Mr Perry on the first class report he has presented to us and then ask the House to bear in mind that the right of petition is one of the fundamental rights of European citizens .
The exercise of this right currently represents one of the few points of direct contact with the European institutions available to the European citizen .
So it is essential that we activate this right fully .
It has already been said , and I want to underline it , that in the last ten years some ten thousand petitions have been presented and millions of citizens have signed them .
That is why it is important for all the parliamentary committees to be involved in activating this right , and not just the Committee on Petitions . It is also vital to find a way of amending the Rules of Procedure so that a rapid response can be given to all the petitions we receive .
We have taken a considerable time to respond today , and we cannot maintain dialogue with the citizens of Europe and protect this right for them unless the response procedure is changed to make it faster and easier .
Here I must also mention that the Commission collaborates too slowly , but at least it does , whereas the Council hardly collaborates at all .
A strong request needs to be made on this point too if the right of petition is to be fully realized .
Mr President , the annual report by the Committee on Petitions naturally contains little that is controversial .
There is no doubt that there must be mechanisms at every level of government to protect people against abuses of power or the indifference of officialdom .
For example , support and help needs to be given to frontier workers within the European Union facing problems with their tax or pension administrations .
However , it is most regrettable that when this ideal is put into practice using all our highly detailed Community law , it is invariably presented as a kind of victory for democracy .
I would point out that in many cases Community law is introduced in a way that could not remotely be described as democratic , either because decisions are taken behind closed doors where no one monitors what happens , or because they are taken at a level so far removed from the man in the street that there can be no question of controls , let alone involvement .
Let me give you an example .
The Maastricht Treaty provides that in all the Member States , even people who do not have the nationality of the country concerned must have the right to vote in European and local council elections .
This was a totally arbitrary idea , the brainchild of a purely pro-European ideology .
It was a decision taken over people 's heads and was not even welcomed by the people concerned , as we can see from the fact that the most recent European elections were a major flop amongst the electorate in question .
For the last three years , I have been asking the Commission at regular intervals for the turn-out figures , and they have always claimed that they are unable to provide them , even now , three years after the event .
In my own country , this European decision is threatening to result in cultural genocide - there is no other word for it - for Flemings around Brussels and in Brussels itself .
Tens of thousands of new voters , almost by definition not Dutch-speaking , of course , are threatening to create a tidal wave of support for the French-speaking parties .
These French-speaking parties represent people who think that they belong to a sort of ' Herrenvolk ' that does not need to adapt itself to the language of the country in which it settles , but thinks instead that the native population , the Flemings , the Dutch speakers , should adapt themselves to the newcomers .
This modern form of cynical and brutal colonialism is now being supported by a European decision which the vast majority of my people did not want and which has to be seen as helping to promote cultural genocide .
The Flemish Parliament has actually adopted a motion linking the right to vote in European elections to a number of very strict conditions and restrictions , but it looks very much as if the decision taken by Europe over everyone 's heads carries more weight than the democratic wishes of the Flemish Parliament .
It is examples like this which make me think that Europe is often actually harmful to the interests , survival and identity of the nations of the Union . That is why I have become a eurosceptic and why I cannot endorse this report , uncontroversial though it may be .
Madam President , I too wish to compliment Mr Perry on his report and to thank him .
We should recognize , of course , that the report is the product of the committee as a whole , as is reflected in the unanimous approval given to it and the constructive additions made via amendments throughout the period during which it was being drawn up .
The Perry report follows the lead set by the Gutiérrez Díaz report last year and the Kuhn report in 1995 in enhancing the standing of the Committee on Petitions .
Yes , it is true that the Committee on Petitions is not the most exalted of this Parliament 's committees . However , as a committee , it is not the same as the others .
The right of the citizen to petition is a fundamental right recognized in the treaties and the European Parliament has a duty to promote that right . And it is the Committee on Petitions which is charged , in the name of this Parliament , with the task of supporting and making a reality of the right of the European citizen to petition .
This right of the citizen to approach the European Parliament directly provides us with a good tool for monitoring the European venture on the ground .
It is form of ongoing check , a form of public scrutiny of Community law through the eyes of ordinary people who very frequently find themselves up against adverse circumstances in their everyday lives .
I think that this message is good news to very large numbers of people .
The fact , I mean , that the European Parliament has this committee which is now able to protect and promote the rights of the citizen in concert with the institution of the European Ombudsman .
Madam President , I join colleagues in thanking the rapporteur for his report , which was quite excellent , as was his presentation .
But , of course , as the last speaker has said , the report is a reflection of the work of the Committee on Petitions as a whole .
I am an outsider , ie , I am not a member of the Petitions Committee , but I have , from time to time , constituents with knotty problems .
I must confess that we have had our share of failures .
I am the first to acknowledge that the committee has been successful on many fronts .
We have heard in particular from Mrs Banotti how children have benefitted from the work of the Petitions Committee .
But the hard fact is that there are a number of knotty problems and some of them have come through my own hands .
I have not been able to satisfy the constituents concerned ; not at least until now .
That may or may not be the fault of the Petitions Committee .
It may or may not be the fault of the Commission .
But one gets the feeling that some people sometimes are not doing their stuff .
I would put the Commission officials in that category .
Who do I have in mind ?
I have in mind , for instance , my excellent constituent , Mr Peter Thomas .
He won a case against the Greek railways several years ago and he is owed several thousand pounds by them .
Have they honoured that ?
Certainly not !
They have not paid him for breach of contract .
The thing drags on and on and my constituent is in serious trouble with his bank manager .
That is case one .
Case two : I have a constituent - Mr Hawthorne - who had a villa in Malaga , in Spain .
This was sold when he was not looking .
He only owed them a very small loan .
He has been struggling now for six years with the Spanish courts and we have not had any help yet , effectively , from this Parliament .
I feel slightly ashamed about that .
Madam President , I think this is a very useful report , as we are seeing from the debate , because it gives an account of the work of the Committee on Petitions - an account fully deserved by the Committee on Petitions and its secretariat .
But we must realise that we are far from making the effective and necessary response expected by Europe 's citizens , who are turning to us in droves , submitting very important cases , cases affecting their fundamental interests - and we have not been able , as I said , to provide the desired effective response to these petitions , to these requests and to the defence of their rights and interests .
We have not been able to do that for two types of reasons : one might even be our fault because of the difficulty entailed in informing citizens that this facility does exist ; that is bound up also with the lugubrious and complex nature , in spite of everything , of the actual process which also requires translation into all languages .
But , in the second place , this inability to respond quickly and positively to the requests and petitions submitted by our citizens is due to the fact that the complaints are often directed against the acts or omissions by the Member States .
And the problem is that the procedure we work to does not allow us to contact the Member States direct to compel them to respond to the wishes of the citizens .
We must therefore accept that , in order to respond effectively , the terms of the very procedures in the Treaty must be amended .
But I must not forget to point out the practical importance which petitions to the European Parliament have , for example in Portugal in the case of discrimination as regards salaries in the Banco Central Português and in the case of the customs agents , specific cases where many petitions were received - indicating that people expected an objective response to their problems from the European Parliament .
And that is why we have to improve the way we work . I also appeal to the Council and to the Member States to cooperate in the process with the Committee on Petitions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the honest report that the Committee on Petitions has presented to the House on the queries raised by European citizens gives us an excellent opportunity to think about the relationship between the citizens of Europe and the institutions of the European Union .
The Commission has placed great emphasis on this point , which is so important to the European Union , particularly during the Inter-Governmental Conference , where it was a central issue in the discussions about the future of the institutions , because the Commission believes that it is very important that citizens and institutions should be brought closer together .
It is also , at the end of the day , a question of the confidence in Europe that people are already feeling .
The right of petition is an important achievement for our citizens .
The rapid and efficient processing of petitions is therefore an excellent means of increasing people 's confidence .
When a citizen hands in a petition to Parliament , he is not only highlighting what , in his opinion , is an unsatisfactory application of Community provisions , but also , at the same time , expressing his confidence in Parliament .
He is also linking that with the expectation that what he sees as a wrong will be righted accordingly .
The Commission therefore tried hard to ensure that the questions put to it by the Committee on Petitions are answered quickly and comprehensively .
As Mr Perry has shown in his extremely informative report , this cooperation between the European Parliament and the Commission has once again this year , in many case , enabled solutions to be found and definite improvements to be made .
The thorough examination of the many different petitions is also interesting , as Mr Perry has quite rightly pointed out , for another reason , because the Committee on Petitions is the barometer of the specific issues that concern our citizens , the most important parliamentary citizens ' forum .
Since 1987 , more than 10 million European citizens have turned to Parliament , in around 10 , 000 petitions .
The subjects that chiefly concern them are social issues , the environment , taxes , free movement and the recognition of diplomas .
The Commission regards it as one of its most important tasks , in the interests of the people , to ensure that the relevant Community law is applied without restrictions , and to discover and remedy any weak points in the provisions of that law .
Parliament provides the Commission with very valuable assistance in carrying out this task .
The Commission is therefore particularly pleased about the excellent cooperation with Parliament , and Parliament 's recognition of that fact .
It will continue to give the Committee on Petitions all the information it needs in order to process petitions efficiently , and will be happy to comply with the desire expressed by the Committee on Petitions for close cooperation on the ' Citizens of Europe ' initiative .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Television broadcasting
The next item is the report ( A4-201 / 97 ) by Mr Galeote Quecedo and Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive ( C4-0203 / 97-95 / 0074 ( COD ) ) amending Council Directive 89 / 552 / EEC on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities .
Madam President , throughout the debates and the course of work on the Directive on Television without Frontiers , we have held intense discussions , often lengthy and sometimes controversial , but I think that everyone who has taken part in those discussions will agree that our recollection of the debates will be a good one .
I think that we have put in a good deal of effort and imagination and have all fought for our convictions , but with enough flexibility and room for dialogue for the debates to be a success .
I also am convinced that all of us who have discussed this issue have had as the main aim of our positions the general interest , over party interests and economic interests .
As co-rapporteur along with Mr Hoppenstedt , I must also note the leading role played by the European Parliament in this debate .
In the recitals , we have pointed out the elements always regarded as essential by the European Parliament for promoting the European audiovisual industry : fostering production by means of a Community mechanism , that could be the guarantee fund , and boosting independent producers in particular .
I should like on this point to appeal to the Commission to insist on its proposals : it will always have the European Parliament on its side in the fight to go from declarations to practical actions that could change the situation .
The European Parliament has also contributed specific solutions , such as developing a novel television phenomenon , like tele-sales , or updating the regulation on advertising , which is always debatable , but I think that this subject has emerged from our debates with a ' healthier ' regulation , if I may use that word .
Above all , the main satisfaction of the European Parliament in my view lies in its ability to be sensitive to social demands .
We have added to the Directive a reinforcement of the protection of minors ' rights and I have every hope that we could even develop this matter in a year 's time when the Commission presents the findings of its research , as reflected in the Directive .
We have also ensured the free access by ordinary people to events of great importance for society .
So that both provisions can be fully operative , we must ask the Commission to bring forward the creation of the contact committee provided for in Article 23bis of the Directive and to stick to its promise - as Commissioner Oreja has declared himself willing - to inform the European Parliament regularly of the deliberations of that contact committee .
I think that by means of tomorrow 's vote we are really going to be able to respond to the expectations raised by the debate in our respective countries , thanks to two years of intensive work by the Culture Committee .
I would like to thank , in particular , Mrs Castellina and Mr Pex , who have chaired it over that time , the effort by the Dutch Presidency and Commissioner Oreja 's involvement and skill , as well as that of his colleagues , who has so magnificently helped us throughout our discussions .
For media policy and media-policy development , what we have been doing for the last two years has made media history .
I believe that , in view of the meteoric development of electronic and digital communications , especially via satellite , we have done a good piece of work .
However , we are also aware of the fact that media developments are driving us as we move into the future .
You could say that this is a very exciting task .
In our search to find the right solutions , many people have given us their help .
This includes , of course , our fellow members , even though , in many cases , at the first or second reading we did not agree with them . It also includes the Commission , and also , as has already been pointed out , the Dutch Presidency of the Council .
However , I do not want to forget , either , the professionals who were involved , and to name the individual groups who have supported us or tried to point us in the right direction .
That would certainly be a subject that would take up the whole evening .
During the second reading , we made some important decisions , for example , about the definition of the concept of broadcasting , the differentiation of the so-called new services , and also the clear definition of advertising rules , which is naturally an important factor in setting the course for the dual system which we all wanted , without - Mrs Tongue - pressurizing public-law broadcasting in any particular way .
We have established that the quota system will be voluntary , and on this subject I have to say - and it was a very wide-ranging discussion - that everyone here in this House wants European programmes , and European films , to make up the largest contingent of our programmes .
We could do nothing by means of quotas .
It is our opinion - and mine - that quotas have never yet created programmes .
MEDIA I and II , Action Plan 16 : 9 and the Guarantee Fund which has already been mentioned , and which we still see as an important contribution to the development of European programming policy , all these , on the other hand , are elements which we trust will take European programming policy forward .
As has already been mentioned , we have had very thorough discussions on the protection of young people and , in particular , on the technical devices for switching television sets off , as the last option for those who have parental authority .
I think it was a mistake for the Council not to accept this .
In the context of the conciliation process , from which we achieved excellent results , we have commissioned a study which should once again make it clear , where young people have been placed at risk , just how great that risk is .
In addition , of course , the study should also make it clear whether a switching-off device would be a suitable tool , and whether the assessment criteria , if they cannot be harmonized at European level , could be made effective at national level .
This study , by means of a questionnaire on the subject of whether television is harmful to children , may well be superfluous , however , since there are already 5 , 000 of these studies throughout the world , so we could perhaps have made things easier for ourselves !
One important subject - and I believe this was also a satisfactory result of our conciliation procedure - is the question of how we can make sure that , even in future , consumers continue to have access to important national , cultural and sporting events .
On this question , in the course of the conciliation procedure , we proposed - and decided- that the drawing up of lists should be voluntary .
This voluntary basis will put Member States into a position - and Member States have already received the submission on this subject - to turn it into something sensible and thus decide on a suitable path into the future for their citizens and consumers , as far as participation in these events is concerned .
Owing to technical developments , we as a Parliament will in future be called on to give some thought to major developments in media policy .
This year , Parliament has taken up a key position on this issue , and I can only say , that if we continue to act - and develop as a parliament - in such a positive manner , especially where media policy is concerned , then we are moving in the right direction .
I only hope that we shall continue to work on this exciting subject .
In so doing , we shall be finding a sensible solution for our fellow-citizens of the European Union and beyond it in the worldwide network of the new media .
I should just like to thank , once again , my fellow campaigner , Mr Galeote Quecedo , and also all those colleagues who have supported us .
I should also like to thank the Commission , especially Mr Oreja , and Nicole Fontaine who , together with the Council , managed the conciliation procedure extremely successfully .
Madam President , I should like to thank our rapporteurs .
We have shown that the future of the audio-visual industry is a debate which crosses all political and national boundaries .
We have all shown a shared concern for the future of television , the most influential medium in our democracies and in conciliation we were united as a parliament which was most welcome and most important .
It is worth remembering what the directive is about .
It is about building a strong and competitive audio-visual industry which should offer more than 1 million new European jobs by the year 2000 .
We cannot tolerate a $ 6.3 billion deficit with the US .
America only accepts 3 % of audio-visual material from outside of non-US content .
Free trade must be about reciprocity .
The directive is about ensuring that we as Europeans benefit economically and culturally from this expanding industry .
We must create in order to compete .
We must make sure all our cultures have a space on our screens .
Canada , Australia , all countries across the globe ensure that there is space on their screens through quotas .
I say to Mr Hoppenstedt that European quotas are not protectionist .
The US enjoys a massive structural advantage .
It can sell programmes to us at a tenth of the cost it takes to make them and this is in part due to their own regulatory regime that they have enjoyed in the past .
Moving on to sports rights , there are two possible futures for television .
The one is driven by commercial demand and the other shaped by the public interest .
Sports rights are key .
Thanks to our amendment on sports rights every country will be able to draw up a list of key events .
This will ensure the continued success of culturally diverse free TV .
The Olympic Games and the European Cup Final , for example , must be on free TV for every citizen .
TV is Europe 's Hollywood .
The Television without Frontiers directive is our chance to show that we are really serious about jobs , investments , exports and cultural pluralism .
We must be able to create and see our own stories , be it Inspector Morse or Derrick .
We must benefit economically from this industry which will soon be the largest employer in Europe .
Finally , the major sporting and cultural events must be shown free for everyone 's enjoyment .
Madam President , now that the dust has finally settled on this directive - possibly the most lobbied directive in my experience here in the last 13 years in Parliament - let us look at some of the issues that concerned not just us here in Parliament but specifically those who were quite bemused by the complexity of this directive in terms of public perception .
The reason why I have supported quotas is - as I am sure is the case for many other colleagues - because we cannot necessarily trust our own broadcasters not to take the easy option when it comes to cheap programming .
The independent producers were very concerned about this directive , and we must recognize and support our young , independent producers , who are already producing some of the best and most interesting programmes out of Europe .
Let us look in particular at those who produce in minority languages and who , inevitably , need to have subtitles for their programmes .
Yet if we already have subtitles , it should be possible for these programmes to be seen throughout all European countries and , I hope , throughout the world - if necessary with subtitles - for they do give us a very special insight into the less well-known languages and less well-known cultures within our communities .
We must protect our public service broadcasting .
Coming from a country that has mixed public service and commercial broadcasting , we have particular problems and we must also recognize that we are not selling our own programmes to our own colleagues and other countries in the European Union .
Of course we must try to break into the lucrative American market , but first of all let us make sure that we produce programmes that will sell across our own borders , that people will be interested in and will buy , and thus add more to the pot for independent producers .
This directive has been a great catalyst : it has pulled us up short to look at what we mean by our culture and to put a value on it that perhaps was lacking in many of our other deliberations .
Madam President , a conciliation meeting of 100 minutes was deemed to be sufficient , partly because the European Parliament , in its wisdom - though not everyone would agree with that - dropped its original demands for compulsory quotas for European productions and the inclusion of new services .
The Liberal Group is happy with the high level of protection which is provided for minors in the revised directive , and I sincerely hope , Commissioner Fischler , that you will look into the question of the V-chip very carefully , and that this or some similar technical device will eventually be introduced .
I see this as a Liberal principle : the government provides the means , and it is up to parents and teachers to decide whether or not to use them .
We are also happy that the general public is to have guaranteed access to major sports events at no extra cost .
I should like to congratulate both the rapporteurs on this .
On an entirely different subject , but in the same context , I am concerned at the Dutch proposals to include a protocol on public service broadcasting in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Will governments then be able to provide unlimited funding for public service broadcasting ?
And would this not then put public service broadcasting in an entirely anomalous position with regard to European competition rules ?
Once the protocol has been adopted , could commercial radio and television complain to the Commission if they think that public service broadcasting is being given preferential treatment ?
Could government funding be used to give public service broadcasting an advantage in launching new services and breaking into new markets ?
These are matters that have nothing to do with public service and would be unacceptable to the Liberals .
I know for certain that Commissioner Van Miert finds them difficult to accept too .

We support the idea of a dual system , with strong public service broadcasting providing information and maintaining its own cultural identity , while at the same time allowing plenty of scope for commercial broadcasting - choice instead of a concentration of power , no preferential treatment , and everything on a level playing field .
We should not forget that commercial broadcasters too have to make their living on the open market , yet they are just as bound by the provisions of the ' Television without frontiers ' directive - which is as it should be , but then they should also be given equal treatment .

Madam President , Mr Hoppenstedt , Mr Galeote Quecedo , are you not astonished that there are so few people in the hemicycle - not forgetting Mrs Banotti - after two years , as you have pointed out , of such intense lobbying directed at us ?
Today , you are holding your Oscar ceremony , congratulating each other , in an empty Chamber , but you are not astonished .
The Council is represented , but no Culture Minister is here .
Mr Oreja could not be bothered to come .
Mr Bangemann , so furious over the quotas , is not here either .
Yes , nobody is here because they have won !
There is nobody here because those who want to fight and continue to fight the fight for quotas no longer believe in us .
It is also a failure for Europe and its institutions , when at the IGC we are not going to be able to call into question that false codecision , and we were 22 votes short of a qualified majority , whereas we had a simple majority , such that we opposed democracy .
Of course , we are heading in the direction of what the former White House aide , Mr Brejzinski , used to say : ' What we have not succeeded in doing by force of arms , we shall achieve by means of the information superhighways ' .
Ah yes , we are opening up the information superhighways , we are opening up our screens .
For many countries , they have in any case been largely invaded .
Then we can say that we have won .
For sport , it is the least we can do , in every corner of France and Europe , perhaps to watch the Tour de France or Wimbledon .
But is that really a victory ?
Is this a victory - I was not really a partisan , for the furious campaigners for protection from violence and pornography , to know that the solution finally opted for means that , in a year 's time , the Commission will conduct , together with the Member States ' competent authorities , an inquiry into the advantages and disadvantages of measures aimed at facilitating parental controls .
But who are they poking fun at ? !
Faced with a great challenge for civilisation - so great that the United States , since the Blum-Barnes accords , have understood that that was a priority and that that was where the future of employment lay , but also the future of culture , language , ideology - why not say so ?
The quotas battle is vital .
I hope that we shall continue to fight that fight , with trade union organisations , with professional organisations .
I can tell you that at Cannes , during the fiftieth anniversary , people were convinced by and spoke a lot about quotas .
I hope that after the elections in Great Britain and France , we shall be able to fight this fight intelligently and responsibly .
Madam President , I want to put on record , briefly , that throughout the lengthy period of work in which discussion of the Television without Frontiers Directive has been going on , the Greens have made their position clear , declaring their agreement with the text as it stood after first reading .
In that text we recognized an important step forward in the evolution of this directive , and above all we recognized that a link between television , media in general , and democracy had been established .
There is a link between television and culture and the need was recognized , not for a European culture , but for the group of different cultures that exist today in Europe to be able to have a future and not be suffocated by the domination of transmission modes and fiction , are all imported from the United States of America or , in some cases , from the Far East .
We cannot accept that situation .
The first reading provided a remedy . Unfortunately , as has been mentioned , by a few votes the second reading has radically altered the meaning of the text that came out of the first reading .
And I am not just referring to the quota problem but also , it has to be said , to the failure to include all the possible developments in television , the television of the future , in the directive . All these factors have brought the Green group to a negative position .
Now , as other colleagues have already said , in the end the outcome of the conciliation was facile and anyone can support it on certain points which are important , true , - the problem of the protection of minors , the problem of clear guarantees of transmission of national and international events , particularly sporting ones - but the sum of these is not enough to change our negative assessment of the directive as a whole in the form it has taken after second reading and after the changes made by the Council .
That is why our position is a one of criticism .
Madam President , the interest of the conciliation focused on the European Parliament proposal to guarantee the open broadcasting of major sporting events .
The text agreed upon is satisfactory and balanced , but I have to regret and denounce the fact that the Spanish Government , led by the Partido Popular , has used this provision of the Directive as a pretext to persecute the media not at the Government 's service .
The European Parliament proposal established that in all Member States it would be compulsory to broadcast openly certain sporting events of extraordinary importance , such as the Olympics , and World or European Football Championships .
For legal reasons , the Parliamentary delegation to the conciliation accepted that this rule should not be compulsory in all Member States but that it would be optional for each State .
The agreed text maintains the extraordinary character of events to be broadcast openly as an obligation , through national lists approved by the Commission .
Precautions are set to guarantee the transparency of the procedure , with respect for all principles of Community law .
In the Spanish case , however , the Government is proposing a law making football a more important general interest than education or health , banning the cable television broadcast of the regular club championship matches at weekends .
This excessive rule was particularly unnecessary since Spain is one of the countries where it is easiest to see matches broadcast live on free television channels every weekend .
This situation was guaranteed , at least until 2003 , by agreements freely adopted by the various TV companies with broadcasting rights negotiated with the clubs .
The provision contained in the Directive defends a balance between the different legal assets to be preserved .
The right to receive information must be compatible with the rights of ownership and free competition between companies possessing broadcasting rights .
But in the Aznar Government 's law on football , it is possible to withdraw those rights retroactively and without compensation .
It wants to force the various TV companies and clubs to break contracts reached freely so that a pro-Government company can take them over .
This is an abuse of authority by an authoritarian government which has declared war on the digital TV sector in order to dominate it , expelling the current operators and imposing its monopoly with communication companies close to Mr Aznar .
The Television without Frontiers Directive is being used in a wretched way in Spain in order to persecute opponents of the PP Government which are already being persecuted or threatened judicially by that government .
Nothing like this has been seen in twenty years of Spanish democracy .
Madam President , I shall be very brief because I do not want to enter into a national debate .
This is the European Parliament and not the place for that type of speech .
As far as I know , Madam President , lies are not accepted in any parliament .
Madam President , the debate on the right to televise major sporting events , incorporated in the TV directive , has been good in principle , for it is important that everybody who wishes to do so should be able to follow major sporting events on television .
It is also important for sporting discipline that they receive as much publicity as possible , since this will enable general interest in the sport to grow .
There have , however , been clear shortcomings in the preparation of the directive .
No consultation of sports organizations or competition organizers has taken place , or at least not very broadly .
The influence of the directive on these very sporting organizations and competition organizers has not been adequately explained .
The sale of TV rights is an important source of income for associations and clubs organizing sporting events .
Copyright and the EU 's principle of free competition should be taken into account in the televising of sports as of other events .
Restricting the sale of TV rights may have serious consequences for sporting activity as a whole .
The organization of major events particularly in Finland , where sporting activity is voluntary and Community based , would be made more difficult and might prove economically unviable .
How can we compensate the organizers for this loss of income ?
As a result of conciliation each Member State has to list the sporting events which must be transmitted publicly .
This ' blacklist ' can also include events taking place in another country .
These events must therefore be broadcast freely to another country .
Is not this an interference in the subsidiarity principle ?
The listing of events is a difficult job .
Moreover , it puts different sporting disciplines on an unequal footing .
Which will be included on the list , and which not ?
Which will be seen and which not ?
This is a restriction of free competition in sport .
There are other , better ways which can be found of guaranteeing that sporting events can be seen which will obtain the support of sports supporters fans and sporting organizations .
Madam President , the interminable and heated discussion about this directive has not produced the desired result : obligatory quotas for broadcasting European programming as a condition for creating a genuine European audiovisual market , the result sought by the Commission , by the great majority of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media at first and second reading , by a large majority of this House , but not by the majority necessary at second reading , a proportion which is virtually impossible to reach on an issue involving so many contradictory interests .
The position of the Committee on Culture was also unanimously supported by the European audiovisual sector , which gave evidence to Parliament several times .
But it has not been a pointless battle , because a regulation to support the European cultural identity has been obtained . Although respect for the quotas set in the directive has not been made legally binding , two gains have been made : the establishment of the contact committee to monitor the implementation of standards , and a change in the public attitude to the problem .
Today there is more awareness of the need for measures that can prevent the globalization of trade cancelling out cultural differences .
Thanks to all this it will now be more difficult for public and private broadcasters to ignore the rules contained in the directive .
So it is not the result we would have wanted , but it is a basis for further progress .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is pleased with the text which the Conciliation Committee has agreed on and which you are to vote on today .
The Commission can only warmly recommend that you approve it .
On the one hand , this text is the result of excellent cooperation between the institutions , and on the other it provides a new legal framework for television in Europe , a legal framework that is modern , improved , complete and clear .
To those who work in this sector , it gives the conditions for legal certainty , which are necessary for the development of the sector .
For European citizens , it ensures that the public interest is taken into consideration , which is so important to their daily lives .
The Commission will supervise the complete application of the text , in all its parts , as it is required to do by the Treaty .
It will also set up the so-called Contact Committee immediately , and support the Committee in carrying out its work .
This Committee will be composed of representatives of the competent authorities in the Member States .
Therefore , as has already been said in the course of the proceedings of the Conciliation Committee , the Commission wishes to confirm , yet again , that it is determined to ensure that the competent commission of the European Parliament is kept informed about the results of meetings of the Contact Committee , at the appropriate time and in the appropriate form .

Finally , on behalf of the Commission I should like to express my special gratitude to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , the rapporteurs , Mr Galeote Quecedo and Mr Hoppenstedt , and also successive Presidencies of the Council , for the excellent work that they have done , which has made it possible for us to achieve this result .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Health monitoring
The next item is the Report ( A4-0202 / 97 ) by Mr Poggiolini , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision ( C4-0204 / 97-95 / 0238 ( COD ) ) adopting a programme of Community action on health monitoring within the framework for action in the field of public health ( 1997-2001 ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the legislative journey of the programme of Community action on health monitoring concludes with this third reading .
This is the fourth action programme in the field of public health to be launched by the European Union , a programme aimed at establishing a health monitoring system by collecting a wide range of data which the Member States will be able to use for setting up and evaluating national and Community health policies . So it is an important instrument , especially at this delicate stage in history when , to respect the Maastricht criteria for the single currency , all the Member States are occupied with the very serious problem of health expenditure , which has now become unsustainable .
The optimal operation of such a health monitoring system will help define priorities , improve the viability of health systems by avoiding waste and consequently increase the effectiveness of health policies .
I believe the European Parliament can feel satisfied , because the amendments it proposed are now an integral part of the legislative text , considerably improving the quality of the initial proposal presented by the Commission , and widening its scope .
In the course of the two readings and the preparations for the Conciliation Committee , which included two trialogues , as fruitful as they were important , Parliament has succeeded in obtaining a good compromise agreement with the Council on almost all the technical amendments , relating in particular to three problems : the harmonization of data and indicators , the creation of a health observatory and the enlargement of the scope of the programme .
As regards the harmonization of data and indicators , in fact , on the basis of an obstinately restrictive interpretation of article 129 of the treaty which , as everyone knows , excludes any harmonization of legislative and regulatory provisions , the Council even opposed harmonization of scientific language .
But it did accept the word ' comparable ' instead of the word ' harmonized ' with reference to scientific data , and all legal quibbling aside , that was what we actually wanted to obtain .
Then it was also felt that the words used about creating a European health observatory were too binding .
Instead of ' observatory ' , which may indeed evoke the idea of costly new agencies which Parliament does not want either , a feasibility study for a permanent structure for monitoring was obtained , which was precisely our purpose .
Finally , we obtained enlargement of the scope of the programme , providing the possibility of cooperation with nongovernmental organizations , the support of the Member States and a precise date for the programme verification reports .
But in the end the main bone of contention on the conciliation table turned out , as always , to be the funding . In Parliament 's view such a programme ought to have had funding of ECU 20 million rather than the ECU 13.8 million included in the Commission 's proposal for a decision .
Well , the Council , demonstrating great parsimony , promptly cut the ECU 800 , 000 , arriving at a proposal of only ECU 13 million , a figure we considered inadequate .
Parliament 's delegation suggested a range of possible solutions , from reducing the duration of the programme to building in an extra amount , outside the programme , to be used by Eurostat for data collection .
In the end Commissioner Flynn added to the Council 's immovable position , by explicitly stating he was quite sure there was no need for the extra funding Parliament had been fighting for .
In the end agreement was reached confirming the ECU 13.8 million for five years , but including two joint declarations which will be published in the Official Journal : one from the Commission , making the commitment to introduce actions in the health sector into the next statistical programme , for 1998-2000 , in order to strengthen this programme ; and another from the European Parliament , committing itself to supporting such action during the budgetary procedure .
So some doubt remains as to the funding achieved , which may not be sufficient for the minimal threshold of effectiveness we consider necessary .
The Commission does not harbour these doubts , and promises , if necessary , to use the 1998-2000 statistical programme as well .
We shall watch and wait .
The European Parliament delegation which conducted the conciliation takes note of the position and of the commitments made and , all in all , believes the result obtained is positive .
It therefore recommends that the House approve the joint draft , recognizing the immense importance of this programme , which is fundamental to the success of all the current and future programmes in the area of public health .

Madam President , Mr Poggiolini has made an excellent summary of the gist of his report , our initial intentions , our frustrations and the solutions found so that we can celebrate an important approval and so that my group can side with the Poggiolini recommendation , coinciding with it in that the European Parliament must vote for a resolution that is positive and even I would say , historic .

This is the first time that , in health matters , there is to be a programme that consists in cooperation between the Member States , i.e. it is not just going to be the sum of the efforts by the 15 Member States but we are actually going to carry out Community-level monitoring , and there will be Community controls - I am not mincing my words - of all health parameters and health indices in the Member States .
This will lead to a comparison , a criticism and procedures for improving public health which is , after all , what is important .
I think that this programme is important and the result has been good thanks to the serenity and good work carried out by the rapporteur , Mr Poggiolini , and also thanks to Mrs Fontaine 's skills , as she firmly but courteously and admirably chaired the Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
The free movement of persons , the physical disappearance of frontiers , the free circulation of services means that it is common sense for health to come within Community scope and , in that sense , many of us think that the Treaty on European Union should more explicitly turn health into a Community competence .
Until that happens , I think that there are countries for which the terms of the Treaty on European Union are a trench where they hide and prevent harmonization taking place .
How on earth can we manage when in some countries ' post-operative period ' , for example , means three hours after the operation , in others one day , in others five hours , or when there are no common standards on ' neo-natal periods ' , etc , etc !
At least unify the criteria - that is what we were after - on the basis of a few basic scientific data .
I think that common sense is on our side .
It is a fact that the term ' health observatory ' has been avoided because the word has an overtone of supervision .
That is not important , as long as there is a permanent structure where statistics can be pooled and studies from all Member States can be compared , and that is something e welcome .
Good luck to everyone and let us formulate our proposal to the European Parliament so that it can vote for this report .
Mr President , the collection and analysis of all health data is obviously a necessary condition for the promotion and actualization of the Community 's competence in the field of health , as required by Article 129 of the Treaty on European Union , and for ensuring that Community programmes and actions in the field are structured in the best possible way .
The European Parliament for its part has made clear its position that the protection of the health of Europe 's citizens must be a main policy concern of the European Union .
Monitoring of the health of the peoples of the Member States and of health indicators should therefore be a priority for the Community , and the establishment of a permanent system for the monitoring , evaluation and development of those indicators in the European Union will be an essential element in that regard .
It is also obvious that precise knowledge concerning the development of health indicators in the Union will assist the determination of priorities and objectives in the public health field and the shaping of programmes .
These actions should have been taken immediately after the adoption of Article 129 .
I recall also that the findings of the report of Parliament 's committee on bovine spongiform encephalopathy revealed a glaring absence of effective monitoring of the development of very serious problems affecting public health when those problems were being created , and , of course , a lack of appropriate action .
A system for coordinating the various measures for protection of the health of Europe 's citizens is essential , therefore , even though it is late in coming .
I find it hard to understand why the financial framework for this important programme is so meagre .
We should not forget that the programmes that are devised , regardless of how important and detailed they are , may end up as texts in the eleven Community languages and make no effective contribution to public health in the Member States .
The building of the Europe of the peoples quite clearly requires that particular attention be paid to issues of health , education , culture and the environment , and that spoken and written concern should be augmented by actions and bold funding initiatives to bring genuine change in the quality of life of Europe 's citizens as a reflection of political will .
I wish to thank Mr Poggiolini for his excellent report .
We do have reservations about the financial framework but I hope that the House as a whole will give its approval to the report .
Mr President , my colleague , Professor Cabrol , who followed the conciliation on the health programme , is unfortunately absent , and has asked me to speak on his behalf .
The file on health surveillance includes two points which we see as essential , namely the harmonization of data and definitions concerning health and the creation of a European centre or agency for health , responsible for collecting and centralizing that data .
The main aim of the health programme is to gauge the state of health and policy trends in this respect throughout the Community and to supply the Member States with appropriate health information that could enable them to make comparisons and support their national health policies .
In order to be of use this data must be harmonized .
The Council has accepted the idea of comparable data .
We hope that that will suffice for a coherent health protection policy .
The creation of a European observatory or agency responsible for collecting and centralizing data , monitoring the development of diseases and sounding the alarm in good time , has been repeatedly demanded by the European Parliament and Professor Cabrol in particular .
That observatory or permanent structure as the Council calls it must cover various European health programmes and enable our fellow citizens to enjoy greater safety and avoid the serious mistakes that we have recently seen .
Nonetheless the Council seems to be giving in little by little , since it has agreed in the conclusion text to consider setting up a permanent structure .
This is a small step forward , nothing more , and this body is not yet ready to see light of day .
We are voting for the joint project because the proposed programme is a real step forward for the health of our compatriots even though it is small , since we are starting from scratch .
However , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we shall continue to demand the setting up of this permanent structure , whether it is called a European observatory or centre , since Europe absolutely needs an instrument that is efficient in terms of information , alerts and protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Liberal Group is quite happy with the outcome of the conciliation procedure , except for one point with which none of the Parliament delegation agreed , namely the size of the budget .
Fortunately , we have a written undertaking from Commissioner Flynn to ensure that the next Community statistical programme devotes appropriate attention to the development of statistics on health monitoring .
Parliament will be watching to ensure that the Commission carries out its promise .

In the short term , developing statistics may seem a laborious and expensive task , but in the long run , accurate statistics can bring considerable savings and can teach us a great deal about developing an effective preventative health policy .
Finally , I would urge that more work should be done with statistics broken down by sex , so that we can tailor policy more specifically .
Mr President , in joining others in welcoming this compromise which our rapporteur is recommending tonight , I just wish to make three brief points .
Firstly , on the outcome of the conciliation process itself : the deal which has been achieved is probably the best that Parliament could realistically hope to expect .
On the most contentious points , namely the question of competence of data harmonization , the concept of an observatory and , most of all , the budgetary implications , the detailed work of the rapporteur and the negotiations undertaken by Mr Collins , as the relevant committee chairman , and others have borne fruit .
The progress has perhaps not been as significant as some would have wished , but there are improvements to be celebrated nevertheless .
My second observation is rather more of a query directed at the Commission as to how far we can view this as a reasonable precedent in cooperation in the field of public health .
Having undertaken these negotiations over some broad principles of terminology and participation , it is reasonable to expect now a consistent approach to all aspects of health policy in the pipeline and to look for an effective approach across Commission directorates and portfolios when it comes to cooperation on research or economic , social and environmental policies , for example , which affect public health .
That just does not apply to BSE , or internally , of course .
We are all here aware of the importance of cooperation with the wider world , be it in liaison with the World Health Organization , UN agencies or third governments , particularly the United States .
That leads to my final point , which is to urge that all the institutions learn the lessons of these carefully negotiated proposals in the discussions next week in Amsterdam .
The Council seems to be poised to throttle the broad remit sought by the Commission in the field of public health and would doubtless follow that by a noose of budgetary restrictions .
Yet there are strong demands from the public for action and international cooperation on health priorities , as the BSE fiasco showed , and this process has shown that there are imaginative proposals and policies available if the political will exists .
As with so much in this field , these conclusions should be seen as just a start .
Parliament will be keenly awaiting the agreed studies and will equally keenly want a positive approach from the Council and the Commission to reforms of the Treaty , notably Article 129 , to continue the progress that this represents .
Mr President , I too believe it is very positive that a common position has been reached on an important subject , which completes the group of health programmes .
In fact monitoring is a fundamental instrument for checking whether the programmes the Community implements are effective in contributing to raising the protection of human health to a high level , guiding efforts to prevent disease , encouraging cooperation between the States , supporting their actions in this field and promoting coordination of policies .
I would also like to dwell a few moments on the funding .
The rapporteur , Mr Poggiolini , has already mentioned that the European Parliament felt ECU 13.8 million was inadequate because it was less than ECU 5 million a year .
We think the Commission 's proposal on this is rather inconsistent : inconsistent with the Commission 's own stated position in its communication on legal bases and maximum sums , where it proposed that actions with amounts below ECU 5 million should not be given legal bases .
Having said that , however , I do agree that this common position is an important step forward in the direction of improving and monitoring the health of European citizens , and I think we should vote for it .
Mr President , health monitoring is of course an important field of activity within the framework of the Community objective of achieving a high level of health protection , as set out in Article 3 and Article 129 .
The exchange of opinions , the considerations and discussions , which have accompanied the tedious process of getting this programme accepted , have been extremely fruitful , and have led to definite improvements in the instruments used for health monitoring in the Community .
The Commission takes the view that on the basis of this programme a valuable health information system for the Community can be built up , a system which will be very useful to the Member States and to the international organizations , in observing the state of our health and the ways in which it is changing .
On behalf of the Commission I should like to thank the European Parliament for the support that it has given to this programme , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Poggiolini , for all his effort and hard work .
I should also just like to say a few words about the conciliation process .
Once again , each institution has made full use of its opportunities in order to ensure that the programme takes their particular interests into account .
In this context , there are two particular points that the Commission would like to comment on .
Firstly , there are the funds that have been set aside for this programme .
I know that Parliament initially took the view that ECU 13.8 million would not be enough for such an important programme .
In view of the important work involved in such a programme , there is something to be said for this point of view .
However , I am convinced that it will be possible , even with the sum that has been proposed , to achieve the programme 's objectives .
In order to emphasize this point , I would add that the Commission , as long as it can count on the full support of the Council , will ensure that when the next statistical programme is implemented , special attention is given to extending the statistics in order to include health monitoring .
Secondly , I should like to say something about the way in which the European Parliament will be kept informed about the implementation of this programme .
I should like to emphasize that the inter-institutional modus vivendi for the implementation of legal acts , under Article 189 ( b ) of the Treaty , which applies to this programme too , provides us with the conditions for ensuring that Parliament receives the information it needs .
Moreover , as far as Article 5 ( 4 ) of the Decision is concerned , which lays down that the Commission should keep the relevant committee regularly informed about decisions on individual projects , the Commission undertakes to make the same information available to the European Parliament too , on an annual basis .
I hope that you will regard the findings of the conciliation process acceptable , and that the work that has been done here and in the other institutions will lead to the start of a programme that will be of great benefit to the health service and to the citizens of the Community in general .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Noise policy
The next item on the agenda is the report , drawn up by Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Green Paper on future noise policy ( A4-0183 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I begin by saying that the urban culture of our century could partly be described as a culture of noise .
Our fellow citizens ' days and nights are becoming increasingly noisy .
People 's concerns over noise pollution , as we approach the third millennium , as shown by the latest surveys published by the Euro-barometer , are on the increase .
Not only is noise people 's fifth concern , but complaints in this environmental area are the only ones to have gone up in number since 1992 .
Commissioner , the truth is that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , whose rapporteur it is my honour to be , is not insensitive to that concern .
Since 70 % of the European population lives with sound levels coming from a single source , namely road traffic , far higher than those recommended by the World Health Organization , one might think that people should be listened to more attentively .
Especially since the twelfth section of the Fifth Action Programme on the Environment states that people should not be exposed to noise levels which jeopardize their health and their quality of life and set a series of measures and actions about whose accomplishment we knew nothing or very little when it was revised .
If it is true , and it is in the view of our committee , that the European Union must become closer to the ordinary people , how can it be explained that the Commission omitted this from its 1996 work programme although it promised to present , in July of that year , a whole set of legislative measures on noise ?
In other words : two framework directives and a communication .
We are now debating a mere Green Paper which replaced , and it is important to stress this , the Commission 's previous promise to introduce legislation for a programme which is obviously insufficient and , as we all know , is not binding at any stage .
Obviously I have nothing against opening a debate in the European Union on noise pollution , involving the Commission , State authorities , local and regional authorities , experts , lawyers and citizens ' movements .
That would undoubtedly be extremely interesting and very positive ; but given that seven in ten people are exposed to sound levels harming their health and quality of life , at levels far higher that those authorized by the WHO , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council should try and make it a top priority to take urgent action and set in motion , as promised , a set of practical measures in the form of an appropriate legal response to the problem .
This debate and the programme are welcome , of course .
But , nonetheless , our parliamentary resolution - and I cannot repeat this too often - is asking the Commission to present , this year , the announced legislation on the reduction of noise levels .
That is what we want .
I think this matter should be referred to your colleague , Mrs Bjerregaard , conspicuous by her absence this afternoon .
I conclude , Mr President , by saying that we are only asking the Commission to do something as basic as honour its promise and for the Council to listen to this popular outcry against noise , never better expressed .
If I may - and I would like to thank Mrs Graenitz - I should like to add a personal experience .
Two months ago I had to have an operation for a serious complaint .
The hardest thing to put up with was not the pain , but the noisy traffic at night , dust-carts collecting rubbish , ambulance sirens .
It is impossible , Commissioner , to rest when you have to put up with an atrocious nightmare of noise .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy - ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that the Community and Member States need the most accurate and detailed information available concerning the real costs and consequences of noise if they are to develop an integrated strategy for combating it .
For this reason the Community should , on the one hand , develop a uniform methodology for measuring and evaluating noise which can then be uniformly implemented by the Member States and , on the other , launch general guidance and technical aid initiatives in respect of the Member States to organize research , exchanges of information and public awareness campaigns , and also to monitor the implementation of the measures .
As you know , there exists no Community legislation at present fixing permissible noise emission levels from industrial installations , even though most Member States impose limits on noise levels in industrial regions .
Measures to combat noise at source mean an additional cost for industry which has to adapt to new specifications .
On the other hand , industry should bear in mind that noise is one of the five main sources of annoyance which erode the quality of life , behind environmental pollution , which are attributed to industry and damage its image among the public and consumers .
Consequently noise abatement is in the interests of industry .
No one should expect the adoption of strict measures to produce immediate results .
Society and industry need at least a decade of planning and adjustment until the positive results are measurable .
The costs will have to be shared out gradually so as not to impose a disproportionate burden on the state , industry or citizens .
It is self-evident that Community policies within the framework of the various action programmes and initiatives on environmental , transport , regional , industrial and social policy must be coordinated so that the problem of noise can be addressed in a multi-faceted and , consequently , more effective manner .
I must say that I am surprised that the Committee on Transport has not wished to submit an opinion on the Green Paper , even though the matter touches directly on air and land transport .
Lastly , Mr President , I believe that the Member States must address the problem of noise , in cooperation with industry , in a planned and responsible manner , given that the cost of such an exercise is not excessive , while an improvement in working conditions and in the quality of life of citizens will lead in the long term to a reduction of costs and benefit society as a whole .
Mr President , I have little to add , as Mrs Díez de Rivera 's report is so excellent and so complete that it says it all , and I support everything in it .
It is good to begin with a Green Paper , and it is good that we are opening a debate , but if we know anything it is the cause of noise ; most people , when inquiries are held into environmental problems , complain about noise .
However , we must now reduce noise , not only industrial noise but also the main problem : vehicles and road traffic .
As draftsman for the opinion of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I am going to refer to that subject .
Measures were taken in the Third and Fourth Programmes in the framework of research to reduce , within the telematics and materials programme , the noise produced by equipment , but that is not enough . Much more still has to be done .
In industry , the main areas have to be distinguished .
Heavy industry does not pose a problem because it is confined to large , enclosed areas , and the noise does not reach the outside ; the noise problem in those industries is one of health and safety at work , the prevention of work-related risks and there is legislation on all of that ; we are not therefore going to look at that subject .

Small industries in urban estates are quite another thing , small workshops , etc , which are an extraordinary nuisance for local inhabitants ; another major nuisance is discotheques , ambulances , road traffic and the lack of education and consideration towards one 's neighbours .
In the research programme , we are asking the Commission to call on the European Committee on Standardization to set new standards for the European Union on the noise produced by different groups or activities .
There are various programmes that could be included in the Fifth Programme , and that would be an interesting task .
We also think that , when measuring noise , we should not only set standards but actually take action to reduce the noise made by refrigerators , air-conditioners , building machinery - especially the latter .
Europe is an old continent where construction work is going on all the time and the sound of building sites is quite unbearable , as well as the traffic noise mentioned by the rapporteur ; that noise should be limited .
Large and small industries should be legally required - not voluntarily , because then they would do nothing or take ineffectual action - to implement a noise limitation plan , just as they are obliged - although few do so - to limit waste production .
I think that this , whether or not included in the environmental management plan , would be a major step forward .
It would also be necessary to take noise into account far more when building new rail networks , new roads and new vehicles .
Congratulations to Mrs Díez de Rivera .
We all agree that this is a first step down a road where progress has to be made .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we subjected our eyes to light in the same intensity as we subject our ears to noise , then we should all go blind immediately .
Yet in spite of this , the question of noise is one that is repeatedly and controversially debated , even though noise is one of the most severe forms of environmental pollution , and although , in many of the European Union 's environmental programmes - most recently in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme - specific reference is made to the fact that reducing and combatting noise is an important measure in maintaining human health , and that health is very badly affected by noise .
Mrs Diez de Rivera Icaza , whom I should like to thank most warmly for her report , and to whom I should like to say that I am happy that able to discuss it with her , has set out many of these points , in very precise terms , in her report .
The most important thing is that the Commission 's Green Paper should be followed by legislation , so that this framework legislation for noise protection , which was part of the Commission 's programme for last year , can finally be put into place , because I believe it is necessary for you to do something about it .
No doubt much of what our citizens experience as noise does not fall within the competence of the Union .
But then , people are not asking who is responsible for the noise , or which legislative body is responsible for controlling noise .
They are much more interested in getting noise brought under control .
Therefore we must do something . By all means let us bring in subsidiarity , but we really must take some sort of action .
I believe that the issues that have been touched on here - aircraft noise , street noise , railway noise - can be tackled by a variety of methods , that it is essential to set noise limits for tools and machinery , and that we need to make more progress in research .
We have plenty of research programmes on the subject of noise , and it is time something was happening here .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza .
I am very grateful to have the opportunity to speak to her today and to see that she has recovered sufficiently to attend .
One of the oldest types of environmental nuisance is actually not noise but smell , though smell is a very subjective term , so I prefer to call it odour .
Even with perfumes , if you do not like them , they are not a pleasant smell , they are an odour .
And this is one of the oldest pieces of environmental legislation that we have in Europe .
The legislation on noise is different , although it exists in most Member States , and noise is something that can actually be harmful to health , which is why it is essential for us to do something about it .
The purpose of the Green Paper is to see first of all whether we can reach agreement amongst ourselves .
We need to determine the areas in which we feel that common agreements should be reached in Europe .
We all agree that noise pollution is something we need to clamp down on .
What is the Community interest in combating noise pollution ?
The Community element comes into play as regards distortion of competition in the Community .
Looking at the Green Paper , I note that it talks about low-noise aircraft , and it says that we need to change the sort of tyres we produce in Europe to help reduce tyre noise . But there is no mention of Community zones or any kind of agreements on the subject , which means that it could happen - and there are precedents for this - that a regional airport is turned down in one Member State but allowed in another which has less strict requirements , and is then built six miles from the border , so that the first Member State still suffers from the noise pollution anyway .
So I think that in calling on the Commission to do something about noise pollution , we need to look first of all at equipment and machinery , and we also certainly need some sort of framework legislation to cover everything that distorts competition .
I am thinking here of airport zones , high-speed trains and major motorways .
For the rest , I think we must assume that things can be dealt with at national or regional level .
Mr President , noise pollution is a problem that needs attention at European level , I think we would all agree .
But we must be careful to take account of the principle of subsidiarity when it comes to deciding on measures to be taken .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten talked about airport zoning and aircraft engines , and these are indeed issues that have a cross-border impact and should be dealt with at European level .
But we must also ensure that the measures which should be taken at national and regional level in accordance with subsidiarity are indeed implemented .
Mrs Díez de Rivera 's excellent report contains a number of extremely good proposals , such as the development of common measurement methods in Europe , for which the Environment Agency needs to collect information throughout the Union .
Public information is another good idea . We already have several directives on noise pollution from specific sources , such as aircraft , construction equipment and so on , and we have already debated noise pollution from engines .
So in other words there is already a good deal happening in this field , and we in the Liberal Group rather doubt whether we really need a framework directive as well .
We therefore reject paragraph 23 which calls for framework legislation in the Green Paper , and we would prefer to tackle whatever needs to be done at European level and leave everything else to local , regional and national level , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
That is the Liberal Group 's position on Mrs Díez de Rivera 's excellent report .
Mr President , it is not just urban culture which has become a culture of noise , as our excellent rapporteur says ; these days tourism , chiefly mass tourism , particularly in coastal areas , is also a culture of noise .
The people of the European Union go on holiday in their millions and encounter one lot of noise after another .
During the day from various engine-propelled craft on the sea and at night from extremely noisy entertainment centres . Both sources are regarded as attractive to tourists and are thus a focus of competition for profit .
Of course , such competition is very damaging to tourists and their health , and in the end it always destroys the tourism itself .
That , Mr President , is why I think we should persist in demanding the formulation , in serious terms , of course , of a common policy which will take account of the interests of the millions of European citizens who go on holidays , establish permissible noise levels and curb competition based on noise . In the final analysis that will probably benefit the very people who generate all the noise at tourism undertakings .
Mr President , first of all I too would like to compliment Mrs Diez de Rivera Icaza on her excellent report , because it is a document which finally clarifies the impact of the noise problem on all European citizens .
A high proportion of the population of Europe is now forced to live with dangerous noise levels , and we cannot ignore that fact .
Faced with a lack of legislation either at Community level or , often , at Member State level , we certainly cannot be satisfied with a Green Paper without precise commitments to ensure that in the near future we will finally have standards adequate to deal with the problems of all the citizens who face this situation .
Now we all know that the effects of noise strike at several levels .
It has a direct effect at the physiological level , but it also acts directly on living conditions , psychological well-being , and the very bio-rhythms of individuals .
As the rapporteur said , the problem of noise at night is particularly dangerous , as it makes sleep impossible , and sleep is an important physiological function , vital to the life of each individual .
Not being able to sleep properly actually changes a person 's life radically .
That is why it is important to have regulations banning night flights at airports or only allow them if there are no homes in the neighbourhood and no-one can suffer serious damage .
The Committee on Petitions has received many petitions on this problem .
In general it can be said that much of the noise , though certainly not all , is linked to transport .
That is why the report lays great stress on this point , and I would also like to mention that it is particularly important for the new transeuropean network projects to take account of the possible increases in noise that could derive from them - I refer especially to the problem of high velocity trains .
So I hope that approval of this report can finally push the Commission into raising the standards to a satisfactory level and giving us appropriate provisions on the matter .
Mr President , the European Union has been very reluctant to introduce rules on noise pollution up to now , which I can quite understand , since noise problems are usually localized issues .
But there are certain European aspects .
Take the noise regulations for products such as cars and lawnmowers , for example , or the transfrontier noise pollution caused by having a motorway or airport right by a border .
It seems strange that people laugh about lawnmowers and ask if we have nothing better to do in Europe , but I think that these are exactly the kind of issues that should be regulated at European level .
The Commission remains very reticent in its Green Paper , and rightly so , in my view .
Most noise pollution problems are local issues and can best be resolved at local level , so the Commission is simply showing common sense in putting forward a limited number of specific measures .
What is the point of trying to regulate all sorts of issues in European directives if nothing changes in practice because the Council does not wish to tie its own hands ?
I think that setting limit values to be applied throughout the Union simply will not work .
It is simply making environmental planners responsible for doing the impossible .
But there are still the proposals in the Commission 's Green Paper : better harmonization of the methods for evaluating noise pollution , a directive laying down fiscal measures to combat noise pollution from road traffic , and an approach on train and aircraft noise and noise from equipment used outdoors .
The Díez de Rivera report adds a number of recommendations here which I am quite happy to support , since they are all excellent ideas on noise abatement .
The only thing with which I cannot agree is that all this should be covered by a framework directive , complete with limit values to be applied by the environmental planners .
The Union really would be biting off far more than it could chew there .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , noise is a significant environmental problem , and with the rapid development of technology it will soon be one of the most serious .
The Commission 's Green Paper is an important advance .
I would , however , like to see it developed into a framework directive .
The report of our excellent and experienced rapporteur Carmen Díez de Rivera Icaza covers the subject comprehensively and I agree with everything that it says .
Nevertheless , there are a few points that I think deserve special mention .
Noise pollution is a phenomenon of the modern age .
It is now quite common to hear people complaining about noise of one form or another .
It not just aircraft noise , which has very rightly been highlighted , and noise from factories that we are talking about .
There are also the incessant noises of everyday life which though less intense are a source of nuisance and damage human beings without being directly noticed .
There is a need for strict specifications to be imposed on major construction projects because we are seeing more and more instances of motorways being built near to residential areas .
Likewise areas of housing in the vicinity of airports seem to be expanding all the time .
I believe that we have a duty to examine this whole matter and to tackle it comprehensively .
In addition , I think it is very important that research be carried out on the quality of materials used for soundproofing so as to ensure that the products used are environmentally friendly .
Lastly , I think it essential that the specifications to be imposed for various forms of noise should take account of climatic factors in the Member States , given the differences between the north and the south .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , noise is classified nuisance number one by most Europeans and nearly 70 % of them have their quality of life affected by noise .
Over 20 % European suffer from diseases linked to excessive noise levels .
I am an ear , nose and throat specialist , specializing in deafness and I can tell you that the number of complaints and cases of deafness linked to noise increase from year to year , as the WHO report quite rightly points out .
The non-auditive consequences of noise should also be dealt with , especially the effects on sleep , work performance , schooling , medical consultations ( their number ) , the consumption of tranquillizers and even neuroleptic drugs .
History has shown for thousands of years that man can adapt but that adaption has a price and , so far , most national governments and the Community has reacted too little .
Legislation is insufficient , still .
It is high time for the European Union to take full stock of the size of the problem and turn the fight against noise into a priority .
It must go beyond general - albeit generous - intentions to improve matters .
It must set a precise timetable , with common maximum levels , if we are to stop this scourge from spreading .
Research must be encouraged .
I turn to Mrs Cresson , so that she can provide us with the necessary standards .
Current noise standards do not match the physiological reality .
We need a strict timetable , with updates standards and the European Union must carry out regular checks and impose sanctions in cases of violations .
The relationship between noise and health is extremely complex .
If we make clear commitments , take concrete actions and show strong political will , we shall be offering all European the protection they are asking for .
I therefore approve this report which must be an opportunity for the European Parliament to express to the Commission the high expectations of European citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel most strongly that we need a stricter European approach on noise pollution from aircraft and the upward harmonization of noise standards , as proposed by the rapporteur in paragraph 29 .
At the moment , it is only the larger and more competitive airports that are able to impose stricter standards and refuse to handle noisy aircraft .
Smaller airports that have to fight to stay profitable impose as few requirements as possible , and thus become the Mecca for all the old and noisy aircraft which larger airports will no longer tolerate .
Take Ostend airport in my own country .
The quality of life in the area around Ostend is being seriously undermined by the fact that this airport does not impose strict standards , which apparently only apply at Zaventem .
Finally , I also think it is important , as the rapporteur says in paragraph 8 , for noise prevention and repression to be included with other environmental standards as a prerequisite for approving the funding of projects by the Structural Funds .
Mr President , I am fully behind the Díez de Rivera report , a magnificent report on the rules to be applied as quickly as possible .
Noise pollution is , along with atmospheric pollution , the major problem facing cities and it is lowering the quality of life in our towns and cities .
I come from Valencia , one of Europe 's noisiest cities , mainly due to traffic and socalled ' pleasure-related ' noise .
If we produced a noise map of Europe , as I hope we do , then Valencia would definitely be one of its blackspots .
As the rapporteur said , road traffic , building work and industry can disturb and upset the normal functioning of city life .
We all have examples near us of how noise affects us every day .
Our cities are noisy , above recommended levels , and the need to draft a Community framework directive that will be binding , and to implement measures and actions at national and local level , is an urgent matter .
Not only must we deal with noise but with road traffic as a whole , encouraging public transport and a planning policy that favours functionality and not speculation .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur personally for illustrating her report with letters from our Noble Prizewinner for Literature , Juan Ramón Jiménez , who was one of this century 's first famous people to complain about noise .
If only , seventy years on , we only had to complain at night of crickets and pianolas and did not have to tell the Commission that this is an urgent question and one of prime concern for all our citizens .
Mr President , the Commission Green Paper on future noise policy contains many important and correct considerations on the noise problems we experience in our daily lives .
In particular , I note with satisfaction that the Commission pays special attention to noise nuisance from road traffic , which is absolutely the most disagreeable source of noise in Europe .
I welcome the Commission 's decision to replace its original idea of committing the individual Member States to common legislation in the area with a noise abatement programme .
Indeed the prevailing view in Denmark is that it makes sense to solve noise problems at national level .
In this way we have managed to deal with all major noise problems in an exemplary manner .
We have an exceedingly efficient system of planning legislation which ensures the rational planning of the physical landscape with respect for human needs .
This is done in the best democratic fashion through a dialogue with local agencies in the local environment .
Also , Danish citizens , who are manifestly experiencing nuisance from traffic noise , can get the State to foot the bill for the sound insulation of their houses .
Our international airport at Kastrup , in cooperation with the Folketing , has introduced a full landing ban on especially noisy aircraft during the hours of night , and is moreover currently one of Europe 's quietest airports .
With the greatest respect for the impressive and brilliant work done by Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza , I cannot support the parts of the resolution calling for common framework legislation .
Overall , I can give heartfelt support to the other proposals , and I will wait to see whether the close national monitoring called for by the resolution actually takes place .
The splendid analytical section of the Green Paper gives a good description of the noise nuisances we are subjected to today and can serve as a powerful incentive to this monitoring process .
Mr President , firstly I should like to pay tribute to Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza for her passionate pursuit of the noise issue , despite her illness .
I welcome the overdue Green Paper on noise because nearly seven out of ten people in Europe are subjected to noise levels higher than those recommended for health .
The main culprits as we know are excessive road traffic and aircraft noise , amongst other things .
Despite often being seen as a local issue there are huge costs to European society and to business of stress-related illnesses to which noise is a big contributory factor .
In urban environments we usually find that it is the poorer citizens and the poorer districts where people have to live or work near big , noisy , polluting roads .
It is high time that this problems was tackled much more efficiently than we have been able to do so far .
My constituents in London also suffer the problems of sleep disturbance caused by early morning flights at Heathrow Airport and I hope Parliament 's call for a ban on night flights will be acted upon before my citizens ' lives are made even more miserable with the increase to air traffic which is likely to result from Terminal 5 .
The issues called for in the Green Paper are all very fine : measurement , the information exchanges , the noise mapping .
Parliament agrees with all those things .
But we also must have a proper framework directive on noise reduction and we ask the Commission not to delay but to come forward with this as a matter of urgency for the sake of the health of all our citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I say anything about the Green Paper and about Parliament 's position , I should like to express my pleasure in the fact that the rapporteur , Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza , is with us once more .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur most warmly on her excellent report .
The Commission would like to thank the European Parliament for its comprehensive contribution to the debate on future noise protection policy , which of course I shall be analysing in depth .
Once thing that particularly impressed us was the large number of measures demanded in the resolution , which makes it clear how important it is to develop a coherent strategy for our future noise-protection policy .
In the Commission 's opinion , the broad consultation that its Green Paper has stimulated will provide a solid basis for the drafting of measures to combat noise .
In the mean time , the Commission has received 175 written contributions , and has organized numerous conferences on the aspects touched on in the Green Paper , which may also supply the Commission with important information .
The comments reinforce the Commission 's view that a comprehensive noise-protection strategy is necessary , and that it must include all levels of government , from local authorities to European institutions .
Many municipal authorities have given us their opinions on the Green Paper , and this is in line with the concept of shared responsibility , whereby all those involved must work together to achieve a common objective .
All the contributions are currently being collated and evaluated by our staff , and are accessible via EUROPA , the Commission 's internet server .
The Commission is convinced that this report , and the resolution that we presume will result from it , can make a valuable contribution to the success of our policy and to the achieving of our common objective - to protect our citizens from noise that harms their health and interferes with their lives .
We are aware of the fact that our Green Paper has given rise to great expectations on the part of those of our citizens who are exposed to noise pollution , and we must not disappoint those expectations .
Mr President , I hold the Commissioner in great esteem , so I mean no disrespect when I ask why Mrs Bjerregaard is not here .
We have also not had a clear answer from the Commissioner on whether or not there is to be a framework directive .
If there is , when is it likely to appear ?
I should like to have a rather more detailed response to the excellent report by my colleague , and to hear it from the Commissioner who is responsible for this dossier .
Mr President , Mr Eisma , I am sorry , but unfortunately I am unable to say why Mrs Bjerregaard cannot be with us today , because I do not know .
I can promise you , however , that I will pass on to her , word for word , the point that you have raised , and I hope that she will then react accordingly .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the Commissioner for his good wishes and the fifteen or more speakers in this debate .
I too , you may recall , regretted the conspicuous absence of the Commissioner responsible for this matter .
I hope Mr Fischler will pass on to her , with the same passion as Mr Eisma just now , our demand and the fact that we are not satisfied with the good words and more than 170 responses from the whole Union .
Commissioner , recognizing your insistence , we ask you , please , to give us this year the legislation promised in 1996 , and thank you for your good wishes .
Thank you very much , Mrs Díez de Rivera .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed at 8.00 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
To clarify the Minutes , Mr President , my group would like you to invite Mr Sorgdrager , as President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers of Justice , to make a statement to Parliament concerning the 368 cancelled provisions .
This invitation is a point of order .
Was it just the previous Dutch Government that was so negligent , or has the same thing happened in other Member States ?
Mr President , in yesterday 's Minutes my name is not recorded as being here .
That is not a fault of the parliamentary secretariat ; unfortunately it is my mistake .
I came down to sign in about 8.30 p.m. only to find that the session was over .
Would it be possible to record my presence here yesterday ?
Subject to approval by the Quaestors , Yes .
It is not a point of order Mr President , it is on the Minutes .
It is on the first page of the Minutes , the point made by Mr Macartney on Norwegian salmon .
Mr Macartney and I , at the sitting of 29 May , raised the question of whether the Commission would be prepared to make a statement about the agreement which it was negotiating and which this House had not seen .
We raised it again yesterday .
The President said he would ask the Commission .
I want to know whether Sir Leon Brittan , who has been the invisible man in this case as far as Parliament is concerned , if his services or if the Commission have come back to the President and said when they are prepared to make a statement on this Norwegian salmon issue .
It is a very serious issue for Scotland and Ireland and many other states of the European Union .
It raises a very serious principle in that a non-member state such as Norway is getting better treatment than the Union itself .
To the best of my knowledge , the answer is No , the Commission has not yet come back .
Mr President , I should like to refer to the subject of item 6 , paragraph 4 , of the Minutes , on the membership of Parliament .
It says that the President announced that four of our colleagues had been appointed as members of the French Government and that pursuant to Article 12 of the Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament by universal suffrage , Parliament established these vacancies .
This is incorrect given that the French Constitution lays down a 30-day period for ( MPs and ) MEPs invited to join the government to decide whether to remain MEPs or accept ministerial responsibility .
It is therefore not correct to establish these vacancies but we should wait , in accordance with the French Constitution , for them to decide , i.e. for thirty days .
As you know , European law is of a higher order than national law and European law on direct elections says that when you are elected to one of the other institutions , you cease to be a member of the previous institution of which you were a member .
So whatever French law says , the European law is clear and their resignations have to be accepted .
It concerns the Minutes , Mr President .
I have no point to make on the Minutes because I cannot get a copy - they have not produced enough .
Can you ask them in future to produce enough copies so that we can all look at them , rather than the first few people in the queue ?
We will do that but one way of stopping points of order on the Minutes is not to distribute them .

Mr President , could I follow on the statement yesterday from Mr Macartney and today from Mr McMahon and ask if you , Sir , will personally ask Commissioner Leon Brittan to come here , given that he seems to have got his way against the wishes of the Commissioner for Fisheries , the Committee on Fisheries , and indeed the Commission .
And in view of the fact that there is at stake a fragile industry in Scotland and Ireland , a whole industry in the most fragile areas .
The agenda is a matter for the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , I wish to make a point concerning Question Time .
At the last plenary I put a question that was not reached and had therefore to be answered in writing .
My question concerned the then forthcoming Council meeting on 26 May .
I received an answer yesterday , dated 4 June , and I must protest about that .
I would ask that , in future , answers be sent out immediately .
You have protested but , in fact , we are on the Minutes .
Mr President , although I took part in yesterday 's vote , I omitted to sign in , thus neglecting the second most important duty of a Member .
Could I ask you to add my name to the list of Members present ?
Again , subject to the approval of the Quaestors .
Mr President , I am afraid to say that I did sign the voting list .
Really I was making a point of order on page 17 of the Minutes .
Yesterday we discussed whether my report should be dealt with at a later date .
I asked the President if I could speak on it .
I have pressed the button and it appears that it does now work but yesterday it failed to work .
We have an electronic system and I think we should use it ; we should not need to stand up and flail our arms about like windmills .
I would very much have liked to have spoken on that particular position yesterday .
I am told that you should also press the button .
This is useful because as people no longer sit in allocated seats , we then know their names .
It is also useful to raise your hand .
Mr President , I am reluctant to take the floor but it is in response to something you said ...
... in answer to an earlier question .
You said : ' the agenda is a matter for the Conference of Presidents . ' We should not allow that to become part of the mythology of this House .
The agenda is for the Conference of Presidents to recommend but always for this House to decide .
You are quite right but the Conference of Presidents makes the initial recommendation and the House approved the agenda on Monday at 5 o 'clock .
It is now Tuesday in case people have not noticed .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
The week before last three Members of this Parliament - Angela Billingham , Edward McMillan-Scott and myself - wrote to the President 's Office to ask for urgent action to be taken on behalf of a number of citizens whose properties in Spain have been wrongly seized by banks - one of those citizens being my own constituent , Mr Frank Clark .
We have had no reply as such from your office - no doubt due to an oversight .
I would ask that your office help us to urgently respond and to show how this institution can be a defender and fighter for our citizens ' rights where wrongs have taken place , particularly in an area which is part of the single market and European citizenship .
We ask for your assistance on that case .
Mr President , I rise to confirm what has just been said by Mr Teverson .
I am sorry that Edward McMillan-Scott is not in the Hemicycle this morning because he has been dealing with this matter for over 15 years .
A bad situation is now a desperate situation , with properties actually being sold as we speak .
We have asked for intervention .
It would appear that the Spanish authorities are running rings around the European laws and this is a quite disgraceful state of affairs .
I seek the assistance of the President and of all our colleagues in this Hemicycle .
I will ask the President to draw this matter to the attention of the Spanish authorities .
Decision on urgency
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have received an urgent request to supply macrofinancial aid to Bulgaria and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
However , the Committee on External Economic Relations , which is responsible for this dossier , has not yet had the chance to consider it , and this has also meant , of course , that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has not been able to deliver its opinion either .
These are politically sensitive situations in which we would normally make macrofinancial aid dependent on a number of conditions , and I would therefore feel it a great pity if it were to be rushed through the Committee on External Economic Relations this week and then voted on without a debate .
I think it would be perfectly feasible to deal with it at the July part-session instead , so it should be put on hold until Parliament has the chance to say what it thinks , as indeed it should .
I give the floor to the Commission to defend the proposal if it so wishes .
Mr President , the Commission wishes to insist on the request for an emergency procedure .
As far as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is concerned , the International Monetary Fund and the World Ban have now agreed to throw their full support behind that government 's economic policy .
It is important for the European Union to take part in that movement , and I would add that there are pressing needs for external financing in that country and that if we want to be able to support it in the adaptation of its economic policy , given the instability of the region and the low level of reserves , we should respond alongside the Monetary Fund and the World Bank .
The same is true of Bulgaria : may I remind you that that country 's situation is extremely fragile , especially concerning the level of its reserves .
It also has a very large foreign debt vis-à-vis the European Union .
At the European Parliament 's own request in its resolution of 10 April last , on humanitarian aid for Bulgaria , the Commission - along with the Council - was urged to take the measures needed to help the Bulgarian Governments in its fight against the current serious economic crisis .
That is why it is important for the Commission that the European Parliament should be able to vote in favour of the emergency procedure on these two issues .
Mr President , I have listened to the Commissioner but allow me to say that the situation in Bulgaria , as anyone who has visited that country will have noted , is such that we cannot not permit something that is absolutely vital to enabling that country to return to the path of good economic policy to be held up for bureaucratic and procedural reasons .
Now we find that the Committee on External Relations has not discussed the matter .
It must convene a special meeting to discuss it because the problem besetting Bulgaria is actual , not bureaucratic .
If we delay for too long all of the work being done in conjunction with the IMF and , to some degree , with the World Bank will be destroyed .
If the committee cannot meet I do not think that we should sit on our hands and let those people wait for things that are crucially important to the survival of the Bulgarian state just because of that .
Mr President , I would just like to make it clear that the reason why the Committee on External Economic Relations has not dealt with this problem is the delay in consulting us . As a matter of fact we are not usually consulted at all .
This is a very serious matter , which affects everything in these agreements . That is the simple reason why this has not happened .
So we do find ourselves in a very embarrassing situation and we would really like a remedy to be found .
Lots of Members are asking to speak but the Rules are clear .
There should be one speaker for , one speaker against plus the Commission or the committee chair if appropriate .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Mr President , excuse my lateness .
I see , however , that my name is not on the list of members present . I was here yesterday and signed in various committees .
I hope that this mistake , for which I am to blame , will be corrected .
We shall check that out .
European Monetary Institute ( EMI annual report - Monetary policy ) - Budgetary and taxation policy - VAT
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0194 / 97 by Mr Mezzaroma , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the 1996 annual report of the European Monetary Institute ( C4-0175 / 97 ) ; -A4-0185 / 97 by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the European Monetary Institute 's report on Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three - specification of the operational framework ( C4-0043 / 97 ) ; -A4-0192 / 97 by Mr Fourcans , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the coordination of budgetary and taxation policy in the Monetary Union ; -A4-0164 / 97 by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a common system of VAT - a programme for the single market ( COM ( 96 ) 0328 - C4-0458 / 96 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , a thank you to those who helped me complete this report .
I also want to congratulate Mr Lamfalussy on setting up the EMI and quickly making it operational , carrying out so effectively the tasks conferred on him by the treaty and , throughout his term of office , demonstrating an independent and open-minded approach and a willingness for dialogue as testified to by the highly satisfactory relationship he established with our institution in spite of the limits imposed by the treaty .
The purpose of the annual EMI report is to review all aspects of the tasks conferred on him by the treaty .
The analysis looks at the economic , monetary and financial situation in the European Union , including the degree of economic and institutional convergence in the individual Member States , the preparatory work for stage three and the other activities of the EMI , especially as regards cooperation between the central banks , and , finally , the annual accounts in accordance with article 11 of its statutes .
That covers the technical side .
But in my view this House also needs to make a political assessment .
The single currency presupposes holding individual national public debt in common and also presupposes equilibrium of balances of payments between individual Member States .
But how can monetary union be achieved unless there is political union first ?
I do not think there is a single example of a monetary union that survived without political union .
In the sixth century BC the Greek cities set up a monetary union , but it lasted three or four years and then collapsed .
More recently , the Latin monetary union between France , Italy , Switzerland and Belgium also failed , as did the Scandinavian one , because there was no political union .
The United States made the dollar a single currency , but it preceded that with political union , with the Declaration of Independence .
Bismarck created the gold mark after first unifying the German states politically ; the monetary laws followed .
A united Europe presupposes a single state , hence a parliament with legislative power and a government with executive power .
Then the currency can work !
So an effort must be made in Amsterdam to develop the political bases of the European Union , the necessary economic , fiscal , financial and above all social convergence must be achieved , qualitative convergence parameters and not quantitative ones , including equilibrium of balances of payments and convergence of interest rates .
The Commission has lately set out the framework for the convergence parameters , superseding those drawn up by the EMI .
These new data have unleashed total uproar in the Member States : some had thought they were top of the class , some had thought they were at the bottom , and others were limping along , desperately trying not to die before the finishing line .
Now who can say which will be in and which will be out ?
Europe is constantly changing : economic , financial and political scenarios of individual nations change , and that changes even the most solid situations .
One thing is certain : Europe today is experiencing a moment of weariness . Citizens are not inclined to believe in a Europe which does not keep them informed , and from which they receive no concrete , visible or rapid benefits .
More than anything , if Europe means being afflicted with new burdens , heavy taxation or economic and financial alchemy , they do not want to be part of it. it is true that structural reforms are needed to achieve a single currency , but they must preserve solidarity with the weakest citizen .
It is no longer possible to assume that the free market can get everything right , as witness the depression of the Twenties and Thirties .
Europe today needs to develop , to work .
Our great problem today is unemployment . There is no work .
The welfare of the world has to depend on work and on hope for development whereby people can rediscover themselves , and if the technological innovation produced by the information revolution also brings an increasing number of jobs , Europe will be able to compete on culture , education , professionalism , sport , tourism , environment , services , the restructuring of the territory and the development of public and private works geared to transport , energy and telecommunications infrastructure .
Let us make our cities more beautiful , let us make rural areas better places to live , let us make room for the cohesion process , so necessary to unite the citizens in a great movement capable of integrating traditions , languages , affections and - why not ? - spreading our cultures to the rest of the world .
Now is the time to have the courage to spend more , to make economic and social investments , to go out into the world with the accumulated experience of hundreds of years - experience such as no other continent possesses - to aim straight for the heart of development through research .
Money was invented by man and man has become its slave .
Europe must make a great effort to use this means of exchange only to guarantee the welfare of the people and not be overwhelmed by it .
The EMI should make way for the Central Bank .
I hope we are all aware that we need to arrive at 1999 with clear ideas , so that we are not overwhelmed by an institution which should be at the service of the citizens and which , if left alone , would be a state within the state , able to regard the European citizen as a means of developing Europe .
This is the scenario spread out before us today , considering the deadlines , analyzing the situation and reading the EMI report .
My best wishes to President Lamfalussy and I wish the new president every success even though , unfortunately , the road he must travel is still very uncertain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish particularly to make the point that these reports on the introduction of the euro call both for employment policy and for the democratic rights of the European Parliament to participate and exercise supervision to be taken properly into account .
I am also grateful for the preparatory work that was done by the European Monetary Institute and its president , Mr Lamfalussy , as this will provide a sound basis on which to build further , However , recent developments illustrate just how critical the situation is .
The position of France has shed light on a number of things and is a warning to us to proceed with particular caution .
The fact is that every economic and monetary policy measure must be geared to citizens .
We need a socially responsible Europe and not a Europe founded on capital alone because capital alone undermines positive integration - and I mean capital alone , please do not misunderstand me .
Those then are the purely political considerations .
The European Monetary Institute 's report on ' Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three - Specification of the operational framework ' , concerning the introduction of the euro , has for the moment to be seen as a proposal : not until the European Central Bank has been set up can final decisions be taken .
At any rate - and this is fundamental - we are already staking out the course for the monetary policy strategy which the ECB will need to evolve and pursue .
Over and above that , particular sensitivity and transparency is needed in Stage Three particularly .
Not only has there to be a guarantee that it will operate seamlessly and smoothly , the internal barriers to the single currency that actually exist in all the Member States will have to be removed .
There has to be wide acceptance of all measures relating to the single currency policy of the ESCB .
In the final analysis , it has to seem credible to the public generally .
I wish , in passing , to make a very personal comment on the convergence criteria : the very fact that yet another stability pact has been devised demonstrates a failure to appreciate how integration is achieved in the process of European development .
But that has now happened .
The concept of a hierarchy with one person in charge , telling everyone else what to do is certainly not what is needed here .
Penalties that appear to be a slap on the wrist will not help the financially weak countries and will inevitably impede the integration process .
Introducing the single currency does not simply depend on whether the countries concerned are economically ready for it ; it is , far more importantly , a question of our perception of democratic development .
If we are to be able to develop the framework conditions in a sensible manner , we need a combination of tried and tested monetary policy strategies able to be applied by all the Member States .
When it comes to converting monetary policy , it will be essential to apply different data and early indicators - of the kind we have for inflation targeting .
That means that there has to be an operational framework for monetary policy .
It makes sense to include inflation targeting as a strategy at the point of transition because we have to take account of uncertainties , particularly the unpredictable portfolio decisions of financial market operators .
As we move over to the euro our approach has therefore to be very pragmatic and be an amalgam of both complete transparency of the money supply objective and the variety of information provided by the inflation target .
I also believe that it is crucial to coordinate the exchange rate target , for which the ministers of finance are responsible , as far as possible through permanent consultation arrangements - possibly in the future Economic and Financial Committee or in some other way - with the European Central Bank .
I do not consider it appropriate in that context always to be talking in terms of black and white , of hard and soft currencies , particularly when , in the background , we are considering and fixing exchange rate mechanisms .
What is actually needed is to create a stable currency that meets our needs in the global currency context .
That is what we are aiming for .
Alongside monetary policy strategies , instruments for conversion and the effectiveness of those same instruments are a vital precondition if we are to convert smoothly to or introduce the system as a whole .
Monetary policy instruments have to be applied decentrally , and this means that monetary policy has to be implemented decentralized basis , relying solely on the experience of the issuing banks .
Wishing particularly to emphasize transparency in my report , I have to reiterate that the European Central Bank has to have a special duty of accountability in relation to the European institutions and the European Parliament .
The economic dialogue with the ECB has to be placed on an institutional footing .
This is not a matter of political intervention but primarily involves exchanging information at an early stage .
That is the only way in which we can guarantee a prompt response in monetary policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of the report that I am presenting to you today is very important for the proper functioning of Economic and Monetary Union , as of 1 January 1999 .
It is a shame that there has been so little thought and decisions about this matter since the success or the failure of the single currency will depend on it .
It is from this viewpoint that this report poses a number of questions and proposes a number of answers to ensure that monetary union will work in favour of growth and employment .
The vital questions posed are : firstly , how will the role of budgetary and taxation policy change once the euro is in place ?
Secondly , in this unknown situation , this first in economic and political history , that of a centralized monetary policy with decentralized budgetary policies , how can we ensure that those policies jigsaw harmoniously and efficiently to ensure growth and employment for the whole of the European Union ?
Thirdly , how can we conduct budgetary and taxation policies and , more generally , economic policy , in such a way as to obtain an optimal functioning of the single market ?
Fourthly , how can we best respect the subsidiarity principle while ensuring the coherence of all budgetary and taxation policies and economic policy in general ?
Fifthly , should we leave budgetary and taxation policies under the full responsibility of the Member States in the framework of the growth and stability pact - which of course there is no question of calling into question - or should we coordinate those budgetary and taxation policies , even increase the Community budget , if we want to guarantee a harmonious economic and social development ?
Sixthly , how far should we harmonize taxation policy in order to avoid economic distortions that would be harmful to the allocation of resources , within the European area , and that might create very strong political tensions between the Member States ?
Seventh - and this is the final question - how can we find this economic and political grail , while guaranteeing democratic control over decisions , in particular giving the European Parliament the role it deserves ?
Those , ladies and gentlemen , are some of the fundamental questions that I try to answer in my report .
They are ambitious , difficult questions , but they are crucial for the future of the Economic and Monetary Union and I think that everyone here will acknowledge that .
The report therefore proposes various avenues to go down in order best to answer these questions and I will mention four that I think are vital .
The first is that in order to deal with an asymmetrical economic clash , i.e. one affecting a single country or region , or even a symmetrical clash , common to the whole euro area , it will be necessary at least to coordinate the budgetary and taxation policies and , probably , in the long term , to increase the Community budget .
Even if that is a taboo subject today , I think that in the long term that is the direction in which we shall head .
Why ?
To avoid external factors and situations that which soon prove insufficient in these matters .
The second avenue , in terms of budgetary and taxation policy - again in terms of economic policy in general , in order to head in the direction just indicated - consists in proposing the means for implementing this coordination , via an adaptation of economic decision-taking in a political body to be determined , subjected to a solid democratic control .
In other words more or less the proposal made here by Mr Lamfalussy and even by Mr de Silguy .
I should like to emphasize the fact that it is not a question by any means of calling into question the independence of the European Central Bank , nor of calling into question the main aim , that of price stability .
It is , on the contrary , a case of ensuring that there is a good policy-mix , as we say , between the two main instruments of economic policy , monetary policy and budgetary-taxation policy .
The third avenue concerns taxation itself , Mr Monti , putting forward the desire for minimum common rules on savings , company taxes and transfrontier taxation .
Finally the fourth main avenue is that of strengthening the ability to analyse the economic situation in the European Parliament , in order for it to participate more satisfactorily in the definition of European economic policy and in order to make our budgetary and taxation choices more credible .
We therefore propose creating a committee of economic advisers at the European Parliament to include recognized experts and to report , let us say twice a year , to the European Parliament on the economic situation and on recommendations that it thinks ought to be implemented in terms of economic policy and , more specifically , budgetary and taxation policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is what we feel to be essential if we wish to guarantee the optimal functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union , i.e. strong growth and full employment , as that is the final aim , all of it within the framework of harmonious economic and social cohesion .
Mr President , harmonization of taxation - just like monetary union - is part of the whole question of how we get the internal market to work to promote the investment and growth that stimulate employment .
The reason I am concentrating on VAT alone in the context of our review of taxation strategy is because this is a tax that has to be paid at the creditor 's place of business with regard to economic operators in the European Union , within the European single market , with - currently - 130 permitted derogations , 66 options and special rules and 25 differing rules on the place of taxation .
And who is really going to be able to make sense of all of that ?
Businesses that operate across frontiers have to have a detailed knowledge of the VAT systems of the other 14 Member States and familiarize themselves with the different procedures .
That is the reality of the transitional rules on VAT that have been in force since 1.1.1993 .
It is high time not only that we improve these transitional rules but that we establish definitive rules based on the country-of-origin principle .
Given the many problems , it certainly cannot be claimed at present that the internal market has made things easier .
The transitional arrangements have involved complication , waste , increased costs and bureaucracy , and it is the economic operators above all who have to carry that burden .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are therefore unable to derive any benefit from the internal market in this area .
What we need then is a reduction in administration , no reduction in the level of the Member States ' tax revenue , a reduced risk of tax evasion and to ensure that there is no distortion of competition due to VAT .
We have to achieve that by improving the existing system but also by moving towards the definitive system .
The subsidiarity principle has , in any event , to continue to be observed .
Harmonization should be required only where it is genuinely necessary .
The chief requirement for the definitive VAT system has to be that intraCommunity and domestic transactions are treated the same .
That can be achieved only if the taxation of all transactions is based on the country-of-origin principle .
That principle is bound to cause shifts in VAT revenue .
Member States with high levels of exports would benefit from increased revenue , while Member States with high levels of imports would have to cope with a substantial fall in revenue .
A sensible macroeconomic clearing system is therefore crucial , as it offers the only way of securing the current tax revenue of the individual Member States .
However , a clearing procedure of that kind will be generally acceptable only if it is simple , clear and quick and ensures prompt compensatory payments .
Previous hearings on this subject in the European Parliament concluded that it was not actually the right moment to introduce the country-of-origin principle .
Uniform and binding rules for all are essential to fair compensation .
Macroeconomic criteria have definitely to be applied to the clearing procedure to avoid allowing a distinction between domestic and intra-Community transactions to creep in .
I should like once again to point out here that the issue of the erosion of national sovereignty in the field of taxation concerns not merely direct taxation , for which the European Union will have in the long term to be competent also ; it also arises in regard to indirect taxation , so that a definitive VAT system really does need to be established - it must cover all transactions and also treat the same transactions in all of the Member States in the same way .
Tax exemptions should be replaced by the application of a zero tax rate .
That will be of particular help to nonprofit-making organizations .
However , the definitive VAT system has also to be seen as an opportunity to serve employment policy objectives .
A further substantial contribution to the simplification of taxation and transparency will certainly be provided by setting two tax rates only - a standard rate and a reduced rate .
Since VAT basically does nothing to distort competition , there is no need for full harmonization of the standard rates .
A great deal of work needs to be done on the reduced rates , however .
The definitive VAT system needs to be rounded off by introducing the single-place-of-taxation principle governing local competence in the taxation process .
Both businesses , which would have to meet their obligations in one place only , and the tax authorities would benefit from that rule .
The tax authorities would be able to monitor individual taxable persons more simply and more effectively .
Security of revenue will therefore be improved and it will be easier for companies to meet their obligations .
The call for the establishment of a minimum of control over the Member States ' powers to raise tax is very important here , to prevent application of the single-place-of-taxation principle being used to avoid tax .
To ensure that all persons liable for tax are treated in the same way , regardless of the Member State responsible , we have to have a rule that provides that VAT is payable throughout the EU on fixed dates .
However hard we try , the establishment of the definitive VAT system is bound to take some time yet .
We must therefore see to it that the transitional rules are improved and simplified .
Every opportunity must be taken to make matters easier and save costs .
Europe 's economy can only benefit from that and , not least , its employment market .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I would like to pay tribute to Alexandre Lamfalussy for the excellent work that he has done as the President of the European Monetary Institute and for the relationship that he has had with the European Parliament .
( Applause ) I certainly hope that even though he will be giving up that post he will still visit the European Parliament to give us the benefit of his extensive knowledge .
I would like to ask the President of the European Monetary Institute to respond to the points that I am going to make .
I used to work for a former Finance Minister in Britain called Dennis Healey , who you might know .
Mr Healey used to have a rule which was called the rule of holes .
The rule said that if you were in a hole , you should stop digging .
Do you not think it is time , given the state of the debate on economic and monetary union and the very clear shift of public opinion in Europe now , to rebalance economic and monetary union so that we can prove to the citizens of the European Union that we can have , on the one hand , a successful economic and monetary union and on the other hand , that we can tackle the problem of unemployment ?
I recall when you came for your confirmation hearing as President of the EMI that you said in response to a question asked by one of the Members that you felt it would be very difficult to complete the EMU project with the levels of unemployment we had at that time .
Those levels of unemployment have increased since that confirmation hearing .
We have made no impact on the unemployment situation .
Surely we must now recognize the political signals from the people in Britain and France and the nervousness of people in countries that have been strong supporters of the monetary union . This must be an economic and monetary union that is not an end in itself but a means to an end , namely a balance that will allow jobs to be created .
In particular I should like to refer to the way in which we deal in future with the question of EMU .
We now have nine prime ministers out of the fifteen who come from the family of socialists , or social democrats . This shows that there has been a switch in Europe in favour of a more balanced policy .
Is it not time , therefore , for the EMI and the Commission to recognize that they have to rebalance their own policy ?
Is it not time for us to look at a new model of development within the European Union ?
In particular I want to refer to two areas of policy : the stability pact , where the French were right to call for a delay .
It is time for us to include something in that pact on growth so that it is not only in name a pact for stability and growth .
Is it not time for us to activate Article 103 of the Treaty so that we start getting proper economic coordination ?
The most significant thing you could do today , Mr Lamfalussy , in your closing remarks to us as President of the EMI , is to send a very strong signal to the finance ministers and the heads of government in Amsterdam for them to recognize the pressure from the citizens for us to have an EMU , but an EMU in which there is public confidence and that will create jobs .
You could do that today for us .
Mr President , our group adds its voice to the chorus of thanks to President Lamfalussy for the commitment he has shown during this period , which has coincided naturally with a temporal and quantitative commitment without precedent in the history of the Community institutions .
Our thanks also go to the four rapporteurs who have done excellent work on their reports at a time - I repeat - when Europe , particularly where major responses in the economic field are expected , is expressing simultaneous hopes and fears which we have never had to deal with before .
But we must tell it like it is and not as we would like it to be .
In the coming months and years the Member States and the European Union must make definitive choices , choices which prioritize both economic and social needs , and it is very difficult to combine the two .
Europe was born of economic issues - the ECSC , coal and steel ; it has since developed on the social side and today it is struggling to find the right relationship , the right balance , between the economic and the social .
The four reports now before us are responses to this grave dilemma , helping us find a final approach , although a priori this must obviously include work and commitment from all the individual Member States .
Regardless of their current position , we know there is very strong political , economic and social movement on our continent at this time and making definitive choices today is very difficult and would erect barriers against countries whose past and future commitment is the guarantee of the continuity and completeness of our continent .
In particular , in presenting his report on the European Monetary Institute , Mr Mezzaroma has hammered home the point that political union and monetary union are mutually indispensable .
A few days ago Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Dini , who has been President-in-Office of the Council and whom I have actually criticized in previous reports , said that a warning had gone out from Italy not to neglect political Europe , not to regard it as completely obscured by the race towards the single currency , which is obviously recognized as immensely significant .
These statements were confirmed directly to the President , the Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok , and to the Committee on Institutional Affairs of the European Parliament .
That is important in restoring the confidence this institution needs to carry weight in the coming decisions .
Minister Dini went on to say that the transition to the single currency will not be a change in degree , but a genuine change in kind . Understandably , it is a change which will mean new arrangements .
He concluded that we are facing a real revolution .
It has been announced in advance , but no-one is ever sufficiently prepared for a revolution .
That is why our commitment must be permanent in giving priority to the qualitative over the quantitative , in devoting special attention to those sectors which are of an operational size to make the change positively .
I refer in particular to small and medium-sized firms , in which all the reports presented have taken an interest .
We are talking about reductions in taxation , contributions and bureaucracy : deregulation to let small and medium-sized companies operate more efficiently .
Finally , on VAT , we favour the approach taken , we are especially grateful to Commissioner Monti for the intensive work of the group that bears his name , and we should unite behind harmonization of the system .
In conclusion , we want to work even harder to define the logic of the single market 's development into a genuine internal market .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's joint debate , opened by the chairman of the European Monetary Institute , Mr Lamfalussy , for which I recognize the hard work and good relations that Dr Lamfalussy has maintained with the European Parliament in particular ( last year it was my honour to draft the report on the first report by his institution ) , comes really at a key moment .
We are facing a new element of uncertainty created after the position expressed yesterday by France at the ECOFIN meeting and one week away from the Amsterdam summit , which should lead us to a new Treaty .
I think that an important conclusion of this debate would be for the European Parliament to consolidate , strengthen and very clearly insist on the need for EMU to come about and the euro to be introduced in the planned conditions and timescales .
I think that any element of uncertainty could lead to greater difficulties , in an economic situation in which gradual recovery is taking placer , as is shown by the development of the European economy in the last quarter and the Commission 's own forecasts , which we debated here for this year and next , and that should offer an appropriate economic framework for fulfilling this project .
This project , as you know , also has a very important political dimension for the achievement of European Union .
I should like to insist that this moment in time is not the most appropriate for asking institutions such as the European Monetary Institute or the future European Central Bank to implement policies that do not fit them .
The Institute and , later , the Bank , must guarantee conditions of stability and solvency , with low levels of inflation and interest rates , offering a credible framework that is both secure and solvent internationally .
Then , if the governments and administrations implement economic policies in a framework of competence , we shall be able to solve the most serious problem facing European society : unemployment .
We cannot ask these institutions to solve what has to be done by the other administrations and the governments , when their electoral promises turn out to be more satisfactory , in the short term , from the electoral point of view .
On behalf of my group I second the congratulations made to Mr Lamfalussy in spite of the differences which we still have .
The current joint debate on these four reports evokes ideas which we would rather avoid , following the last Ecofin meeting , since we have already frequently had the uncomfortable feeling of having to think about something which we regarded as already decided and merely needing to be put into practice as quickly as possible .
There might even have been some change through the pressure of the social consequences and we should be glad that it is recognised , albeit timidly , that reflection is called for - even on something which has already been decided .
These reports fully follow the general direction taken , which we opposed , but which we think does contain some positive points , which might help in this new situation as regards the reflection which is so urgently needed .

The mention in the Mezzaroma report of the rigidity of the labour market , the cause of all the evils for the European Monetary Institute , hides the fact that there is too little investment and a lack of spending power and demand - which are due principally to the high level of unemployment and to many other determining structural causes ; on reading that we have no cause to think and reflect and we can only voice our concern about the attack on the socalled rigidity of the labour market if it is inspired by the example of the United States ; downward flexibility would be disastrous in some countries such as Portugal where the wages spread is already vast and social protection is scant and fragile .
When the Ettl report emphasizes the need for follow up measures which are more favourable to the real economy it really means unemployment , much talked about to little avail in practice , but there must be some levelling out of living standards as envisaged in Article 117 on economic and social cohesion .
Should not the mention in the Fourçans report - that it is necessary to anticipate situations in which the Member States might suffer asymmetric or symmetric crises - be reflected in some points in a resolution ?
I emphasize that it is acknowledged in point 13 that it is inappropriate to abandon the unanimity rule as regards fiscal harmonization , raising the vital question of the notion of fiscal sovereignty and more besides .
When in various points of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report we find concerns expressed about equity in taxation and the strengthening of the instrumental nature of fiscal policy in order to meet national situations which are so diverse , are we not aggravating certain wounds which we would prefer to ignore ?
But how can we then accept the fact that point 19 of the report calls for the introduction of the principle of majority decision-making on tax issues as a means of overcoming situations which the Member States might find fair in the long term , but which would not suit them in the short term .
It is a pity that these reports are short on points supporting our reflection on the consequences of what is afoot .
We do not think any the less of them as we are fully convinced of the need for this debate , which is not of our choosing , but which is forced upon us by social reality .
Mr President , Mr Lamfalussy , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Alan Donnelly has already rightly said , the voters have again given us a one-off opportunity to correct the neoliberal and monetaristic concept of the euro and the relevant strategy , moving not back to the fifties , Mr Herman , but forward to the 21st century .
We must and can now open the way to a Monetary Union within the framework of which it will at least be possible to resolve the major structural problems that were simply concealed by the previous policy of casino-style capitalism that was all show and no substance : the unemployment problem , the environmental crisis - when do we now hear anyone talk about the Rio principles and commitments and the Delors promises ? - but also the problem of real and not just monetary convergence between our Member States .
We ought really to take the opportunity put behind us the destructive temptation to get ' Back to Brüning ' ; we should be moving not back towards classical Keynesianism but beyond Keynes and into selective social and environmental restructuring of our national economies .
That will have to be underpinned by a common and coordinated employment policy because it will not be possible to build a stable euro on the back of increasing numbers of jobless .
Since 1994 , this House has again and again drafted proposals that were then ignored by the governments .
These include the establishment of the Central Bank - French Socialists have again used the phrase ' economic government ' but also the link to Community objectives and procedures .
They include changing the monster stability pact , making it into a pact that facilitates and drives forward a common approach on the part of the Member States geared to solidarity and employment .
It also includes a different interpretation of the convergence criteria , which have to be seen as a starting-point for a policy of genuine convergence and not in fact - and Mr Herman was quite right about this - some kind of mathematical obsession about the figure of 3.0 or indeed 3.00 .
Last , and by no means least , it includes - and all credit to Commissioner Monti who has consistently pointed this out - an end to tax dumping .
We need to get out of this jam , that is to say we have to avoid getting further into debt and imposing taxes wherever possible .
The fact is that the taxation of assets and profits is increasingly being undermined by tax dumping , and a community that covers its infrastructure costs from the coffers of employees , channelling it back to the undertakings , may make competitive gains in the short-term but this will not last .
We now have an opportunity to change things .
We must take advantage of it , and , in Amsterdam , the Member States can make a real effort here or we shall indeed be moving towards interesting , that is to say critical times when a wealth of decisions will have to be taken .
Mr President , I would thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for her radical rethink on the VAT system which is a very cumbersome arrangement and does not seem to have been designed for the Single Market .
The move towards a definitive VAT system based on the principle of origin will be a long process so I would suggest that we should not forget that we can improve matters in the short term .
VAT is a standard rate of tax on consumption which is applied across the board regardless of levels of income and , as one speaker already mentioned social justice , I think it is vital that we manage that aspect in a socially just manner .
Mrs Randzio-Plath 's explanatory statement says that tax exemptions currently permitted on social grounds should be replaced with a zero tax rate .
I see a warning light flashing here because such a move would change the legal tax basis for organizations that are exempt and possibly allow the imposition of the reduced rate or a standard rate in the future .
I would like to suggest that there is a total lack of logic with the VAT rate on newspapers , books and magazines varying from zero to 25 % .
We also have a situation where new education and information resources often attract the full rate .
Surely , as we move into the technological age , the electronic page should be treated in the same way as the printed page .
I have lodged amendments and would urge support for Amendments Nos 13 and 14 as well as Mr Miller 's Amendment No 1 , calling for zero rating of certain goods and services such as children 's clothes , shoes , food , medical equipment , books , social services , etc .
Surely we want to combat illiteracy and promote freedom of information , cultural diversity and an educated citizenry as well as a fair society .
I would urge everyone to support the amendments .
Mr President , the four reports that we are debating now have struck me with their lack of sincerity about the essential matters .
The rapporteurs have made an effort to try and paint an objective picture of economic convergence in the European Union , the major differences existing in the Member States ' fiscal and budgetary structures or the possible strategic axes of the future European Central Bank .
Mr Fourçans is even trying to do a little ' social ' by proposing to ease the constraints of the stability pact , by assessing public deficits not annually but over the whole of an economic cycle , whereas Mr Mezzaroma is aware that the rigidness of the labour market is neither the main nor the only cause of unemployment .
The real reasons underpinning the forced march towards EMU are never targeted .
Admitting that the single currency is not a vital condition for the proper functioning of the single market , that it serves only one aim , a single cause : the creation of a federal super-State , the structures of which our governments are putting the final touches to at the IGC .
In truth , the single currencies creates more problems than it solves and everyone knows that full well .
It calls for a considerable increase in the European budget in order to deal with asymmetrical economic shocks ; Mr Fourçans recalled that earlier .
It makes fiscal uniformization virtually inevitable , both in terms of rates and structures , in order to avoid fiscal dumping , and thereby considerably limits the different States ' freedom for action .
It necessarily calls for the creation of a European economic government to counteract the powers handed by the treaties to a handful of civil servants to run the Central Bank .
In a nutshell , the single currency can only lead to the total transfer of economic , budgetary and fiscal sovereignty towards Brussels , or else the situation will be totally out of control .
By means of the budgetary policies that it imposes the single currency is already an economic disaster , yet another source of unemployment in Europe .
Tomorrow , when it exists , if it exists , it will be even worse as the right conditions will not be there .
In order not to put back the date of introduction , we are now contemplating violating the principles originally set in concrete , the sacrosanct Maastricht criteria .
Neither France nor Germany will respect them in 1997 or 1998 , but neither France nor Germany wants to take responsibility for burying this economic aberration that is EMU .
When they want to get elected , government promise to work for the common good , everyone 's interests , the country 's prosperity .
Now , prosperity and interest call for the once and for all abandonment of the single currency .
Mr President , European Monetary Union is constantly being hampered by talk of postponement which , in turn , inevitably leave citizens feeling uncertain .
That is definitely not how to support the preparatory work that is being done by the European Monetary Institute , by the Commission , by this House and also by the Council and ECOFIN in particular .
I therefore think it very important that the political élite in the European Union should finally speak out clearly , give clear signals and above all , Mr Lamfalussy , highlight what you yourself have again said this morning .
We have made huge , previously unimaginable progress towards the convergence criteria - particularly those convergence criteria that are important for the operation of Monetary Union , the low inflation rate , the low long-term interest rates , exchange rate stability and also legal convergence in terms of the independence of the central banks .
We are all aware - and I should very much welcome it , Mr Lamfalussy , if you could say something further about this - that tax criteria are merely a supporting factor in achieving monetary stability and that the future European Central Bank should not be forced to apply a rigid monetary policy because of unsound budgetary policies ; that is something we could do without in the Monetary Union if we are achieve growth that is based on investment and creates employment .
It is therefore important to emphasize and give prominence to the fact that those who are in favour of Monetary Union are also for job creation and must look to that .
For that reason , the European Parliament has constantly called , since 1993 and by way of preparation for Monetary Union , for investment programmes in infrastructure to modernize and at the same time provide an incentive for private investment in Europe .
In that context , I also welcome the fact that it is clear that the need to consolidate the domestic budgets of the Member States should in no event be at the expense of public investment , and that ought constantly to be emphasized , as this reflects the spirit of the Treaty also .
In conclusion , I should like once again to ask you , Mr Lamfalussy , to explain how you think the democratic accountability of monetary bodies can be improved .
We are grateful - and I want to say this very clearly on behalf of the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs - for your trust and constructive cooperation , for the forbearance you have shown in the face of what can only be described as impudent and disrespectful questions from Members of this House but we are also grateful because you have always been willing to listen and respond to us .
I believe that you have worked not only to prepare Monetary Union but for the future of Europe . In conclusion , therefore , an indication of the form future cooperation between the European Parliament and European Central Bank should take would be especially important for us .
Mr President , Mr Ettl has written a very good report on the EMI report on Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on behalf of my party group .
The report was accepted without controversy by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and is a good summary of what is , in its turn , a good report by the EMI on the preparations which have been made before the ECB commences its work for the third stage .
Preparations for monetary policy procedures are still underway .
The EMI is drawing up various strategies for monetary policy .
In order to gain credibility for the new currency and to create an understanding of it , it will be necessary to communicate this strategy .
The EMI advocates that the ECB strategy is based on targets for the money supply and for direct inflation , which we warmly support .
To waver on chosen strategies or deviate from them may cause serious damage to a project as wide-ranging as EMU .
This is exactly why it is so important for the ECB to be independent and to take the long term view with its main task being to safeguard monetary stability .
The risk of wavering has become a reality now that socialist leaders want to delay EMU or even to change it totally or to alter the stability pact .
The stability pact is a central feature in gaining the necessary credibility for the new currency .
My party group wants to see Europe being further developed in the name of freedom and peace , with foundations in a Europe for the people , where trade and interaction create a sense of belonging and a dynamism .
We are prime advocates of the internal market which will strengthen our joint competitive strength and in so doing increase growth and produce new jobs in Europe .
This is why it is so important to remove barriers to cross border trade .
In this respect the report by Mrs Randzio-Plath on a common VAT system sets a very good example .
The internal market and the single currency are both institutions needed by the EU to promote competitiveness .
Other , different systems which have developed in our individual countries add a diversity which is enriching and which will not benefit from being standardised .
Our common institutions are the external framework which set the long term conditions .
The content must be created by the people and by entrepreneurs .
The easiest way to find the best model is through healthy competition between different national systems and solutions .
This is why I am concerned by those who wish to exclude competition and change as we will be the poorer for it .
A comprehensive political tax harmonisation will not solve the growth problem in Europe .
On the contrary we will set ourselves cost levels which remain permanently high and will continue to have high unemployment .
I am in favour of a diverse Europe which works together for common solutions where these are necessary .
I am also in favour of political leaders who keep their promises and are capable of taking a long term view and are not just out for gimmicks and popularity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's joint debate on the EMU , euro , VAT and coordination of budgetary policies hits at the heart of the matter , i.e. States ' currency and public finances , in the perspective of EMU .
All of these reports mostly are agreed to by our group although , in the case of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's , we are unable to share the philosophy of paragraph 19 , which stigmatizes the principle of unanimity for deciding taxation matters .
As far as VAT is concerned , the switch to a final VAT system , due on 1 January 1997 , has been put back sine die .
But it must be admitted that the current system opens the door to numerous major frauds and leakages .
We are aware of the imperfections of the transitional system and the European Union should set three objectives .
On one hand , to improve controls over the real situation of deliveries abroad , and to improve the sharing of information available to customs and tax offices ; in other words improve the exchange of information between States .
One certitude is that the switch to the final system , which would make it possible to impose the tax in the country of origin , calls for the current system to be greatly improved .
I should now like to make a more political comment .
If I am to believe today 's press , the new French Minister for European Affairs is asking for six extra months for understanding the set of dossiers on this subject .
What did he do when he was a member of this Chamber , until last Friday ?
I do not like criticizing our colleagues , but even so .
A member of this Parliament who sat here for three years , who never spoke in plenary session , whom we never saw , either in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs or in the Sub-Committee on Monetary Affairs , and whose most notable written question dealt with the comparative merits of the Cormorant phallocrocorax carbo sinensis and the Cormorant phallocrocorax carbo carbo , now that he has become Minister , comes and asks , cap in hand , for a six months ' delay , probably in order to have the time to examine a dossier he did not give a damn about when he was a member of the European Parliament ...
Some of us have been working here for many years and we could give him a few lessons , if he needs some cramming before the Amsterdam Summit .
Mr Pierre Moscovici - I am talking about him - and his accomplice , Dominique Strauss-Kahn , are holding the single currency hostage and are taking on the huge responsibility of jeopardizing the patient and careful work done by the Commission , the Council , the European Parliament and the European Monetary Institute .
I am sure that history will hold them responsible .
It seems to me that our colleague , Mr Giansily , was more interested in making personal attacks than a real political judgment of the commitments made by the French socialists in their electoral campaign which led them to victory .
Mr President , I should like to begin with the disturbing problem of the lack of consensus which has re-emerged on the question of fiscal policy at the heart of the EMU debate .
This needs to be resolved urgently .
If it is not , it has the capacity , politically and economically , to destabilize seriously the preparatory work to achieve a good EMU launch .
There is a huge unemployment crisis in Europe today , but we should not kid ourselves about how to respond to it .
It requires a realization that in a global economy we need more European labour market flexibility .
It requires an understanding that in that context and inside the EMU we need a wage-rate and incomes policy that takes account of growth in labour productivity and of competitive requirements .
It requires that we enhance labour mobility where possible within the Union through a variety of measures such as , for example , improving pensions ' portability and other practical measures .
It requires an emphasis on more European research and development .
It requires a constant search for more competitiveness .
It requires looking at switching social expenditure from passive to more active models .
All of these and more are needed , but not the illusion that quick , short-term budget fixes are an answer .
We tried that . It failed .
If we try it again we create an illusion and that illusion will lead to a weak , inflation-prone , high interest rate Euro-zone .
We do not need that either .
So we have to sort this debate out now , abandon self-delusion and realize that a solid EMU requires a solid fiscal basis .
Anyone who does not understand that will pay the price through higher interest rates and an inflation-prone Euro-zone .
On the VAT question , I agree in substance with what the rapporteur has said .
The Liberal Group wants two things from the Commission : that it should , in the short- to medium-term , try to improve the problems and shortcomings of the current system ; also , it should continue to deepen its work on moving the system to a new regime using the point of origin .
We cannot ask Member States to take a leap in the dark .
We need to know what are the revenue implications for states .
We need the macro-economic distribution key to be resolved sooner and not later .
Subject to that , the Liberal Group supports the timetable set out by the Commission .
Mr President , in my opinion this debate should have been more intensive and should have taken place a long time ago .
I am referring in particular to the debate on the far too independent status of the future European Central Bank , and on the vital need to tighten up economic political cooperation under the conditions created by EMU , particularly in the area of taxation , because under the conditions of EMU fiscal competition between the Member States will become ever stronger .
This distorts competition and also makes it harder for the Member States in their efforts to obtain sufficient tax income .
We are relatively satisfied with this report .
A number of views are put forward on how to create democratic supervision as a counterweight to the future European Central Bank .
One idea which has come up in my own party in Finland is that the European Central Bank should have a ' confidence body ' made up of Members of the European Parliament .
The Bank of Finland , for example , naturally has a group of bank delegates made up of Members of Parliament .
This thought perhaps tends in rather the same direction as the idea which the French floated when they spoke of a Stability Council .
However , it would provide a parliamentary dimension to this problem of democratic supervision .
It is also clear that the European Parliament should be consulted when the directors of the Central Bank are chosen .
This consultation should involve the whole board , for never before has there been such an independent body of experts which can limit in such a decisive way the powers of democratically elected bodies to pursue economic policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these four reports are an opportunity for us to express our support for all those who want Europe not only to be a market and a currency , but it is also an invitation for them to clarify what they really mean by a ' European economic government ' , which in our view must be clearly distinguished from the currency question .
As for this currency question , we shall sum up by saying that it is imperative to apply all of the treaty , nothing but the treaty .
All the treaty means the independence of the future monetary institution and banning excessive deficits .
Nothing but the treaty means that we deplore the slide , noted at Dublin , between the aim of the treaty to ban excessive deficits and the now clear allusion to an aim of systematic balance , even budgetary deficits .
We see this as a kind of dogmatic slide on which rests a perfectly erroneous assertion according to which growth and employment cannot only come from monetary and budgetary stability .
The whole of this century 's economic history shows the contrary .
The single currency does not need that economic justification .
While it is a necessary aim for completing European Union , it is a political aim and we know full well that it is because it cannot be built without budgetary stability that that stability is necessary .
Those are political aims .
As for the economic government , it must take into hand the question of growth and employment , but regardless of the currency objective .
We should not get the negotiation nor the timetable wrong .
What we need to achieve that balanced European economic construction is , for example , a strengthening of the means to take Community public action , by means of strengthening the budgetary means and strengthening fiscal means .
That would , for example , require the adoption of qualified majority voting , at least for part of the fiscal sector .
What is at stake is the IGC , not the stability pact .
Mr President , last week the ' Euroboat ' was moored at the Westerkade in Rotterdam , showing an exhibition on the monetary history of Europe .
This week it has started a tour of various cities in the Netherlands , Belgium , Germany and France , and is scheduled to bring this mobile euro-exhibition here to Strasbourg next month .
Compared with the introduction of the euro itself , this cruise upstream by the ' Euroboat ' is a piece of cake .
The Waal and the Rhine are not exactly raging torrents , and there are rarely heavy storms in the summer .
In economic and monetary terms , however , quite a violent storm has blown up in Europe .
Confidence in EMU is waning by the day .
The new French Government wants Spain and Italy to join the euro , but even if they were to meet the criteria - and Italy will certainly not be able to - everyone knows that the market has no confidence in a broad-based EMU , which would inevitably lead to a weak euro .
And as Mr Ettl rightly points out , this is hardly what we want .
If we take this view , the logical consequence is to call for EMU to be postponed , a conclusion reinforced by the fact that unemployment in Germany has remained at such high levels .
But Chancellor Kohl insists that EMU must and will go ahead .
This means that there is no chance of meeting the Treaty criteria by 1998 .

The Commission too says that postponement is impossible , which is the result of its highly irresponsible behaviour in promoting EMU and then , as it becomes clear that it cannot be achieved , claiming that there is no choice but to go through with it .
With disaster looming whether it goes ahead or not , the public authorities are clearly skating on thin ice .
One thing that surprises me is that the motions for resolutions support the independence of the central banks , while at the same time stressing that the European Central Bank should be answerable to Parliament and calling for a new political organ as an economic counterpart to the ECB .
Mr President , given the way it is currently looking and going , the fact is that Monetary Union is going to be an economic area which , though comparable with a nation-state in terms of its currency , has in many others areas structures that are clearly critical if Monetary Union is to be a success but which differ greatly from one Member State to another , and this is in itself a factor that involves a whole range of problems .
These are problems that have to be properly resolved before Monetary Union is set under way .
If the solutions adopted to tax harmonization and the issue of stability are only half-hearted , then this Monetary Union will rest on very shaky foundations .
The single currency should improve the operation of the internal market .
However , if , at the same time , it is to promote growth and employment , the Union is going to have to tackle the budgetary and fiscal policies of the individual Member States , as these inevitably have a considerable influence on the Union 's general economic position .
Then there is the question of coordinating the national budgets or even significantly increasing the European Union budget .
But as the rapporteur , Mr Fourçans , himself puts it , it is extremely difficult , both economically and politically , and I am afraid that it will not actually be possible to resolve those questions in the medium term , because Europe is not yet ready for this .
As far as fiscal matters are concerned , the rapporteur points very clearly to the unfair tax competition that could arise in a variety of areas between Member States or regions .
But , politically speaking , these are extremely difficult matters because the structures , traditions and cultures differ very greatly in the individual Member States .
What the rapporteur is unable to say is how the distortions likely to result from differing taxes are to be prevented .
At present , as far as many Member States are concerned , the principle of unanimity on this issue is something of a sacred cow .
We can certainly expect that where wages and wage costs differ only marginally , we shall see both increased worker mobility and businesses exploiting these location-based advantages .
Commissioner de Silguy said he was prepared to talk about everything but not about the point in time at which Monetary Union would commence .
I take the view that he needs immediately to tackle the question of a new and realistic time-frame that makes it possible to achieve real convergence if he wants Monetary Union to be a blessing for Europe and not a lasting burden .
Those , like me , who want economic union , may also want it at a later point in time , and I think that those who do want it have also to be in favour of closer citizen participation in this issue .
Mr President , employment , competitiveness and growth are issues which deserve to be given priority attention , as has been pointed out more than once here this morning .
It is quite clear that they are all affected by the way in which we organize our indirect taxation , so the report by Mrs Randzio-Plath deals with a subject that we cannot afford to treat lightly , not least for the following four reasons .
VAT is naturally important for the national income of each Member State .
It is also a consumer tax which affects everyone , and is particularly significant when it comes to the administrative burden on firms .
VAT can also cause shifts in intra-Community trade flows and in the attractiveness of certain services that we offer to consumers outside the European Union .
VAT based on the country-of-origin principle has formed part of the single market project since the very beginning , and its purpose is still to make intra-Community trade as easy as trade within one Member State .
With the current system this is impossible , and it is therefore unacceptable simply to convert the transitional regime into a definitive system .
Some people claim that this transitional system that we have been laboured with for far too long is now well established , and that firms would prefer to follow the principle of ' better the devil you know ' .
However , this is not the dominant view in business circles .
Anyone who takes a rather longer-term approach cannot but follow the Commission 's logic and choose the short , sharp shock of conversion , rather than carrying on with the heavy administrative burden which , for a number of reasons , the current system represents .
We should also not forget that the introduction of the euro will make the market more transparent , and that differences in rates and in how the rules on VAT are interpreted and applied are more likely than ever to distort competition .
The completion of the single market now demands the introduction of the euro and decisive measures to eliminate the patchwork of VAT rates .
This means having a system based on the country-of-origin principle , so that the rates remain roughly in line , and anyone subject to VAT only needs to nominate a single place where he can pay his taxes and claim deductions , with a clearing system based on macroeconomic principles .
But this solution will clearly never be achieved as long as this whole issue is still subject to the unanimity rule .
I therefore hope , perhaps against hope , that the Amsterdam summit will bring some progress in this area .
Time is now short , and past delays mean that European firms could now face a number of upheavals all at once .
Allowing the euro and the new VAT system to coincide could be too much of a good thing , and that is why we , as the authorities , have to show that we are serious about easing the administrative burden .
Clearer legislation is what we need , and what we are waiting for .
Mr President , this important debate is taking place at a time of dramatic change in the political landscape of Europe , when the situation seems too unbalanced to guarantee a stable euro .
This is a particularly worrying state of affairs and comes despite the considerable progress that has been made , as Mr Lamfalussy has described .
Although these reports are of a technical nature , we do of course all know that this is a political issue , much more so than many other aspects of the Intergovernmental Conference , because it is the euro which can create unity in Europe .
Not just Europe 's unity , but also its competitiveness is at stake here .
Mrs Randzio-Plath called in this morning 's ' Financial Times ' for the European Central Bank to have the same degree of openness as the federal committees in the United States .
I find it remarkable that one of our leading rapporteurs should recommend an American model , when it is more usual for Parliament to feel frustrated by the actions of the USA .
People in general have now become anti-European , and this is why all politicians from all parts of the political spectrum now have just one task before them .
We are facing a revolution , as Mr Garosci said , and politicians must now do everything they can to make it clear that European unity requires substantial reforms from all its citizens , because this is the way to create a dynamic financial , economic and social Europe .
Mr President , I would like to build on what Mr Cox said earlier , on behalf of my Group , about the debate on monetary union and the debate on fiscal union .
It seems to me a little strange that we have brought such diverse reports together into one debate - certainly Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report on indirect taxation seems to fit with little ease into such a debate .
It is nonetheless important because , inevitably , the discussion on monetary union must be succeeded by an in-depth discussion on fiscal union , which must follow .
I would like to raise the problem of our relative lack of understanding of , and failure to study , some of the principles of indirect taxation .
There is a need for clear principles for indirect taxation to be established , and much of the very valuable work that is being carried out by the Commission in this area seems to ignore the wider context of the lack of consensus on the base of VAT ; the danger here is that we will find the fiscal base actually being diluted .
Certainly , in my own country , the government is extending exemptions from VAT to services which were once in the public sector and are now in the private sector .
I am aware of similar problems in France and Italy .
The Commission has indeed put some of these questions to the Court of Justice for resolution .
I propose , and my Group proposes through amendments to the Fourçans and Randzio-Plath reports , the establishment of an independent organization which would bring together academics , industry practitioners , Commission officials and national government officials in a wider and informal context to discuss different VAT practices and to build a consensus on this .
I hope that the House will feel able to support these amendments so that we may have a wider discussion on the very principles of indirect taxation before we proceed further with the details .
Mr President , as opposed to the economic area of free trade initially set up , the rule of increasing Community regulation has prevailed once more , leading to the triumph of supra-national will .
Since the second half of the 1980s , the growing desire for general harmonization called for the setting up of a socalled transitional VAT system that everyone knew was not appropriate .
Transitional , but until when ?
The final system was due to be adopted by the Commission by 31 December 1994 .
It is now June 1997 and the taxation question is still on the agenda for harmonization .
It is a delay but , above all , an admission of failure .
This failure is all the more damning because it affects the main Community institutions , the Council and the Commission .
This delay is now symbolized by two simple points .
The first is that this transitional system is inappropriate and must be replaced and the second is the difficulty in setting up the final system .
For that purpose , a certain number of ideas have been advanced , primarily that of replacing the destination country rule with the so-called country of origin rule .
We are in agreement with this rule in principle as it would simplify administrative steps for companies .
When you have fewer declaration obligations , you have fewer risks of error .
A single declaration in a single taxation location means less possible fraud and cost savings .
Where we disagree is when you recommend the pure and simple abolition of national exonerations and their replacement by zero rating .
This is a further abandonment of our national sovereignty since it would be the Community institutions which would decide .
Like all national taxes , direct or indirect , VAT is a priority instrument of budgetary policy .
The proof is that since its appearance in France this unique tax has been copied worldwide .
Yes , to the desire to change the current system but not at any price .
No , to a further abandonment of sovereignty .
We want to preserve our fiscal autonomy , which is not necessarily incompatible with a new VAT system in the European Communities .
Mr President , like many of the earlier speakers this morning , I should like to thank Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy for his work at the head of the European Monetary Institute and his relations with his institution , in the knowledge that we are not always easy to deal with .
We thank him for the relations he has maintained with us , in the hope that we shall develop similar ones with his successor .
He is leaving us at a moment when things are obviously moving .
The nearer we get to monetary union and the more we can gauge the main consequence : the urgency of economic union .
In this context the Fourçans report , as amended by our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , is a useful one .
Yes , we need to strengthen the coordination of the budgetary policies of the Member States , be it by indirect or indirect taxation , capital or company profit taxes , without forgetting the process of relocation .
We also need to set up a democratically controlled political body that would be responsible for the coordination of economic policies .
These are the concerns that we share although we have not been the main promoters .
But we must go further and be more ambitious .
The budgetary aspect of the report calls for several remarks , in my opinion .
The stability pact - as the outcome of yesterday 's ECOFIN Council meeting showed - is only legitimate if it serves faster growth .
In terms of taxation , we should head towards minimum harmonization of corporation tax , savings taxes and transfrontier taxation .
But we should also introduce qualified majority voting for certain direct taxes , or else we shall be unable to fight fiscal dumping or strike a taxation balance between capital and labour , taxing capital speculation .
As for the political body mentioned in the Fourçans report , while not simply call it an ' economic government ' and give it , as Article 103 of the Maastricht Treaty clearly calls us to do , clear powers to coordinate budgetary , fiscal and structural economic policies ?
The Fourçans report heads in the right direction but seems a little timid when it comes to aims .
Recent changes of government in certain Member States should help us , without delay , to promote at European level alternatives to the solutions and mechanisms proposed in recent years .
We must all work for the introduction of the single currency within the set deadline .
But the States that want it must be free to pursue their main public investment policies so as not to sacrifice the recovery in growth to the absolute priority of the monetary objective .
To conclude , Mr President , we must avoid setting up a mechanism that would turn employment into the main variable of adjustment , thereby turning our back on our political priority : job creation .
To achieve that , we must do all we can to ensure that the switch to the single currency takes place on the planned date but with an economic union that is also committed to , serving growth and employment .
For that we must , in the beginning , as of today , complete the stability pact , which only has growth in its name and nothing else , so that thanks to a genuine coordination of economic policies , we can turn it into a genuine growth and employment pact .
The vital thing is not whether or not the stability pact is adopted in Amsterdam .
It is that the single currency will help to create jobs as of 1 January 1999 .
Mr President , with regard to the Fourçans report , it is extremely important for us to determine how far we need to focus on economic cooperation during the third stage .
We can also no longer avoid the problem of harmonizing the taxation systems within the euro zone .
We have heard much more recently about economic cooperation , such as at yesterday evening 's ECOFIN meeting in Luxembourg on giving greater priority to the fight against unemployment in Europe .
The socialists clearly see large government deficits as synonymous with social policy , so the proper organization of government finances has been pushed into the background , a move which I deeply regret on behalf of all of Europe 's unemployed .

Not long ago , a Stability Council was set up at the request of the French .
Now the Fourçans report , once again by a Frenchman , proposes an economic government with far-reaching powers .
The intention is clearly to provide a counterbalance to the European Central Bank , particularly with regard to employment , and it seems that there is a wish to have a trade-off between inflation and employment as usual .
But I am firmly convinced that the answer to the unemployment problem does not lie in undermining the independence of the European Central Bank .
The policy advocated by the future ECB - price stability and low inflation - means low interest rates , which should stimulate investment and , in turn , growth and employment .
Next , tax harmonization .
We need to avoid fierce competition between the Member States here .
On the other hand , Member States whose government finances are in order and which therefore do not need to impose higher taxes on their citizens must not be punished for their success .
The VAT system too will come under pressure from the euro .
For businesses , and in particular for small and medium-sized firms , the current VAT system is the main distorting factor in the single market , and even the man in the street can see why there are still discrepancies .
Commissioner Monti bases his definitive VAT system on the country-of-origin principle , which in theory should remove most of the problems we have with the current system .
But it is the implementation of the system , particularly the clearing systems , that is causing great concern among the net exporting countries , especially those with a mainport on their territory .
Small and medium-sized firms also regard this as a problem .
As long as VAT is calculated on the basis of national statistics and the statistics within the European Union are not harmonized , there will still be a risk for the net exporting countries .
The SMEs are currently worried that they are going to have to supply the missing figures , which would in one fell swoop cancel out one of the main advantages of having the definitive system , which is to reduce the administrative burden on firms .
In principle , the clearing system ought to shift the administrative burden from SMEs to the government , where it belongs .
As far as I am concerned , the definitive system is only acceptable if it places the administrative burden where it belongs , with the government , and if a solution is found to the enormous risks presented by the clearing system .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the European Monetary Institute , today we are debating reports whose common theme is the preparation for the single currency in connection with which you , Mr Lamfalussy , have been a prime mover .
You have done it with exceptional skill and finesse and displayed a refinement of conduct which makes all of us regret that today marks your last appearance here as president .
Mr Donnelly has recalled your reference here to unemployment and to the obstacle that you believed it placed in the way of completion of the process . Your full view , if I remember rightly , was that high levels of unemployment would push some governments into relaxing budgetary discipline .
Looking at the developments in France one could say that your prophecy is beginning to come true , except that it is coming true , of course , with popular endorsement , and despite the sarcasm that has been expressed in this Chamber about the voice of the people I do not imagine that anyone will say that we should get discard the people of France and appoint another people in their place . I am assuming that in a parliament the voice of the people should carry some weight .
With all due respect to your views , I must point out the one-sidedness of your positions concerning fiscal discipline .
Unemployment may give an impetus to fiscal relaxation , and excessive budgetary stringency may , of course , create unnecessary and intolerable levels of unemployment .
One has difficulty understanding in what way the persistence with a policy which is expanding unemployment and slowing down economic growth can benefit us as regards global competition , which also comes into play here .
Is it or is it not correct that technological innovation takes off , that costs are reduced , that productivity rises and that , therefore , competitiveness increases when an economy is flourishing rather than when it is stagnating and when unemployment is perpetuated ?
We are not saying that unemployment should be combated via consumption excesses , but for the stability pact effectively to prohibit public investment when private investment is not forthcoming is , to say the least , rash , and any move by the French Government to change things in the direction which this Parliament has called for would indeed be laudable .
Furthermore , the imposition of fiscal stringency is wrong at this particular time . It is not a question of whether we can live with balanced budgets .
We can and we must live with balanced budgets .
What is at issue is the dynamic via which we achieve them and whether , as far as unemployment is concerned , now is the right time to be imposing a squeeze which is actually increasing unemployment .
We need to get on top of the unemployment problem first and to escape from this impasse into which we have been led instead of digging a deeper hole for ourselves . After that we shall be able to tackle the issue of monetary stability , as indeed we must , with much more ease .
Mr President , I want to speak mainly on issues linked to the Randzio-Plath and Fourçans reports , and then on fiscal issues .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , Mr Harman and I have presented two amendments to Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , which we strongly support . These amendments are intended primarily to emphasize our clear agreement on the final choice of the principle of country of origin .
In the light of many considerations , we are in fact convinced that this is the optimum mechanism for the definitive VAT system , because of its advantages in terms of greater simplicity for businesses , but also for consumers , who will be able to benefit from more transparent news and information about the relative advantages in different countries and on different markets . Finally , it will lead to better functioning of the internal market , which will also be stimulated by a more transparent VAT system .
In particular , a system of this kind would strengthen the fight against fraud - and we all know how important that is . We feel sure it is the right system to adopt , despite a certain confusion which emerges every now and then , on condition that it is based on the simplest possible mechanism , both as regards public administrations , hence the compensation mechanisms others have already mentioned , and in particular , obviously , as regards the obligations on firms .
So our two amendments - Nos 9 and 10 - which we hope will receive wide support from Members of Parliament , are intended to reinforce this concept , and are also intended to stimulate the Commission , in the current transitional stage , to do the groundwork , so to speak , for moving to the definitive system .
We are certainly facing all kinds of obstacles , in particular the famous unanimity problem .
In this connection I am delighted that the Fourçans report , at points 11 and 12 , incorporates the concept of a code of conduct in fiscal matters .
We debated this at the last Brussels session with a report - I had the honour to be the rapporteur - which received a large majority and wide support from Parliament .
I would like to record this fact not only as a point shared with the Fourçans report , but also as a question on which Parliament has already made its position clear very strongly .
I shall restrict myself to these points and just reiterate my deep appreciation for the work of both colleagues , which I have had the pleasure of commenting on briefly here .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mr Lamfalussy and all our colleagues who draft reports , but due to shortage of time , I shall concentrate in this speech on the Fourçans report .

The coordination of the budgetary and fiscal policies for Monetary Union is based on an initiative report by the European Parliament , which realised at a very early stage that it is essential to study not only the effects which the third stage of EMU might bring , but above all the new role which these policies should come to play in monetary stability , economic growth and the jobs market .
It was even fundamental to make an in-depth analysis of the Maastricht Treaty in order to identify the mechanisms which would make it possible to define , follow up and control the policies to be pursued by the Council , the Commission and finally by the European and national Parliaments in this matter .
The principal objectives of the single currency are to bring optimum efficiency to the operation of the internal market and to make it possible to develop a sustainable economy , to have more and better jobs and to improve living standards in the community .
So what means should be adopted to keep within these principles ?
From the budgetary point of view I think that the main ideas should be as follows : national budgetary policies will continue to be a fundamental instrument , but the deficits should not be assessed on an annual basis , but on the basis of a global cycle .
And consequently , the stability and growth pact - if it comes to be implemented - should in some way be applied automatically and independently of political judgment .
Budgetary policy should therefore tend towards the re-channelling of expenditure to help to create employment and improve the well-being and safety of the citizens , not to reduce that .
At Community level we must in the long term envisage budgetary growth in relation to GNP in order to move ahead of the 1.27 % envisaged for 1999 to higher figures which will make it possible to overcome situations in which we have asymmetrical crises .
As regards fiscal policy within the sphere of the single currency , harmonization measures are needed in order to avoid burdensome economic distortions , measures which must be applied above all in the field of taxation on savings , taxation of companies and the approximation of indirect taxation .
The broad lines are set out in this report by Mr Fourçans , whom I congratulate on accomplishing this difficult task .
It is now up to the national and European institutions to define the means and the time-scale for realising our hopes placed in the creation of the internal market and the single currency to reach the objectives of growth , wellbeing and economic and social cohesion which the citizens of Europe aspire to .
Mr President , it now seems clear that the third stage of EMU will take place in accordance with the timetable , although according to the assessment of the Commission and the Monetary Fund only two countries , Finland and Luxembourg , will fulfil the convergence criteria It may therefore be necessary to interpret and relax them , partly in order to revive the employment situation and economic growth in some countries in the next few years and to prevent ' asymmetrical crises ' .

Mr Fourçans ' report has excellently analysed the narrowing of the choice of economic policy instruments under the new current conditions .
In adopting my three amendments , the Committee on Economic Affairs accepted a rather softer line which also stresses employment and the prevention of difficult economic crises while at the same time acknowledging the broad lines of the report 's analysis .
What would this line mean if put into practice ?
Greater national freedom of action for budgetary policy .
Its significance will be enhanced if the possibility of using exchange-rate policy disappears and the European Central Bank prevents the operation of national monetary policy .
How should it be implemented ?
The 3 % ceiling on budget deficit should not be interpreted short-sightedly but in the context of the whole trade cycle .
In this way a deficit can be used as a means of stimulating growth , and a surplus as a weapon of deflationary policy .
For this reason , punitive interest rates should also be defined on the basis of the average deficit over the whole trade cycle and not the deficit at one particular moment .
This last is important because no punitive consequences ensue in the case of divergence from any other of the criteria .
A Member State may happily have a debt representing as much as 100 % of its GDP and inflation on an interest rate exceeding the criteria , without these incurring any punitive measures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's economic policy has taken a healthy , though to many people dramatic turn .
The election victories of the Social Democrats have recently opened the door to the emergence of an economic policy which stresses the importance of employment .
We cannot build a common currency on mass unemployment and the voters have now clearly shown that .
We must not run headlong into a common VAT system on a wholly mechanical basis without taking account of employment factors .
Fortunately , Mrs Randzio-Plath takes account of the social aspects in considering taxation priorities .
However , we must go further .
We cannot assume that the Commission has the sole right to analyse and direct the structure of tax policy .
Here in the European Parliament we must bear our responsibility and define the new structures and priorities which will encourage employment .
The current VAT directive which had its origins in the 1970s requires reform .
Tax revenue has gone uncollected in all Member States since customs formalities were removed and because of the cheap depreciations carried out by big businesses .
Large industrial concerns are able to adapt to the jungle-like VAT system , but SMEs are still trying to cope with the differences in practice between the various countries .
Now the big firms do not want a new VAT system , but it is of vital importance to SMEs .
The common VAT system will have problems if we assume that public services come within the scope of VAT .
Will schools , kindergartens and medical care thus become a saleable good to be taxed and privatized ?
And how about public service or charitable organizations which collect money for example for developing countries or for those who are excluded in their own society ?
Will we thus tax humanitarian work while closing our eyes to bigbusiness tax evasion ?
Setting tax rates at the same level is thus very problematic because it would distort competition .
Mr President , I should like to comment on the report by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
In paragraph 14 , she quite rightly calls for particular attention to be given to tourism , which as we all know is an extremely important sector for employment , with some 10 million people in the European Union earning their living from it .
In a number of Member States , VAT is a major cost factor for tourists , for example in Denmark , where VAT accounts for 25 % of holiday spending .
We should not underestimate the effect of this .
Margins in this sector are usually small .
In Ireland , the VAT rate for hotels was increased from 10 % to 23 % at the beginning of the 1980s , with the result that over 10 % of Ireland 's hotels were forced to close within four years .
The Council , the Commission and Parliament all regard the fight against unemployment as our number one priority , and rightly so .
Eighteen million people out of work is simply not acceptable .
Experts believe that the travel and tourism sector offers the best chances of creating new jobs over the next ten years , particularly for women and young people .
At the same time , they also conclude that of the tens of millions of new jobs that are expected to be created in tourism worldwide , less than 5 % will be created in the European Union .
This poses two specific questions : firstly , what are the Commission 's views on these studies , and is it prepared to try to ensure that the reduced VAT rate is applied across the board to all tourism-related activities ? And , secondly , when can we expect the results of the study which the Commission promised six years ago into the impact on employment of the possible abolition of duty- and tax-free sales in intra-European transport in 1999 ?
More and more studies are indicating that tens of thousands of people could lose their jobs , not least in the ferry sector .
Mr President , Mr Lamfalussy , in the long run you cannot spend more than you earn .
Families that go on spending more than they earn , lose spending power ; in businesses jobs are put at risk and lost if , in the long term , they spend more than they make , and the same , of course , applies to States if , in the long term , they spend more than they take in .
Anyone can lose credibility in that way , and we have in the past seen crises which have shown that all citizens then lose their assets and enormous numbers of jobs are lost .
That is why the Stability Pact is so important .
We have to try to establish sound finances , as they are , when all is said and done , the best foundation for the internal market .
The roof is build out of the single currency .
Our finances are in the end critical to our ability to compete , including with States outside the European Union .
That is why we need to take a very close look at the harmonized taxes .
This House has already made a preliminary assessment of what the subsequent costs will be .
It is very important in relation to VAT harmonization also , to consider what the costs will be to the State , to citizens and to businesses .
My second point concerns lean management .
I think it absolutely vital that those concerned are involved in the harmonization process .
99.8 % of businesses in the European Union have less than 250 employees .
I think that we have to ensure that , for individuals , the taxation system is as simple and easy to understand as possible .
My third and final point concerns bench marks .
In the same way as the convergence criteria provide useful bench marks , we need to have that same system for taxation , and indeed to have an improved version that can be applied when decisions are taken in the future also .
Mr President , may I start by thanking the rapporteurs for the excellent work they have undertaken in this very important field .
In particular , I am encouraged to see how the role of the European Monetary Institute is shaping up and look forward to seeing the institute become the central bank .
One thing I would like to comment on are the obvious problems that we are finding with the economic and political developments in Germany and France .
Both of those electorates clearly are somewhat concerned at the budgetary measures and steps being taken by their respective governments in trying to meet the Maastricht criteria required for European monetary union .
In France that has manifested itself in a changing government , where the emphasis now will shift to jobs , prosperity and employment and away from the type of budget-cutting that we have seen in the past .
Similarly , in Germany there are problems with the ability of the German economy to move in a way which will help the country meet the 3 % deficit requirement .
Given the changing nature of the view of the electorates in both France and Germany - and indeed the UK since the election - and the emphasis that will be placed on jobs , growth and employment rather than on budget-cutting , the position has altered to the extent that there should be a review in the Maastricht timetable .
I say that with regret because I am a keen enthusiast of monetary union and would have liked to see it go ahead on time but the positions of the German and French governments will be such that if a Euro is created on 1 January 1999 it will be a soft Euro and very quickly come under attack from the currency markets .
I want to see an emphasis on growth and genuine stability and if we go ahead on 1 January 1999 we will not see stability and growth may be hindered .
I want to thank Mr Fourçans for his report and to refer to his report in particular as a good basis for a strategy on the whole question of the harmonization of tax in line , of course , with economic convergence in future years .
We should remember that the internal market has only just been completed .
We should recognize that a considerable degree of economic convergence has already been achieved between the richer and poorer parts of the European Union .
Yet we still have a wide degree of variation between the economic performance of the Member States , and indeed the traditions of government management of the economies .
We should not jump to any rash conclusions about the need for the harmonization of tax in order to create equality of competition .
We should also remember that whatever laws or whatever rules we make will apply to an enlarged Community where economic convergence will be much less than what it is today .
The report is therefore a good basis for consideration but we must not do anything rash until we see properly how the Single Market with freedom of movement for people and money interacts with taxation policy and fair competition .
In relation to some countries , I have heard it said that the manufacturing profits tax imposed by the Irish Government on manufacturing industry distorts competition .
Yet I would like to point out here that when you consider the high rates of personal taxation , when you consider the social welfare system , when you consider the high rates of taxation on transport , you will find that the government is wiping out with some policies concessions that it gives to others and , in fact , competition is not at all distorted .
It will take a number of years before we know what is actually happening .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate Mr Lamfalussy , the committee and the rapporteurs .
The reports before us indicate that we are making considerable progress towards achieving economic and monetary union .
A number of major political events have recently intervened in the final phase of preparations , and in a democracy it is logical and advisable to take account of such signals from the public .
If we fail to do so , we shall simply undermine Europe 's credibility further still .
What is currently happening with the stability pact is supported not just by France , but by Parliament and Parliament 's largest political group .
It is not true , Mrs Peijs , that those who want the stability pact to have a proactive growth component are trying to derail public finances .
For us there is no contradiction .
We want compliance with the stability pact and the budget criteria , but the name of the pact is actually the pact for stability and growth , and the growth aspect also needs to be given attention .
Proactive measures can take various forms .
Monetary policy in the stricter sense can be tailored towards employment as well as inflation .
The White Paper can be implemented in full , alongside the Member States ' own labour market policies and in addition to a different , alternative form of taxation system to produce lower social taxes .
So we are in favour of the timing of the euro and we also wish to see compliance with the letter and spirit of the convergence criteria .
This does not mean 3.0 for a country such as France with a debt ratio of less than 60 % , and there needs to be room for some discussion on this point .
We support an independent European Central Bank , but with democratic supervision by Parliament and a kind of economic government by the Council .
So what we favour is a twin-track approach .
First , prove that we are right to be confident about the exact timing for the introduction of EMU and , secondly , introduce a procedure for expanding the stability pact .
Mr President , I will not bother congratulating Mr Lamfalussy and the Commission because I think they have had enough for one morning .
I should like to speak on the report on VAT .
Value added tax is probably the only true European tax .
It is also the tax which touches the lives of every European citizen .
This tax , though , does not come without its problems .
There are problems of differential rates in the various Member States ; there are problems of implementation of the tax ; there are problems on the collection of the tax .
All these problems and differences expose numerous loopholes .
It is the exploitation of these loopholes which is responsible for the massive fraud which is occurring within the European Union today .
It is therefore imperative that any system of VAT which we adopt must be able to tackle the problem of fraud .
That is why the Socialist Group calls for a common system of VAT which is simple , transparent and above all , easily monitored .
A VAT system based on taxation in the country of origin would seem to be the best method available to reduce the scope for fraud .
The goal of the single European market is one which this Parliament is striving to achieve , but that also brings forward problems in the harmonization of taxation .
In the field of value added tax this , on the face of it , would create innumerable problems .
Cultural differences have led to different rates on the same items in different Member States .
So , should we harmonize all levels of VAT ?
I believe that is not necessary .
As my colleague , Mrs Randzio-Plath , said , harmonization should only occur where it is necessary and can be effective .
As I said at the beginning of this speech , VAT touches the lives of every European citizen .
Therefore the system we adopt has to be simple , fair and effective .
If it is not then we run the risk of alienating the citizens of Europe .
Without the people 's support we are no longer a Union .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to speak in this very interesting debate to refer to various questions and in particular the uncertainty that prevails in the European Union and is reflected in public opinion and the front pages of today 's newspapers .
First of all , uncertainty over the fulfilment of the convergence criteria in particular by the two central countries : Germany and France .
Secondly , uncertainty over the possible postponement of entry into effect of Monetary Union , due to the previous question .
Thirdly , uncertainty over approval and the functioning and effective application of the stability plan .
Fourthly , uncertainty over compatibility between the logic of Monetary Union and the strategy to boost growth and employment .
Uncertainty or argument that can be handled in different ways .
Given all these uncertainties , I think , Commissioner and Mr Lamfalussy , that we must urgently send European public opinion and society a clear political message .
First of all , that message must assert that Monetary Union will be achieved in accordance with the set timetable .
In order to meet that aim , we must assess fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria using the flexibility foreseen in the Treaty and that has to be done at once .
Secondly , we must affirm that Monetary Union will be accompanied by a coordination of economic policy between the Member States , with growth and job creation as the main objective .
This strategy in favour of employment not only is not in contradiction with the logic of Monetary Union but , on the contrary , is precisely in the framework of the single currency where we shall achieve the vital level of autonomy to develop a European policy to boost growth and create jobs .
Active growth policies that are currently coming up against serious limits in each Member State could be developed instead in the Union , by means of a common monetary policy .
We must approve the instrument of a stable single currency , with low interest rates and less conditioning in respect of the external sector than that encountered at present by each of the currencies due to join the euro , in order to set in motion a European growth initiative .
I would like finally to refer to the question of the flexibility of the labour market and our economies , a flexibility that often - this morning too - is considered to be the only requisite for growth .
Our economies - it must be said - under the imperatives of the single market and fiscal consolidation - have achieved a highly appreciable level of flexibility during this decade .
We are still far off the flexibility levels of Singapore , Thailand or the United States , but we enjoy a very high degree of flexibility by European standards , by the standards that are acceptable to our public opinions .
These public opinions , bearing the sacrifices imposed by that flexibility , must be sent an urgent and positive message of hope , of confidence that Monetary Union will also make faster economic growth and more jobs possible .
Mr President , one Member in this debate found bracketing fiscal issues and monetary union together a little forced .
On the contrary , I have to say I found that bracketing very interesting .
The single currency is the culmination of economic and monetary union , the essential basis of economic union is a properly functioning single market , and a well-functioning single market demands proper coordination of fiscal policies .
I will now briefly discuss the fiscal policy aspects , which have been deepened very intelligently in the reports by Mr Fourçans and Mrs Randzio-Plath , and I thank them both for the important work carried out .
I would like to start with a political point .
We find ourselves at a stage in which the Member States are very much bound to the concept of fiscal sovereignty but are in fact largely losing that fiscal sovereignty to the benefit of the markets , as a result of mobility .
The cover of a recent issue of the Economist was headed ' The disappearing taxpayer ' ; it was about the phenomenon of mobility , which whittles away the tax base .
As Mr Giansily and Mr De Rose have emphasized , subsidiarity is fundamental and so is national sovereignty .
The Commission still considers it desirable to move from unanimity to qualified majority , at least for certain fiscal matters .
Even if this does not happen , we must also make efforts to increase coordination of fiscal policies .
The political stakes are very high : without coordination of fiscal policies , respecting subsidiarity , there can be no social market economy at European level , and no well-functioning market economy .
There can be no social market economy because fiscal competition between the States is increasingly preventing each of them from redistributing income through the fiscal system .
And the way fiscal competition takes place - so favourable to capital and adverse to labour , as Mr Wolf underlined - contributes to creating unemployment .
Nor can there be a well-functioning market economy in Europe without fiscal coordination , given the obstacles facing firms , and indeed workers , in a single market without a minimum degree of fiscal harmonization .
That is why the Commission has been taking a new approach for about a year , aimed at raising awareness amongst the Member States of the need to make progress and laying the foundations for consensus and concrete proposals .
The Commission has put forward the VAT work programme dealt with in the Randzio-Plath report , the proposal for a directive for the taxation of energy products and a fiscal package being developed in the Fiscal Policy Commission .
I agree with Mr Fourçans when he stresses that fiscal competition is not a negative phenomenon in itself , but it becomes one when it involves asymmetry and unfairness , as it does in many cases .
As a result of continuous contact with the European Parliament , in particular with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and with the group of permanent representatives of the finance ministries , the Commission has been finalizing a fiscal package , which coincides in many respects with the lines proposed by Mr Fourçans , consisting of a code of conduct , especially as regards company taxation , measures to eliminate distortions in the taxation of capital , measures to eliminate deduction at source on interest and royalty payments between subsidiary companies and measures to eliminate some of the more significant distortions in indirect taxation .
I now come to VAT .
The new VAT system , dealt with in the Randzio-Plath report , is , in the Commission 's view , an issue of the greatest importance .
As you know , after the result of the vote on the Randzio-Plath report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on 22 April , nine amendments were presented and if you adopt them they will introduce changes the Commission thinks right .
I very much appreciate the constructive attitude of all the political groups in deciding to reconsider certain extreme positions .
I thank Mr Donnelly , My Thyssen , Mr Secchi and the others who have shown support for the Commission 's project .

The Commission has presented a precise programme of work with a political timetable organized in three stages : the first deals with improving the current VAT system and therefore addresses the perspective Mr Cox has identified ; the second provides for the modernization of the VAT system as regards telecommunications services ; the third will genuinely simplify the VAT system , moving to a system based on taxation in the country of origin .
As Mrs Randzio-Plath has recognized , work is in progress on the preparation of this definitive system , to make simplicity its salient feature , responding above all - and here I turn to Mr Peijs and other Members of Parliament - to the needs of small and medium-sized firms and contributing to a major reduction in the serious phenomenon of fraud that exists today .
I also want to reassure Mr Cox , Mrs Ewing , Mr Cornelissen and others that this will not be a leap in the dark , as every detail of the system will be covered and the issue of reduced rates will be examined in the light of social impact .
I feel certain there is no divergence of views between us on an essential point : before moving to the system of taxation at origin , the current system must be modernized , applied more uniformly and , where possible , simplified .
However , I would like it to be really clear that the proposal which we are examining is not limited to the transitional provisions but relates to the entire sixth VAT directive , which specifically includes these provisions .
I conclude , Mr President , by observing that , in its report of a few months ago on convergence and in its annual report , the European Monetary Institute emphasizes the need for progress in fiscal harmonization , in particular as regards the return on capital .
Finally I would like to thank the two rapporteurs and all the Members who have spoken .
We shall continue to work on these delicate fiscal issues in close cooperation with the European Parliament .
Lastly I would like to associate myself with the homage paid by my colleague Mr Silguy , on behalf of the Commission , to President Lamfalussy .
Mr President , I do not wish to hold up the sitting , so I would just like to ask the Commissioner if he will answer my two specific questions in writing ?
Yes , I will .

Ladies and gentlemen , before I ask Mr President Lamfalussy to speak to conclude this debate , I think I am expressing the feelings of the majority of Members in this House , especially since this is the last time Mr Lamfalussy will be appearing here in this capacity in this Chamber , I should like in paying our sincerest , warmest tribute to him for the way he has collaborated with this Parliament and for giving us the benefit of his knowledge ...
for his meticulousness and his personal qualities .
Mr President Lamfalussy , please accept the warmest wishes of the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot answer all of the questions that I have been asked but I shall try to answer the basic question underlying your debate .
How can monetary policy meet ordinary people 's expectations ?
What can it not achieve and what should it not therefore promise ?
The first aim that monetary policy has achieved is controlling inflation .
That is a laudable direct aim : it must not be forgotten that inflation has always been behind most unfairness and inequalities .
We are beginning to forget that now because we are fortunately coming out of a period of inflation .
It should not , however , be forgotten that in periods of inflation the powerful and the rich can protect themselves against the ravages of inflation .
It is the weak and the have-nots who cannot protect themselves from it .
That is , in other words , a social aim that ought to be clearly put on the table .
Once inflation has been brought under control , monetary policy can contribute to economic growth .
It can contribute to it by bringing down short term interest rates .
It has the means and the possibilities and has already done so .
I only need remind you of the figures : in countries where inflation has now been under control for several years , short term interest rates are now around 3 % ; in countries where the control of inflation is more recent short term interest rates are still a little higher , but are on the way down .
In six months to two years that will undoubtedly have an effect on growth .
On the other hand , monetary policy cannot bring down long term interest rates .
That has to be made quite clear .
I am particularly concerned with this : whereas long term interest rates , even in countries where short term interest rates are already very low , are relatively low , historically speaking , i.e. around 5.75 % to 6 % , real long term interest rates are still high , around 4 % .
That poses a real problem .
I do not think that those levels can be influenced by monetary policy .
The reasons for this situation lie elsewhere , I think .
Some people may fear that the euro will not be properly run : but that is not the fundamental explanation .
I think that the fundamental explanation lies in two figures : between 1991 and 1996 public debt went up from 56 % to 73.5 % of GDP .
There is no doubt that this huge increase has an effect on real long term interest rates and puts a brake on growth .
In other words , monetary policy can influence growth but not without the help of budgetary policies .
What can it do to help employment ?
In that unemployment is due to anaemic growth , monetary policy can help within the limits that I have just indicated .
In that unemployment is due to structural factors , without a lot to do with growth , it can have no direct influence .
I rarely refer to particular countries , but allow me to mention my own : Belgium .
Belgium and the Netherlands have been pursuing virtually identical monetary policies for six or seven years and very similar policies for a very long time .
Yet the two countries ' unemployment figures are quite different : 9.5 % in Belgium and 6 % in the Netherlands .
Monetary policy cannot be held responsible for that difference .
We have to realise that .
I think that the resorption of that part of unemployment - nothing to do with weak growth but the largest part - has to do with the implementation of other policies , namely structural policies , labour market flexibility and policies concerning indirect contributions that affect labour costs .
That policy can be pursued at European level .
I think that the coordination of policies , as precisely and correctly described by Commissioner de Silguy , can be pursued at European level - but do not raise expectations that monetary policy cannot meet !
( Loud applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in the block voting time that will commence immediately .
VOTES
Mr President , I think that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten should speak and then I shall answer her , if you will allow .
Mr President , it was agreed in committee that something should be added to my original amendment , but unfortunately this has not been done .
It was simply forgotten .
The words ' stricter legislation concerning ' should be added , otherwise the amendment does not make sense .
Mr President , yes , I would agree to this oral amendment , if the European Parliament agrees because this Group is always in favour of measures to look after people 's health and well-being .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I should like to ask for clarification .
It has now been said at several points in the German interpretation in relation to confirming the vote that you will be holding a roll call vote .
I think that either that has to be corrected in the German or that you have on several occasions said that there will be a roll call instead of an electronic vote .
Could you please sort this out because we do not have roll call votes in these circumstances .
But if there really is to be a roll call vote , you should make that clear .
As I said I do not know whether this is just a problem with the German interpretation or whether that is what all of the interpreters have said .
Mr Friedrich , I hope that the problem occurred only with the German vote , because when I announce a vote I always make sure that I say exactly which vote it is .
Mr President , we have a further problem with the vote on Paragraph 15 . It had been agreed with the rapporteur that it was not strictly necessary to create a new political body here and that this task could be taken over by the existing bodies .
That was what was agreed , and it was also the rapporteur 's suggestion .
We therefore ought - and I apologize for only now realizing this - to have voted separately on the word ' new ' in Paragraph 15 .
As Mr Friedrich has pointed out , we did not even know that it was a roll call vote .
I have to say that I too have some problems with the interpretation from the Greek .
My own Greek is not so very fluent , Mr President , but I am doing my best .
This is a very important political issue .
I would vote against this report if we cannot reach agreement on it .
I would also call on my friends to vote against the Fourçans report , although this distresses me greatly when I think about my friend , Mr Fourçans .
I would therefore suggest that the rapporteur be given the floor again .
Mr von Wagau , first of all let me say that after all of the discussions there is one corrigendum published to the Fourçans report , namely where the word ' new ' occurs .
It has therefore been put to the vote with the word ' new ' .
Secondly , the rapporteur has been at pains to frame all of the points on which discussion led to a conclusion and in each case I pointed out where the addition or other change occurred , for the vote , either roll call or electronic .
So I do not think there has been a problem at all , and I think that you know what you are voting on .
Mr President , I should like to reassure Mr von Wogau that the word ' new ' is not in the text .
If it is there , it is an administrative error , because in committee we voted for a text without the word ' new ' .
There must have been a transcription error .
So the word ' new ' is not in the text .
Mr President , to save the honour of the Sittings service , I shall explain matters .
As a result of yesterday 's negotiations , there was a corrigendum in which the word ' new ' was deleted .
But the majority voted against it .
I have no idea why .
A vote was then taken on the original text .
If you look at your papers you will see that Paragraph 15 contains the word ' new ' .
If we could agree that the word ' new ' should be deleted and the necessary correction made , then we would be happy with that .
Mr von Wogau , as you are aware , the word ' new ' does not appear .
There is a corrigendum , which is not being voted on , of course , in which the word ' new ' is absent .
You need not worry .
Before the final vote
Mr President , in the light of Mr von Wogau 's remarks , I think that we should clear the matter up before the final vote .
Paragraph 15 of the report submitted to the committee , i.e. the one adopted on 22 May and the subject of the written report , contained the word ' new ' .
In any case , it is included in the written report .
Did the text adopted by the committee include it or not ?
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , it has already been made clear that the word ' new ' does not appear .
That is how the report has been approved thus far and how it will be approved finally if you vote for it .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , this new directive on TV broadcasting activities contains some positive aspects , especially since , in the field of subsidiarity , it acknowledges the fundamental responsibility of the Member States and their legal competence .
On the other hand , on the question of the protection of minors , there is a clearly defined concern to work in conjunction with parents , through their representatives in associations and educators of all kinds , and to see how they can filter programmes that might be harmful to children , in particular thanks to technical mechanisms .
Another positive aspect concerns the condemnation of pornography .
On the other hand , this new directive sins by omission on some basic points .
It is not of much use to reaffirm the desire or the intention to encourage European productions unless the necessary measures are taken to ensure European producers the possibility of producing and broadcasting .
The fact that a freedom is proclaimed in abstract , without ensuring the means , and in particular the financial and economic means , is virtually tantamount to hypocrisy .
Nobody want quotas as an absolute but it is , as they say in mathematical logic , a necessary but insufficient condition .
It is not enough to have quotas to have good European productions but it is an absolutely necessary condition .
Unfortunately , this revision of the Television without frontiers Directive does not contain any provisions on quotas , and it is therefore the ideology of a materialistic concept of the market that wins the day . That is not , however , the only concept of the market .
We are all in favour of the market as a necessary economic phenomenon for dynamism , without its being an absolute .
In this area , as in others , this has unfortunately not been taken into account .
Here we are faced with the joint draft text adopted by the Conciliation Committee on updating the Television without frontiers directive .
At previous votes , the European Parliament was the target of unjustified criticism by certain private operators , accusing it of being protectionist .
I wish to pay tribute to the European Parliament 's work and that of its negotiators , who have managed to obtain a compromise acceptable to everyone at the Conciliation Committee .
On the three aspects that we classified as priorities ( non-encrypted access to major events , anti-violence chips and independent producers ) , I think that the first one is of crucial importance .
Where the broadcasting of sporting events or other major events is concerned , what would have been the logic of granting exclusive broadcasting rights to given operators , preventing thousands of people from sharing their enjoyment ?
Let us take the examples of the Olympics or the World Cup , which have millions of spectators .
I think it would have been harmful to grant broadcasting monopolies , for the sake of commercial and financial interest .
Our Parliament took a wise decision .
It must now be taken up by the Governments .
I am delighted to support this conciliation agreement today .
As a keen sports fan myself , I am relieved that major national sporting events will still be available to the public on regular television channels .
Each of our countries has certain sports events which are more than just competitions between teams or athletes .
They are an important part of popular culture and should be enjoyed by the nation as a whole .
Although these negotiations with the Council of Ministers have dragged on for some time , the result is a victory for all sports fans .
My own country is making sure that our football cup final , cricket internationals and tennis from Wimbledon are available to the general public .
I am tempted to ask if the Council could guarantee my favourite teams and players a place in these finals , but for the moment I am satisfied with the minor miracle which this compromise represents .
Millions of sports fans can feel that they have won the cup today .
The European Parliament has today adopted the ' TV Directive ' which has come to us from conciliation .
The directive , and particularly the solutions reached in the conciliation procedure are among the few items of EU decision-making which directly affect the everyday life of citizens .
The directive seeks to protect for the citizen the TV broadcasting of major events such as sporting competitions on a TV channel accessible to all .
The televising of major events in such a way that all have equal opportunities to see the programmes is the responsibility of the Member States .
All Member States should now make use of this power in the interests of their citizens and should define , together with the sporting organizations , those important events which they want to secure for universal viewing .
The recommendation adopted in the conciliation committee for lists drawn up at national level was intended to reassure the market in advance and prevent overheating .
It does not prevent competition or preclude sporting organizations from having access to important sources of income .
It is also to the sports organizations ' and competition organizers ' advantage to ensure the widest possible audience for the most important events .
In the European Parliament , and particularly in its Culture Committee , there was concern to develop TV programmes in the interests of children .
There was also a strong public opinion demanding action to protect minors .
The proposed technical devices for filtering programmes are not , however , without problems .
A particularly careful attitude needs to be taken to any kind of pre-censoring , which would not in any case be effective .
There is therefore a continued need for further research in cooperation between the Commission and the Member States ' authorities on the various possibilities of regulation .
In particular , the protection of minors must be implemented at national level .
Broadcasters of programmes must take responsibility for the protection of minors .
In its current form , the report is at best an uneasy compromise .
It is no longer possible to prevent cultural products being completely subject to market forces ( quotas ) ; the compromise rules arrived at for the new services , the guarantee funds , the independent producers and the criteria for establishing them as well as for the promotion of European products are reliant on extremely vague Commission promises .
As far as culturally and socially influenced programme content is concerned , we are therefore seeing the information society get under way with general commercial pressure winning out over cultural diversity .
That is a bad omen for things to come .
We have , however , to recognize that this is better than nothing .
It at least protects minors and guarantees that important sporting events will be broadcast .
We have therefore abstained .
Perry report ( A4-0190 / 97 )
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats welcome the fact that European citizens , through their complaints to the Committee on Petitions , have helped to put important issues on the EU agenda .
Amongst other things , we are very happy that animal transport and human rights have been taken up in the committee .
It is also a positive development that EU citizens have begun to make use of the Ombudsman , who has proved to be particularly effective in dealing with cases .
Díez de Rivera Icaza report ( A4-0183 / 97 )
Mr President , I am delighted that the Díez de Rivera Icaza report has been adopted , and particularly paragraphs 29-31 relating to the very serious problem of aircraft noise .
As the Member who represents one of the largest parts of London , near to Heathrow Airport and affected by the noise created by that airport , I am very pleased indeed .
I am , in fact , president of a consortium of local , municipal authorities who are concerned about the noise issue .
At the moment there is a public enquiry into the expansion of Heathrow Airport to almost twice its present size .
The issue of noise is a very important consideration in that respect .
The European Commission has done much over the years to create quieter aircraft but that is going to be undermined if we allow even more aircraft to fly , particularly outside daylight hours .
During the night , when other noises are minimal and people are trying to sleep , even the quietest aircraft produce a disturbing amount of noise .
There is new scientific evidence to suggest that public health is much affected by this .
So I am delighted that these paragraphs have been adopted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , initially the Commission planned to introduce a regulation against noise .
Aware of the harm done by noise to the health of millions of Europeans , it seemed to want to take specific , practical and robust measures .
It seems now that we must now be content with a Green Paper , which should make it possible to hold a major debate on noise : a lots of ' ifs ' for little effectiveness .
That is to be regretted .
Public debate is all very well , but it should lead to the introduction of binding Community provisions .
It is no longer acceptable that Community policy should neglect anti-noise policy and I am sure the Commission is aware of that .
We live in a noisy society and it is for the authorities to limit noise sources , and the intensity of noise emitted .
It is a public health problem .
As the rapporteur stressed , the main sources of noise must be ascertained and aims and guidelines must be worked out . We must then apply common assessment methods and determine common indices for noise sources , before contemplating common legislation .
The European Union should no longer accept that 70 % of its population is subjected to unacceptable levels of noise pollution .
We are ready to discuss that !
But we must above all take efficient , swift measures , aimed solely at protecting public health .
I must congratulate Mrs Díez de Rivera on her serious , high quality piece of work .
- The overwhelming majority vote just obtained in this House in favour of anti-noise legislation confirms what my report says and what was said at the heated debated last Monday .
It distinctly emerges that the citizens demand a clear legislative policy to this effect which sets objectives and options for priority actions for reducing intolerable noise levels .
Annex III to my report includes two letters from Juan Ramón Jiménez against noise , which I think are a treat , expressing this same concern about noise back in 1919 ...
For all the above reasons I do not doubt that the Commission , buoyed up by this voting , will be able to provide a global and coordinated response to the request we are all making .
Finally , I should like to express my thanks for the cooperation I have received from everyone , especially from Mrs Graenitz , who stood in for me so well during my illness .
The concerns expressed about budgetary intervention are quite understandable when , with the single currency , countries will cease to be able to intervene in monetary and exchange procedures .
But such intervention is very limited , since national budgetary deficits are not allowed to exceed 3 % of GDP - we are hoping to keep to the Stability Pact - and since it is neither convenient nor easy to increase taxes .
The rapporteur , Mr Fourçans , rightly points out the need for greather harmonization in this matter , especially as regards the taxation of company savings and profits to avoid fiscal dumping , which above all exacerbates the already widespread tendency to tax work carried out for other persons .
But on the other hand curtailing participation in the national budget requires that , contrary to what some people are still maintaining , the Union Budget should exceed 1.2 % of GDP , so that in particular it is able to give greater support to countries which are lagging behind in structural terms .
We must always have budgetary stringency , but that is not to say that a shortsighted approach should pose a threat to a project which will be decisive for the success of our collective metarmorphosis .
The report contains many good addenda and specific points for the Commission 's important Green Paper on combating noise .
This is why we are supporting the report in the final vote .
But we cannot support points E , 1 , 11 , 12 , 15 , 22 , 23 , and 30 .
These points advocate European framework legislation for an area which we most definitely consider should be subject to the principle of subsidiarity .
Mezzaroma report ( A4-0194 / 97 )
Mr President , the 1996 report by the European Monetary Institute reveals once again the weakness of growth in Europe and the unbearable levels of unemployment , which continue to weigh down on public accounts and aggravate social imbalances .
Faced with this situation , unfortunately , most countries are trying to meet the convergence criteria , not by reforming their administrations but by increasing taxes , braking growth even further , something that could expose the growth concerned to serious political problems , as has just been seen in France .
This leads us to a paradox .
Whereas preparation for the single currency should in the mind of its promoters , offer an opportunity for stricter public management favouring liberalisation and growth , it has turned out , given the blockages in our societies , to be a depressive mechanism attracting more and more taxes towards the public sphere .
Alas , this situation is the subject of no serious analysis .
The governments are going to content themselves tomorrow with interpreting the criteria as trends , which means putting rigour on to the back-burner .
Others want to add an ' employment ' chapter to the stability pact which , in the framework of today 's Europe , would just be a little window-dressing .
Switching to the single currency in these conditions would only prepare for a weak euro , with little credibility , quickly turning into a source of tension between the participants and cancelling out most of the advantages expected on paper of monetary unification .
We should also ask why Europe currently seems to be sinking into paralysis .
I see two reasons : one is that the European policy of building a super-State is trying to unify everything , including the currency , by imposing new rigid restraints , and on the other hand - it cannot be said enough - the policy of a poorly conducted international opening has led to higher unemployment , thereby compromising the conditions for achieving the single currency .
Finally , the destroyers of Europe are hiding in Brussels itself .
As this report is based on the fact that economic and monetary union will come about and also supports this project , we have abstained in the final vote on the report .
Should EMU come into being , of course we would want democratic control of the European Central Bank to be as strong as possible .
But the most appropriate course of action is for national parliaments to have democratic control over monetary policy via their elected representatives .
While the economic convergence criteria are a major topic of discussion within the European Union , at the end of the day a political judgement must be made .
The gold revaluation dispute and the results of the election in France should not cause the next phase of EMU to be delayed .
A delay resulting from the French Government 's insistence on renegotiating or reviewing the Stability Pact rules could change the political atmosphere and this would not be good for Europe .
I believe that this would result in instability .
This House must call on the heads of state to make a clear and unequivocal statement at the Amsterdam Summit and insist on proceeding as planned to the single currency on 1 January 1999 .
Europe has too much to lose by not complying with the conditions and the approach as laid down by Maastricht .
The benefits of EMU are obvious .
Ettl report ( A4-0185 / 97 )
As this report is also based on the fact that economic and monetary union will come about and it supports this project , we have abstained in the final vote on the report .
Should EMU come into being , we would of course want the European Central Bank to be as open as possible in its activities .
But it is important to stress that subsidiarity must prevail by permitting national parliaments to exercise democratic control over their own respective National Banks so that monetary policy can be democratically controlled .
The report contains some positive features in its assessment of Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) , the European Monetary Institute ( EMI ) and the activities of the European Central Bank , such as the view that it is necessary to develop democratic supervision for the Central Bank .
A shortcoming of the report is its almost complete failure to touch on the issue of boosting employment .
It is not possible to reduce the present high unemployment simply by monetary and economic mechanisms , and there is a need for an active finance policy , i.e. the more effective use of taxation and public forms of subsidy to promote employment .
The stability and growth pact described in connection with EMU should also be examined from the point of view of promoting employment .
In the debate on the EU 's economic policy , Parliament in particular should prioritize employment and the elimination of social exclusion .
The reports under discussion here are notably on the issue of employment .
For these reasons , I voted against adoption of the report .
Fourçans report ( A4-0192 / 97 )
Mr President , I suppose we will have to pay Commissioners overtime so that they can stay .
As of 2002 , the single currency will get rid of the budgetary shock-absorber , i.e. the monetary sluice-gates that enable different economies to rise to different levels .
The only adaptation variable will , of course , be the budgetary variable and taxation in particular .
Only , a single currency will make the differences of taxation pressures between States more sensitive and will favour relocations .
I offer the example of what has happened to national rights : in Spain , for example , when the Basque Country lowered company tax rates , companies left Madrid for Bilbao .
The same thing happened in France , over the Marne department car tax .
The only way of avoiding injustice between , for example , ' relocatable ' capital income and other revenues would be to plan for a European fiscal constitution adding at least a fifth criterion , providing for a ceiling on compulsory levies for all fifteen counties , a ceiling that might be set at , for example , an average of 40 % of GDP .
That would then avoid having too many distortions .
As this report is also based on the fact that economic and monetary union will come about and it supports this project , we have abstained in the final vote on the report .
Above all , we take particular exception to point 15 in the report proposal .
It proposes that ' a political body with considerable economic powers ' be established with a view to developing a ' real combination of different political and economic instruments and the establishment of a mechanism for achieving standardisation ' .
We cannot support in any way whatsoever such political centralisation .
Point 16 of the report proposal also proposes that the European Parliament establish a ' committee of economic advisers ' .
There are plenty of acknowledged experts whom Members of Parliament can consult for advice without establishing new committees and bodies . Unfortunately there are already too many of these within EU institutions .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for his work in producing a good report .
But we could not support points 7 and 15 at the vote .
Point 7 would involve the use of totally subjective criteria for the control of budgetary discipline .
The implementation of working in such a way would seriously threaten the stability of the single currency and in so doing also threaten opportunities for growth and employment .
We think that a single currency is very important for growth and employment but there is a requirement that those countries who participate in the currency union should also contribute to a strong and stable single currency .
As far as point 15 is concerned , we think that the rapporteur 's basis for a new political body in relation to EMU is a legal one in view of the need for increased democratic control .
But we do not consider that the model proposed in point 15 will satisfy this need .
The Fourçans report on the coordination of budgetary and taxation policies in the future single currency system shows very well , albeit involuntarily , the impasse in which Europe finds itself .
Given economic uncertainties , countries will have their national abilities to make responses to given situations greatly reduced , and there will be nothing at European level to take over that responsibility .
Imbalances therefore are likely to grow more easily .
The European Union would then enter a zone of profound upheaval , if we judge correctly .
Let us explain ourselves .
In any economic area , a country can be hit by a particular economic accident , such as the bankruptcy of a major industry , very serious social unrest , etc . What economist call ' asymmetrical shocks ' .
To remedy those situations , countries have several weapons at their disposal : monetary policy , exchange rate policy , budgetary policy , for example .
But under the future system of the single currency , these national instruments will disappear or see their effectiveness reduced ; internal changes will no longer be flexible but fixed by definition ; interest rate policy will be unified ; budgetary room for manoeuvre will be confined within tight limits by the stability pact ; taxes can no longer be raised sharply , as the single market will prevail ; more generally , economic policies will be coordinated and subordinated to Community aims , in accordance with Articles 102A and 103 of the Treaty .
In such a hypothesis , theory teaches us that the country facing the imbalance should be able to find help from a central European budget .
But that barely exists at present and the Fourçans report acknowledges the fact that we should not dream in the immediate future of setting up budgetary and taxation federalism in Europe .
Not only are people opposed to it , but in any case even if nobody opposed it , such an upheaval , which would call for most taxation levers in our countries to be harmonized and very substantial European levies to be raised , would not be possible in the short term .
This impasse is all the more worrying since the ' asymmetrical shocks ' are not exceptional phenomena or marginal ones as we have heard some people in this Chamber pretend .
In reality , when you have countries and societies with different economies , they never evolve in an exactly parallel fashion .
Their relations are marked by asymmetrical ' slides ' , constantly moving , that so far have been readjusted gently by equal slides in monetary parities .
This brings us back to the fundamental question : the usefulness of several different currencies when there are several different peoples .
Finally , it appears that the countries of Europe , propelled by ideologues , had rushed headlong into the adventure of the single currency , without first of all checking to see whether all the conditions were met and whether they actually had the vital instruments needed to see it through .
We are now practically up against the wall .
Is there a way out , enabling us to go further down the same line to accelerated unification ?
I do not think so .
If we wanted to go down it , we would have to propose to our people , in no uncertain terms , radical constitutional changes that nobody wants , really .
The Fourçans report tries to evoke the possibility of setting up at European level a political body comprising representatives of all the Member States , subjected to solid democratic controls and that would play the role of coordinating national economic policies .
We can see hints here of the famous ' economic government of Europe ' which , in the current disarray of minds , serves as a lifebuoy for right and left alike .
Unfortunately , this idea leads nowhere because if that ' government ' wants to be anything other than a talking shop , it needs strong and specific powers ; yet those powers could only be granted if we carried out radical constitutional reforms , which as we saw earlier are impossible .
We are in a Catch-22 situation .
The only solution is to abandon the single currency and take a more progressive approach , a more reasonable approach , tailored to the real situation . For example the single currency could be superimposed on the national currencies , which would enable the people to learn about it gradually .
This report deals , inter alia , with the consequences , at the level of fiscal policy , of the adoption of the single currency .
From that point of view the clarity and coherence of this document are to be congratulated . As may be clearly seen , if there is to be a single European economy , it needs , in addition to a single monetary policy , single budgetary and fiscal policies .
The question , as this report rightly stresses , is to know who defines the objectives and implements the instruments of fiscal policy within the area of the European Union .
According to the author of this document that could only be the economic governor of Europe , whose president is independent of the Member States with a mandate outstripping the Presidency of the Union .
Such a governor would then naturally become the political governor of Europe .
Since I still have doubts about real convergence of the economies of each of the States , I cannot subscribe to the premises and proposals contained in this report .
Giving up fiscal sovereignty is tantamount to saying that the smaller , more peripheral States of the Union will no longer have available an important instrument for attracting investment , wealth , companies and job creation .
The lack or inadequacy of infrastructures , the inability - due to various factors - to attract investment and lagging technology , as seen in the smaller , poorer economies of some States , can be overcome only by retaining fiscal sovereignty .
A single fiscal policy would at the moment and in this context have the effect of preserving the lack of competitiveness both on the internal market and on the external market .
I do not think that is right in these circumstances , which is why I cannot vote for the content of this report .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Fourçans report today .
The Danish Social Democrats agree with the rapporteur that there is a need for a certain coordination of budgetary and fiscal policy in the EU .
We also strongly agree that tax exemptions and social dumping in some Member States represent a very serious problem .
We hereby call upon Ireland and other Member States to which this may be relevant to drop tax schemes that are advantageous to firms but unfair to the other Member States .
The Danish Social Democrats favour very wide-ranging exchanges of information and coordination of initiatives between the Member States .
First and foremost , to promote employment .
However , we do not agree with the rapporteur that the proper functioning of Economic and Monetary Union at the third stage requires a new political body with considerable economic powers .
We think that ECOFIN is an excellent and adequate forum for the cooperation that is needed .
. ( DA ) The People 's Movement against Membership of the European Union , which I represent , cannot support this report .
Since the preconditions for the introduction of EMU are not in place , it is clear that EMU is primarily a political project .
Approximation of budgetary and fiscal policy should have taken place in a natural way and prior to the introduction of EMU , if it were in any way to prove necessary or desirable .
Instead of this , attempts are being made to introduce harmonizations through the back door , thereby undermining the last vestiges of an independent economic policy in the Member States .
The reference in the report to asymmetrical crises should automatically trigger a reflection on the warnings which American economists have sounded .
Since the Member State labour markets are not wage-flexible , it will put disproportionately heavy pressure on general EMU policy if individual Member States run into difficulties .
This will undermine the credibility of EMU and may invalidate all the claimed advantages of a common currency and approximated budgetary and fiscal policy .
The report is contradictory on several points .
The introduction states that the single currency as such will not influence taxation policy .
Further on in the text it says the opposite , that tax competition and tax dumping will force a ' code of conduct ' into being , in other words that countries will undertake not to introduce taxation policies which are in conflict with the ' interests of the Union ' , or alternatively will lead to tax harmonisation .
There is mention of common taxation on capital , companies and border trade .
The Centre group thinks that tax policy should continue to be a national matter .
For this reason , I have voted against the report .
. ( DA ) The June Movement votes against the monetary dictatorship of the Maastricht Treaty and has therefore supported a number of amendments which offer scope for more economic remedies and for action on employment .
However , that does not mean we want to be a party to any transfer of economic policy instruments from the Member States to the EU .
For the participants in the single currency the commencement of the third stage of economic and monetary union will mean handing over sensitive sectors of economic policy to the European Union and the European System of Central Banks .
The stability pact , which will serve as the main policy instrument , will be used by the big financial interests which control the policy choices of Brussels as a vehicle for stepping up their demands .
The concept of national government as an institution vested with executive power will effectively vanish , and the national parliaments will , in essence , lose their competence in these matters .
The situation will not be all that different for the countries ' with a derogation ' .
The strengthening of multilateral supervision and the intensity of the pressures to adjust to the convergence criteria and to avoid public deficits will render any notion of national competence on budgetary policy meaningless .
As the time nears for commencement of the third stage and as the technical preparations are stepped up , so the situation that is being prepared for us looms ever more abhorrent .
It is no coincidence that the clamour of indignation against Maastricht is increasing by the day and that in the face of growing working class anger political forces other than the communists are using slogans which distance them from the economic and monetary union provided for in the Maastricht Treaty : that they are trying to tinker with the provisions , talking about introducing a social element into convergence and maintaining that nominal objectives cannot by themselves achieve growth and that measures to support workers are also necessary .
Of course , they have not yet gone as far as to propose that the intergovernmental conference that is now completing its work should amend the provisions concerned . Nor do they dissent from the fundamental principles and logic of the Maastricht Treaty .
Our demand for the rejection of Maastricht is being shown to have been right .
It is manifestly obvious that chasing after nominal convergence criteria cannot provide solutions for the problems of working people and society .
It can only exacerbate them , as the facts of the situation are showing .
We do not think that any of the individual solutions proposed by the rapporteur , such as allowing Member States leeway to tackle significant exceptional circumstances or permitting a European derogation from the Maastricht and stability pact indicators , or establishing some form of coordination of taxation policies within those frameworks , can work at a time when the very concept of independent economic policy based on response to particular situations as they arise and on the choices of the peoples and governments of the Member States has to all intents and purposes been rendered meaningless .
We disagree totally with the rapporteur 's proposals for a form of ' economic government ' The institutional edifice of the EU has no need of new political bodies or of any strengthening of the Commission 's information-gathering powers .
Such measures are aimed only at polishing up the image of the EU and at deflecting the anxieties of the people about the transfer of economic and political authority to certain opaque and remote bureaucratic mechanisms over which they will have no control .
In our opinion a better future can come only through total rejection of the institutional framework of economic and monetary union , of the brutal monetarist policy that it imposes , and adoption of another perception on economic growth that can combine recovery with improvement of the position of working people and widening of their rights .
The message from the people encapsulated in the recent French elections , the escalating anger of the citizens and the steadfast struggle of the workers and trades union movement can open the way to destruction of Maastricht and economic and monetary union and to growth based on concern for human beings and their needs .
Randzio Plath report ( A4-0164 / 97 )
Mr President , we tried to harmonize VAT and , as Mrs Randzio-Plath herself admits , the result is a disaster .
It is a disaster in terms of the rules , leading to complexity rather than the aim of simplicity , with over 130 derogations , 66 possible options , without counting the different rules for the localisation of operations .
It is also a budgetary disaster , as a result of fraud , in that , since there are no more border controls , fraud by taxi ( i.e. false addresses in two countries doing trade ) has obviously increased .
The only solution left , it seems , is to compound the mistake by levying VAT in the country of origin , which would call for compensation funds with macro-economic criteria based on GDP .
Excuse me , Mr President , but when you know what the Court of Audit says about GDP calculation in Greece or Portugal , then you can see what disputes there would be between the countries .
The only solution again is the same one as for budgetary policy : establishing another convergence criterion , taking advantage of the IGC .
We must bring about a global harmonization by means of a compulsory levy ceiling and perhaps , if I were proEuropean - which I am not - I would try and think about the free choice of the least taxed geographical avenue , as is already the case for the rich and for capital , since the holders of capital revenue can shop around in Europe in terms of rules and regulations and go wherever they are least heavily taxed , which is not the case for workers .
Now you understand , Mr President , why the rich are so much in favour of Europe .
We think that there is no real need for harmonisation of value added tax for the internal market to function since value added tax does not affect the comparative competitiveness of domestic or imported goods .
We also take strong exception to the two proposals in point 19 of the report proposal .
We think that the principle of unanimity should be applied in the Council of Ministers for all tax matters .
Nor can there be any question of majority decision making being applied to matters of indirect taxation which are raised in the Council of Ministers .
Value added tax is extremely important to the Swedish National Budget . Sweden is a country which has one of the highest levels of value added tax in the EU .
We simply cannot agree to transfer decision making rights over an issue which is so important to us to the Council of Ministers .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a well prepared report .
We could not support point 19 , which concerns majority decision making on tax matters , at the vote .
We think that the Council should , in the main , continue to handle tax matters in accordance with the principle of unanimity .
But we think that common minimum standards for capital tax , company tax and environmental taxes ought to be drawn up and that decisions in the Council concerning these areas ought to be adopted according to the principle of the qualified majority vote .
Mr President , the Randzio-Plath report on the common VAT system invented by the Commission gives hope to all those who think that the madness of certain projects can be halted after all .
The new VAT system being proposed to us is apparently founded on the taxation of goods and services in the country of origin ( and not , as at present , in the country of destination ) , and would treat all European countries as a single domestic market where rates , packages and all other rules would have to be brought into line .
This system would take away national decision-taking autonomy ( is it not its main aim ? ) over a resource as vital for the States as this - since VAT receipts accounts , for example , for half of all French tax revenue .
That loss of autonomy would lead to rates being harmonized regardless of national needs , other than suffering disastrous relocations , and the allocation of revenue no longer in State control .
In fact there would have to be a very rough European share-out mechanism , based not on the real flows of goods and services but on the basis of statistics relating to the countries ' GDP .
We are pleased to note that , in a quantum leap of realism , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of the European Parliament considered as ' untimely ' the introduction of this new system and urged the Commission to put all its energy into improving the existing system .
It is true that this realism has been stimulated by the negative positions taken by several Member States .
It is also true that it contains certain flaws .
For example , the resolution ends with an appeal for majority decisions at Council , rather than unanimity , in taxation matters .
That rule would have disastrous results as it would put an end to the only serious brake on the Commission 's federalist activism .
Another example : the European Parliament 's appeal for improving the existing system does not go as far as mentioning why the current system is flawed and riddled with fraud ( everyone now recognizes that : it is because , to satisfy the dogma of abolishing internal borders , customs controls have been abolished and replaced by simple voluntary declarations ) .
We would like to think that between maintaining certain outdated formalities and totally abolishing controls it might have been possible , if we had looked hard enough , to find a compromise version , satisfying the need for a safe taxation system while meeting the legitimate demand for simplification coming from the corporate sector .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the Randzio-Plath report as a whole , but against its proposal that the collection of VAT on commercial transactions should be based on the country-of-origin principle , that VAT-rate differentiation should apply on an EU-wide basis and that majority voting should be introduced in the Council for decision-making on tax issues .
The Danish Social Democrats favour a certain coordination of policy on taxes and duties at EU level but wish to retain powers at national level to decide on VAT questions of key importance .
It should still not be possible to force Member States into taking decisions on tax issues against their will .
For example , it should be for each individual Member State to decide on the level of VAT and on any differentiation in VAT rates .
The Commission has proposed the introduction of a fully integrated VAT system by the year 1999 , in which all transactions will be taxed in their country of origin and not , as is currently the case , in the country of consumption .
There are plans for five different draft laws from the Commission in order to implement this common VAT system .
The committee supports the proposal in principle but thinks that we are moving too fast .
The proposal would mean totally harmonised , or in other words common tax rates , which would mean considerable changes and would reduce income from taxation in Sweden .
Tax policy should really be a national issue .
I have , therefore , voted against the report .
In explaining my vote against the report on a common system of VAT I wish to express the following points .
It is true that the present transitional system of VAT has functional shortcomings and that it facilitates fraud and non-payment .
It is on those things that efforts to modify the system should be concentrated .
No actions have been taken , however , to stamp out corruption , to make the taxation and scrutinizing authorities more efficient , to tackle tax evasion and to ensure that VAT that is due is paid .
There is never any mention of applying a zero or reduced rate on various items and services with wide public consumption as a means to strengthening the purchasing power of the working classes and of alleviating the impact of the austerity policy .
We dissent from the proposal that the country-of-destination principle should be replaced by the country-of-origin principle in regard to VAT collection .
For many countries such a change would result in revenue loss and have extremely negative repercussions .
Moreover , we think it is logical that as a tax on consumption VAT should be imposed and collected in the country where the consumption takes place .
Some people will say , certainly , that introduction of the country-of-origin principle would be accompanied by introduction of a system of compensation , of a clearing procedure .
We believe , however , that this would complicate the system even further . In addition , there is no guarantee that the principle of the neutrality of the tax would be safeguarded .
One of the main elements of the common system of VAT being examined by the Commission as a possible important simplification is the single-place-of-taxation principle for firms .
In our view that would constitute an interference in direct taxation matters and run counter to the agreements on the avoidance of double taxation of income which the Member States of the European Union have signed on the basis of the OECD 's model double taxation agreement .
Specifically , it would run counter to Article 5 of that model which refers to application of the ' permanent establishment ' concept .
We are against any attempt to increase VAT rates as a means either to increasing tax revenues or to offsetting revenue losses resulting from measures designed to reduce the insurance contributions of employers .
On the other hand we do believe that reduction of the rates in certain circumstances for the purpose of boosting economic activity and , thus , employment in specific labour intensive undertakings and small and medium-sized businesses is a necessity .
In our opinion a main portion of tax revenue should be provided by progressive direct tax .
Any action aimed at burdening consumption would constitute additional theft of the incomes of working people and violate the fundamental principle which should underpin a taxation system , namely that it should contribute to the redistribution of income .
That is the end of voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Telecommunications and ONP
The next item is the report ( A4-0171 / 97 ) by Mrs Read , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive on interconnection in telecommunications with regard to ensuring universal service and interoperability through application of the principles of open network provision ( ONP ) ( C4-0185 / 97-95 / 0207 ( COD ) )
Madam President , I am delighted to invite this Chamber to approve the joint text .
Although it looks very short it was arrived at after many hours of patient discussion and negotiation .
I draw your attention particularly to the items where we reached agreement on the financing of universal service , the study concerning the setting-up of a European regulatory authority , an agreement about the settlement of cross-border disputes , the issue of number portability for subscribers , the question of transparency , the basis of costs of interconnection and assistance for new providers seeking to enter the market .
I know that the Commissioner will want to comment on the two statements concerning number portability and the endorsement of the position taken by this Parliament on the voice telephony directive in its first reading and also on the question of to whom the directive applies .
I hope the Commissioner will be able to deal with this in his response .
I must draw the attention of this House to the fact that there is no Council representative here ; that should be included in the record .
However the following statement , which applies to number portability , was drawn up by the Council at the conciliation meeting : ' The Council states that it will consider carefully and take into consideration the Commissioner 's opinion ' .
I know that colleagues who have followed this issue on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy will be aware that many issues might be more logically attended to in different directives and we look forward to the Commission 's proposals on an overhaul and review of telecommunications legislation in 1999 .
Nevertheless , on interconnections , which are a pivotal part of the creation of the single market and the liberalization programme , it is to the credit of Parliament and its staff - and I would like to thank my colleagues who did so much to support me in this work - and thanks to the cooperation of the Council and the Commission that we have a well thought out , coherent and , I hope , effective piece of legislation .
I request Parliament to approve the joint text .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking all those who have contributed to the successful outcome of the conciliation process , particularly , Mr Imbeni , Vice-President of the European Parliament and co-chair of the Conciliation Committee , Mrs Jorritsma , cochair of the Conciliation Committee , Mr von Wogau , the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and you , Mrs Read , the rapporteur .
This directive is an important part of the new competition-oriented environment in telecommunications .
New market operators will be able to reach existing end-users in a way that will promote increased investment and market growth in the telecommunications sector , within a predictable and stable regulatory framework .
Organizations that hold a dominant market position will have to offer new market operators access and connection under transparent , reasonable and non-discriminatory conditions .
The directive will also guarantee the interconnection and interoperability of networks and services so that users throughout the Union continue to be guaranteed universal availability of telecommunications services .
The result achieved by the Conciliation Committee is very satisfactory and , at the insistence of the European Parliament , the common position has been substantially improved in key areas : firstly , in regard to consideration of the advantages of a European regulatory authority ; secondly , the funding of the universal service ; thirdly , a cross-border arbitration process ; fourthly , a cost-breakdown and cost-based pricing ; fifthly , reasonably priced number portability and , sixthly , recommendations from the Commission for the development of a genuinely European market .
As an integral part of the compromise finally reached by the Conciliation Committee and in the interests of clarity , the Commission is making two additional declarations to be included in the protocol to the interconnection directive as finally adopted .
Firstly , we have a declaration on Article 7 ( 1 ) : the Commission confirms that Article 7 ( 1 ) of the interconnection Directive is to be applied to organizations operating the public telecommunications networks and / or publicly available telecommunications services as set out in Parts 1 and 2 of Annex I , which have been notified by national regulatory authorities as having significant market power , and only to those organisations .
The Commission 's second declaration refers to the revised directive on ' ONP voice-telephony ' .
The Commission has undertaken , when it comes to state its position in the European Parliament 's amendments at second reading , to accept the principle of Amendment No 25 to the interconnection directive , but it will carefully consider the implementation of the provisions identified and , in particular , the fact that the new number must be communicated free-of-charge to the user .
In conclusion , the Commission welcomes the achievement of the Conciliation Committee which has enhanced the common position and takes into account the important amendments by the European Parliament at second reading .
The final text boosts the Community aspect of the directive and improves consumer protection .
The Commission therefore urges the European Parliament to accept the compromise text arrived at by the Conciliation Committee so that this important directive can at last be adopted .
Madam President , can I thank the Commissioner but just query one small point in his presentation ?
In the Commission statement on Article 7 ( 1 ) which he read out , the English translation omitted the final phrase .
This is a very important phrase , over which we spent many hours of negotiation , in that it applies to organizations which have been notified by national regulatory authorities as having significant market power .
This is the part that did not come over in the English translation : ' and only to those organizations ' .
This is a very crucial phrase .
Can I have an assurance from the Commissioner that it will be in the Minutes , as it is contained in the report that we agreed at the conciliation ?
It may just have been the translation tailing off .
Madam President , to make things easy , I shall read out the definitive English version of the Commission declaration to avoid problems of translation .
' The Commission confirms that Article 7 paragraph 1 of the Interconnection Directive is to be applied to all organisations operating the public telecommunication networks and / or publicly available telecommunication services as set out in Parts 1 and 2 of Annex I , which have been notified by national regulatory authorities as having significant market power , and only to those organisations . '
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Production and marketing of honey
The next item is the report ( A4-0191 / 97 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation laying down general rules for the application of measures to improve the production and marketing of honey ( COM ( 96 ) 0596 - C4-0031 / 97-96 / 0282 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , on 20 January 1995 , this House unanimously adopted my report on the difficult situation of European beekeepers and proposed direct support measures to safeguard apiculture in our Member States .
At that time we sharply criticized as inadequate the Commission 's half-hearted 1994 discussion paper on the situation of apiculture in Europe and made specific proposals for , among other things , a pollination premium and compensatory payments for loss of income attributable to the absence of Community preference .
Almost two years later to the day , we were consulted on a Commission proposal which took no account of our proposals and concerns and again provides merely for half-hearted , selective measures to improve the production and marketing conditions for honey in the EU , on the basis of individual State programmes .
Those programmes are intended to be only 50 % EU-funded ; ECU 15 m is earmarked for this in the EU budget , with the bulk of that - ECU 11.6 m - being destined for measures to combat bee diseases .
Commissioner Fischler , our feelings range from disappointment to anger at the lack of understanding shown for the difficult position of commercial or part-time beekeepers , and the serious consequences for agriculture and the environment if not enough bees are raised to ensure that the pollination that is so important from both an ecological and an economic point of view takes place .
The Commission neither can , nor should it , ignore the fact that trends in apiculture are disastrous in many regions .
I can illustrate that with statistics from my own country , Luxembourg .
Within the space of a year - between 1995 and 1996 - the number of bees declined by about 10 % .
Almost half of all beekeepers are aged 60 and over .
Only 4.75 % are younger than 30 , despite the many imaginative efforts made by the Luxembourg Beekeeping Association which , like its counterparts in many other regions , with which I am in contact as rapporteur , is humming with activity .
The short-sightedness of those who refuse to make ECU 65 m available in the Community budget - that is about how much our proposals for direct assistance would cost - is almost criminal , bearing in mind that , through pollination , bees maintain more than 80 , 000 different plant varieties , and that the loss of wild flora would also result in the disappearance of insects , birds and small mammals that depend on that flora for their food and habitat .
Since 1985 , that is for 12 years now , this House had sadly been a lone voice in the wilderness of European bureaucracy , which can cope with the misappropriation of ECU 60 bn but would have us believe that the EU budget would come apart at the seams if ECU 65 m were made available to preserve beekeeping , even though the economic contribution made by bees to agriculture is probably in excess of ECU 5 bn and possibly even more .
That can and must not be allowed to continue , Commissioner !
We have therefore amended and supplemented the Commission 's half-hearted proposal .
We want the pollination premium ; we want compensatory payments for loss of income but we also want apiculture included in the arrangements for compensatory payments in the regulation on improving the efficiency of agricultural structures .
We have nothing against national programmes to improve the production and marketing conditions for apicultural products , but we want them to be exclusively Community-funded .
To prevent the distortion of competition caused by the very much cheaper imported honey , we are calling for uniform marketing rules for Community and imported honey , as consumers need to know what they are buying .
Unfortunately , our financial masters did not back us in their opinion .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development cannot understand this lack of foresight over contributions which would amount to peanuts in terms of the EU budget .
We do not want a market organization on the old model but the direct measures I mentioned earlier , and they have become all the more urgent because the opening-up of the market in honey as a result of the GATT agreement is increasing the pressure on European beekeepers still further .
We are therefore making an urgent appeal to the Commission and the Council of Ministers and asking them to accept our proposals .
Like the bees , Commissioner , we are intrinsically peace-loving .
But when bees are provoked they sting , and the same applies to us .
And that can be very painful !
So let me conclude by voicing the hope that the Commission and Council will learn a lesson from the bees ' lifestyle .
Bees are productive , cooperative , reasonable , reliable , generous and clever .
And though , unlike the bees , the Council and Commission are not wisely ruled by a female , they should bear in mind that the might of the queen bee relies not on her sting but on the fact that bees perish unless they work for and with each other .
And that too should be a lesson to you and to us .
We in the Committee on Agriculture could not support the perverse proposal of the Committee on Budgets to limit to five years the in any case paltry measures , nor could we endorse the attempt to classify the expenditure as noncompulsory .
Commissioner , you will have to put up with this stinging contribution from our European ' queen bee ' because she is not wrong .
In the first place , it is good news when European taxpayers are prepared to make available ECU 15 m annually for something where the money is being well spent , where much can be achieved at little cost : the fight against varroasis , for instance , continues , and one of the fundamental ills of European apiculture is thus able to be tackled .
That money is not being frittered away , nor is it susceptible to fraud .
The scale insects are not , after all , European bees and cannot wreak the same kind of havoc here .
But I should like to urge both you and the Commission to take a further , long overdue step .
Mrs Lulling made it abundantly clear that this is about finally giving beekeeping credit for the ecological service it provides in Europe . I want therefore to take up what has long existed in a peripheral region of the European Union , the Canary Islands , namely a hive-related premium .
I think that what is possible in the Canary Islands must be feasible in the rest of the European Union also , although the existing justification for this special premium in the Canary Islands , namely that the climate is particularly difficult , is not of course so apparent here .
I therefore urge you to take on board these long overdue and modest demands .
This is a contribution in the environmental interest and marks further progress for Europe 's agriculture .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I was a little uncertain whether or not to speak today because Mrs Lulling has been so skilful , so efficient and so effective in defending this report that I did not want to ruin the work she has done . But as Italy is one of the major honey producers , with its 1 , 350 , 000 hives , I felt I had a duty to support the requests Mrs Lulling has put forward , especially the economic ones , because that is what is needed to make progress along lines that have long been clearly necessary .
On this point I just want to emphasize - in a Parliament where rural development and development compatible with environmental needs are so much discussed - what a contribution this sector can make in this direction , even if it looks like a marginal sector in quantitative terms .
Mrs Lulling has mentioned the structural features of the sector in her country .
I have to admit that in Italy the active population in this sector is ageing , but there are also new generations appearing , actually linking the sector to agritourism , that is , an agriculture with income from a range of activities , one of which is beekeeping .
These young people need help , especially when they operate in mountain areas .
We know where the aid needs to be directed and how to implement it : the fight against varroasis , the problem of pollination , the problem of technological innovation in the sector .
I invite Parliament to support Mrs Lulling 's demands and I invite the Commission to respond positively to them .
Madam President , one minute is not much time , but we are backing Mrs Lulling 's amendments .
In 1994 , I was the rapporteur for a report on bee-keeping on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and I think , like her , that this sector is of importance for both the economy and the environment : there are around 500 , 000 bee-keepers , 13 , 000 of them professionals ; Spain , Italy , Greece and Portugal are the countries with the most bee-keepers , and 90 % of all pollination is carried out by bees , working on over 80 , 000 species of plants .
Without bees , over 20 , 000 varieties of plants would disappear .
Europe has to make the most of that sector .
We fully agree with Mrs Lulling in respect of the difficulties facing bee-keepers .
I live in a region of industrial and farming decline , and bee-keeping complements those declining activities and greatly helps producers .
We therefore support this pollination premium , support for training , support for bee-keepers ' associations and promotion of honey consumption which , I think we all agree , is extremely healthy .
Madam President , if you will forgive the expression , Mrs Lulling 's report is definitely ' the bee 's knees ' and we should be giving it all our support .
Members have already explained how important bee-keeping is in various parts of the EU .
Perhaps one aspect on which Mrs Lulling is especially helpful is the variations in conditions between different parts of the EU .
In northern climes , such as Scotland or Scandinavia , daylight hours and the amount of sunshine are very different from the south and , likewise , the warmth of the sun which means that climatic differences have to be built into the provision of sugar in some cases for the honey .
I have one or two points to make which I think are significant .
Firstly , I definitely support the idea of fifty / fifty funding from the EU which Mrs Lulling puts forward .
This should be matched by the Member State governments .
There is a particular worry about the growth of the varroa disease which can strike and have a catastrophic effect on the bee populations of various parts of Europe .
In Scotland we are immune from this disease at the moment , but we have seen the effects elsewhere .
It is very important that every measure be taken to prevent its spread .
In particular , I hope that the newly elected British Government will at last set up a bee inspectorate in Scotland which is one of the few parts of Europe which does not have inspectors for this purpose .
By and large , I welcome Mrs Lulling 's amendments , although I have a word of advice for the Commissioner .
If he intends to reject any of these amendments , I would suggest that he put on his protective clothing .
Otherwise , he will be stung by this Parliament !
Madam President , it is now two years ago - I think it was January 1995 - that the European Parliament unanimously came out in favour of a pollination premium and the Commissioner came out in favour of a compensatory premium to offset loss of income due to the absence of Community preference .
But even when we were unanimous , our demands fell on deaf ears .
For mysterious reasons , the Commission does not like bees .
The European Commission does not like European honey , it prefers Chinese honey .
Perhaps there is a Maoist lobby at the Commission , I do not know .
That said , we produce only 123 , 000 tonnes of honey .
Out of world production of 1-1.2 million tonnes . So it should be possible to protect our bee-keepers .
You are proposing a false solution , a tiny crumb , a paltry amount : 15 million ECU on a fifty-fifty basis , a kind of poisoned gift and you will say : ' you see , we have done something for marketing , we have done something for quality ' .
For a country like mine , that means sharing 15 million francs or so between 3000 professional beekeepers and some part-time bee-keepers , in other words not very much .
We all know the problems and Astrid Lulling has stressed the sector 's importance time and time again .
The problems of Varroa , that little insect or mite ; the problems of fraud - that has not been mentioned - using rice or corn syrups in feeders so that bees manufacture false honey ; the problems of controls on entry into the Community ; the problem , in France , of so-called biological honeys , according to a 1996 decree , but by definition honey is biological , and now we go and get biological pseudo-honeys from Mongolia ; the problems of imports from China , Mexico , Latin America , goodness knows why , at world prices of 12-13 francs per kilo , compared with French production prices of 14-15 francs .
The problem of labelling , too , Commissioner , because it should state on the label whether a honey comes from Mongolia , China or the Canaries , the Alps or my Languedoc-Roussillon .
There is a more general problem of the survival of plant varieties , the survival of life in a nutshell .
I shall not repeat Einstein 's lesson about humanity 's survival being dependant on that of bees .
I come from a country where bees were adopted on the imperial mantel , as a sign of authority .
That is why , Commissioner , you are a mystery for me .
I do not understand why you do not like bees .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Lulling on her report , in line with what we said when we held a debate on the reflection document presented by the Commission and also in line with Mr Böge 's first report on the honey sector .
When looking at this , I have the feeling - as other speakers have said - that the Commission report is rather remote from the expectations and desires of the European Parliament .
It is true that the document and proposals for the Regulation head in the right direction , but I think that they have fallen far short of our expectations .
This refers in particular to two subjects already mentioned - given the situation of the Community honey market , given the absolute deficit in the Community and given the lack of regulation - those of pollination premiums and compensatory premiums to offset loss of income .
These are such important subjects because of the tremendous cost differentials to be found in the Community and external costs .
I therefore support Mrs Lulling 's proposal and believe that these aids should be given .
Secondly , I should like to stress the need for the national programmes presented by the Commission , referred to by the Commission proposal , to be implemented with sufficient flexibility so as to take account of the different factors and realities in the different producing countries in the European Union .
It seems to me that we should be sufficiently flexible to accept quite different situations in terms of bee feeding , hive maintenances , site maintenance , the different technical marketing management and support for transhumance ; i.e. we should be sufficiently flexible in those national programmes so that these aids can be taken on board .
I also think that an effort should be made to market and promote ' honey products ' ( market studies , new market studies , design , specialized publications , animal nutrition , diet , etc ) , so as at least to take into account the reality in the different honey producing countries of the European Union .
Commissioner , Madam President , I should like to begin by paying tribute to the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , whose determination extends to sporting a new dress that is the bee 's knees to mark her birthday .
It seems to me that had she not been so persistent we should probably not have been holding this debate on bees today .
And it seems to me that we can only infer from what has already been said that we need to discuss bees , or apiculture will come to nothing .
If a matter is not discussed , then there can be no further progress .
Bees are valued in terms of the amount of honey and wax they produce but that undervalues them .
The contribution bees make to the natural environment , to birds , to crop pollination , to fruit , berry and oilseed production cannot be overestimated .
I myself grow rape and welcome every year the arrival of the beekeeper who comes and sets up his hives in my rape fields , because if he did not come or the bees did not fly , then the rape harvest would perhaps be only half of what it is now , as there would be only the wild insects to provide the pollination .
And so we should attach great importance to this incidental effect on the natural environment and , above all , we should attach greater political value to apiculture .
For that , clearly , we need not only older , experienced beekeepers , but young people who are enthusiastic about beekeeping .
It is terrible thing , but if you have vast experience and there is no-one to follow in your footsteps and take up beekeeping , then there will be no more beekeepers and no more apiculture either .
We have therefore to support the whole system - the bees , the honey , the wax and all involved with it - and the positive incidental effects of bees .
Bees provide great benefit and that benefit can be expressed in more than just financial terms .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank all who have made an appeal on behalf of the bee here , and particularly Mrs Lulling , the rapporteur , for her careful consideration of the Commission proposal and the suggestions she has made concerning a further review .
Back in 1994 , the Commission put forward priority proposals for improving honey production and marketing in its discussion paper on the situation of apiculture in Europe .
Those measures include combating varroasis , rationalization of transhumance , technical assistance and promoting honey analysis .
I am glad to hear that the House supports the Commission in those areas .
I can , of course , understand that there are many here who would like to go further and would gladly do more , but the scope for that is , unfortunately , very limited .
We can , however , certainly identify adequate common bases for the introduction of suitable regulations to support this sector .
I have therefore read Parliament 's position carefully and looked at all the recommendations in a constructive spirit .
Unfortunately , I have also to say that the majority of the recommendations cannot be fully implemented for the following and , in my view , compelling reasons .
Let me explain them to you briefly .
Amendment No 1 , which concerns institutional issues , cannot be accepted as it stands because it does not constitute a legal basis and , consequently , cannot be cited in a reference .
Amendment No 1 could , however , be accepted as a recital , to take account of the joint declaration of 1 March 1995 .
Amendment No 8 on aspects of the committee procedure must be rejected because a recital should be used to give the reason for the corresponding provision in a piece of legislation , and in this case there is no corresponding article in the regulation .
Amendments Nos 5 , 11 and 12 call for greater flexibility as regards the individual State programmes and the priority measures .
The Commission could accept the reasons for those amendments and inform the Council of this .
However , they are not admissible in their current form because they go further than the priority measures proposed .
Amendment No 4 is calling for the measures to combat varroasis to be transferred to veterinary legislation .
That cannot be accepted because this is not an eradication measure .
The measure is actually intended to help beekeepers to cope with the increased production costs that result from dealing with varroasis .
Amendments Nos 6 , 13 and 19 propose the introduction of further measures in future on the basis of regularly conducted structural studies on the sector and on price formation .
We cannot accept those amendments because the proposed co-financing of the individual State programmes has to be linked to the condition that the studies be carried out before the programmes are approved .
Amendment No 14 provides for the introduction of complicated rules for determining the co-financing ceilings for the individual Member States .
Amendment No 15 is designed to change the proposed text , even though it provides for a simple and frequently used budgetary procedure .
I am therefore unable to accept those amendments either .
I am , however , able to accept Amendment No 16 .
In the final analysis , it makes the proposed text clearer .
Amendment No 17 , which relates to structural policy aspects , cannot be accepted because it would make it more difficult to supervise the application of structural programmes and could result in subsidies being paid twice .
I should like to make the following points concerning those amendments which seek to introduce new articles .
Amendments 2 , 9 and 10 provide for the introduction of a Community pollination premium and a compensatory payment for loss of income .
Those amendments cannot be accepted because it does not seem appropriate , in view of the general situation of the sector in the European Union , to introduce global arrangements for income subsidies or premiums .
The Commission will , however , continue to support thorough-going surveys of the economic position of the sector .
Amendments Nos 3 and 7 call for marketing standards for honey .
The appropriate framework for that is provided by the existing directive on honey which is currently being considered by the House , together with a range of other foodstuff directives , as part of the proposed simplification process .
Amendments Nos 20 and 21 , which provide for the rules on compensatory payments for mountain and hill-farming areas to be extended to cover other species , need to be looked at more closely in the context of the Council regulations on structural policy .
I am therefore unable to accept those elements in the existing proposal , but we shall consider them further .
Amendment No 18 emphasizes that implementing provisions are needed not only for the supervisory measures but also in respect of Articles 1 , 2 and 3 of the Council Regulation .
I prefer the text as it stands because implementing measures are particularly important for the supervisory measures , not least because the Council regulation does not contain any special supervisory measures .
I can in any event accept Amendment No 22 .
The Commission is persuaded that the adoption of the regulation does constitute substantial recognition of the sector and will contribute to positive developments in it .
Madam President , after all that the Commissioner has said to us , he accepts two amendments !
Those are amendments in which we say that the beekeepers , associations and cooperatives have , of course , also to be taken into account and that the famous report , which the Commission is supposed to submit , should be submitted not only to the Council but to Parliament also .
The Commissioner condemned everything else , using arguments which we shall of course look at once again in the Committee on Agriculture , but which are not real arguments , because there is no doubt that it is possible to take our demands on board .
We have , after all , made specific proposals .
That applies particularly to the inclusion of apiculture in the structural directive .
I could not explain all of that in my allotted five minutes , but the Commissioner should explain to me why Article 19 of the regulation cannot say that a beehive is as valuable as a sheep or a goat and that hives can therefore be included in the structural directive .
You have the text there after all .
This is not the first time that we in the European Community make changes to items in other regulations when working on a particular regulation ; otherwise you should make a proposal if you think that would not be proper in legal or procedural terms .
But you cannot say that that cannot be done !
It definitely can be done , there is just a lack of willingness to do it !
A pollination premium can also be introduced .
You cannot expect me to believe that there is no legal basis for this !
Of course there is a cost involved , but it is feasible .
I cannot be satisfied to hear you say that you want to look at various amendments and consider the issue once again .
You will carry on considering until you are worn out considering and there is no beekeeper left in the Community .
We have been studying the issue since 1985 , and I think we know enough .
It is , of course , possible to engage in even more detailed studies and improve the statistics , but everyone dealing with the problem knows that it is really the eleventh hour , the absolute last moment , if we are to rescue apiculture in the European Union , as all honourable Members here have proposed !
I do not agree with your so-called arguments , and I can also tell you that we do not accept that and that we shall therefore ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Lulling , I cannot allow you to continue .
You have our every sympathy here in the European Parliament , and the Chair 's too , but I do not decide on the debating time and I would ask you to understand that .
You have been here too long not to know that we are a special parliament and that speaking time is strictly limited .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Summer-time
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0180 / 97 ) by Mr Belleré , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of the eight European Parliament and Council Directive on summer-time arrangements ( C4-0169 / 87-96 / 0082 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Kinnock , when the Committee on Transport gave me the task of drawing up a report on the proposal for an eighth directive on the provisions relating to summer-time , I did not think it was an issue which would arouse such public interest across Europe . Like hitting the headlines as ' Belleré versus Juppé ' in a French newspaper !
Earlier , in my report at first reading , I stated that I agreed with the aim of the Commission 's proposal : harmonization of the dates for the beginning and end of summer-time to promote better functioning of the internal market and assist important sectors like transport and telecommunications .
But we know very well that there are different positions on this issue , depending on the different experiences of each Member State , and on the basis of those considerations I considered that the decision whether or not to apply this time system should be the exclusive responsibility of each Member State .
I am quite sure the great majority of citizens are in favour of maintaining summer-time , because it provides an additional hour of daylight for all kinds of activities , from sporting and recreational to services and tourism , especially in southern European countries , where the days are very short .
But we have an obligation to consider cases where the application of summer-time , in particular in the countries of northern Europe , has different or less beneficial effects than in other Member States .
I have dwelt on the issue of energy saving , which has minor impact in some Member States , while in others , like Italy , which are not selfsufficient in energy , the application of summer-time last year produced an estimated saving on consumption of 900 million kilowatt-hours , over 0.4 per cent of national requirements .
I also touched on the health issue , the fact that the change in the circadian rhythm as a result of changing from summer-time to winter-time and vice-versa involves small quantifiable disturbances to sleep patterns , but these effects are certainly transitory and definitely negligible .
As regards road safety , common sense clearly tells us there is a correlation between more light and greater road safety , but objective data from the Member States are needed to study this properly .
I concluded in my first report by applauding the Commission 's initiative in presenting its report , because it made an important contribution to evaluating the application of summer-time , but I stressed the responsibility of each Member State to make the decision .
In their common position the Commission and the Council demonstrated , for all response , that their minds were firmly closed to Parliament 's position as set out in its three amendments , in particular those relating to the principle of subsidiarity , basing this approach on the fact that acceptance of such amendments would not have made the application of a system of summer-time compulsory as such , and on the fact that they were considered contrary to the aim of harmonization , which is the fundamental purpose of the directive .
At this point the Commission and the Council at least have a duty to make clear to Parliament how much store they set by the principle of subsidiarity or whether they are prepared to sacrifice it from time to time if they think fit , creating obligatory conditions with effects which fall , for good or ill , on European citizens .
I am going to dwell on this point , because Europe and the values we seek to propose to the citizens do not take the path of compulsion or imposition , but the path of dialogue , mediation and respect for diversity .
We need to bring the citizens closer to Europe , not put them in the position of suffering its effects , and we need to bring Europe - dare I say it - closer to the citizens .
So in supporting a favourable opinion on the application of summer-time and harmonization of the date , I once again invite the Commission and the Council to draw up a detailed report on the consequences of the application of summer-time , by consulting representatives of interested sectors and national experts in the Member States , to bear in mind the principle of subsidiarity and the responsibility of each Member State , and to take greater account of the opinion of Parliament as the opinion of a freely elected assembly and the expression of the will of the European people .
Madam President , to begin with , I would like , on behalf of the social democrat group , to express our support for the common position on summer time .
We have heard previously many good arguments in favour of summer time from the rapporteur , but this concerns harmonisation of the dates for the beginning and end of summer time .
We think this is a good idea because it will reduce hassle , particularly for the transport sector and will facilitate the free movement of the people of the EU and of goods and services .
The majority of people in the EU , more than 80 percent , are also in favour of maintaining summer time .
This further emphasises the wisdom of supporting and approving the common position now .
So , once again , I would like to express our support for it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , during the first reading of the draft eighth directive , I had the opportunity to express to the Committee on Transport and Tourism my feelings on this important subject : summer-time .
Today we can only welcome the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of this harmonization text and I call on all members to approve the draft recommendation presented by Mr Spalato Belleré .
It was a French initiative , in the early 80s , to ensure that clock changing dates were harmonized at Community level , once summer-time had been adopted by all Member States .
As a reminder , that approach was intended to eliminate any risk of impediment to the free movement of persons , goods and services .
Since last year , I am pleased to note that clock changing dates have been completely harmonized .
Throughout the European Union summer-time now stretches from the last Sunday in March to the end of October .
As the head of a French local authority located on a border , in the Nord department , I am fully behind the adoption of the eighth directive which is in line with fifteen years of regulations in favour of harmonization .
My department shares a 370 kilometre border with Belgium .
Think of the importance of a time difference for the daily lives of people living on either side of that border , especially employees and schoolchildren .
The same is true of all border regions in France .
This local example shows just how any reorganization of the time system must be carried out on the basis of an agreement and coordination between all the Member States of the European Union .
If we adopt this directive , that is what will be done , at least until 2001 .
Madam President , allow me , before further ado , to congratulate you on your stunning election , with such a big majority , in your constituency , which has a common border with Spain and which nearly ended up suffering a time difference with people across the border .
I subscribe to the idea of subsidiarity , provided that the time difference between two countries never exceeds one hour .
The time difference between Britain and Ireland , on one hand , and Greece and Finland , on the other , is two hours .
Nonetheless we survive and the sun still shines .
This time difference between countries is not so serious , as long as the Member States change at the same time .
We have reached that goal .
We can therefore only welcome Mr Belleré 's excellent proposal and report and support him , while regretting somewhat that we had to wait so long for the Commission to set the hour change at the same dates .
Could we not possibly make a concession , in order not to upset the delicate rhythms of Frenchwomen and French children ?
Madam President , may I begin by joining Mr Wijsenbeek in warmly congratulating you on your stunning election to the Assemblée Nationale .
The only problem is that every silver lining has a cloud , in this case the fact that this is your last day in the chair presiding over this Assembly .
I am certain my colleagues in the Commission will agree with me that the French Parliament 's gain is the European Parliament 's loss . In neither place , however , would Europe be the loser , because we are certain that you will sustain your vigour and your progressive sense of purpose in all roles .
Personally and , on behalf of my colleagues , I wish you the very best of enjoyment and good fortune as your constituency 's representative in the Assemblée Nationale .
Madam President , I am grateful to Mr Belleré and his colleagues for their thorough and speedy work .
Naturally I welcome their proposed approval of the common position on summer-time arrangements in the European Union .
The House will know that transport operators are awaiting the new directive in order to set timetables for transport services and many other sectors whose activities are related to the dates of the summer-time period are eager for conclusive arrangements .
In his recommendation Mr Belleré comments on the implications of summer-time arrangements in the present and future Member States of the Union , in many cases reinforcing points that have already been made by the Commission and by Members of this House .
In anticipation of the future enlargement of the Union most European countries , both within and outside the Union , already operate a summer-time régime that is consistent with the Community directive .
Our proposal was sent to all the countries concerned and the absence of negative reaction seems to indicate that harmonization of the summer-time period is widely accepted .
The Commission emphasizes the need for the Community to take the necessary action to harmonize the summertime period in order to remove obstacles to the free movement of goods and people .
We are , however , prepared to listen , as suggested in Mr Belleré 's recommendation , to those who argue that the various aspects and various situations in the Member States need to be examined in depth .
Accordingly , the Commission will take into account the advice of national experts and representatives of the economic and social groups concerned and will be submitting a report to this Parliament and to the Council in 1999 .
I believe that that is the wish of the House and I am very happy to give that undertaking today .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Combined goods transport
The next item is the report ( A4-0130 / 97 ) by Mr Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation concerning the granting of Community financial assistance for actions to promote combined goods transport ( COM ( 96 ) 0335 - C4-0028 / 97-96 / 0207 ( SYN ) )
Mr President , Commissioner , the fact that combined transport is not , as anticipated , being discussed here shortly before midnight , is a good thing ; it is , after all , one of things we are pinning our hopes on to make mobility permanently acceptable , and time is getting on .
Those of us involved in transport policy have always made sure that combined transport was writ large our speeches , larger than it was in reality .
We sing its praises because we expect it to combine the advantages of the individual means of transport with shifting the rapidly increasing movement of goods to environmentally-friendly transport methods .
The old PACT programme sought and the new PACT programme is designed to help bridge that gap between intention and reality , between statistically ascertainable and predictable traffic trends on the one hand and our knowledge of transport policy .
At any rate , the ECU 22.7 m under the old programme were well invested between 1992 and 1996 in projects involving 16 international transport axes - incentives which allowed demand to grow .
The current proposal for the granting of Community assistance for actions to promote combined goods transport will be based on a regulation and make available ECU 53 m over six years .
That , in my view , is still too little , but a step and declaration of intent in the right direction .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism welcomes the fact that the new PACT programme focuses on direct measures .
Innovative measures , be they investment in intermodal transport equipment , in transshipment facilities or for access to rail or inland waterway structures , are sensible and important .
They are , however , to be promoted degressively .
We do not want long-term subsidies .
The commercial application of new techniques , which have previously been tested in European research programmes , and the measures to improve logistics and staff development reflect the fact that the programme of support is forward-looking .
In its discussion of the proposed legislation , the Committee on Transport and Tourism placed particular importance on four aspects of the conditions attaching to the grant of resources .
First : the projects supported will have also to develop further the European network structure for combined transport .
It is clear from the guidelines for the Trans-European Networks that , while the networks of the individual carriers and of combined transport are designed sensibly viewed in isolation , they do not tie in with one another - a wasted opportunity for intermodal transport .
The Commission 's consideration of the construction of freight freeways does not fully compensate for that omission .
Priority should therefore be given to PACT projects which help bridge the existing gaps in the networks .
Secondly , even in the old programme , projects on three axes , which extended to non-EU States , were supported .
The new programme too will be open to projects which promote combined transport with Eastern Europe .
Given the political will to see the European Union extended to bring in some Eastern European States , we think that it is now necessary to take measures to shift the very rapid growth in the movement of goods from Eastern Europe to combined transport .
We should earmark an additional ECU 4 m annually for the relevant projects or at least discuss the issue again thoroughly two years from now .
Taking the right measures at the right time helps save on future spending .
Thirdly : it makes sense to combine PACT projects with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe with transport projects to create the necessary infrastructure .
That kind of synergy could be achieved using the cohesion fund .
We are therefore expecting the Task Force on Intermodal Transport to engage in structured dialogue within the Commission so that synergy and complementarity can be achieved between all the funds and programmes in question .
It is certainly right to make a distinction between PACT pilot projects and research projects .
But we should like to there to be a specific sum to take special account of projects which put the results of research into practice , particularly in the area of telematics and logistics , as this is where we shall see the maximum impact .
Finally , I should like to make one more point : all who believe that combined transport to be one of the existing possibilities for resolving our current transport problems must want to see all political measures brought together to promote it .
That is why , in addition to this sound programme of support , we need a political effort to improve the policy framework , be this in relation to the monitoring of driving and rest periods or the implementation of external costs which we have just begun to discuss .
The way we deal with combined transport or , looking further ahead , intermodal transport , will show whether those of us involved in transport policy are and remain capable of political action in the face of current and future challenges .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is hard to follow a rapporteur who has already given a brilliant presentation of the issues involved , but I nevertheless take the opportunity to praise the report .
I also praise the Commission for producing a good proposal , and I hope as well that I shall be able to praise the Council for taking the helping hand held out by Parliament and the Commission to make combined transport a standard feature of our transport system .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Commission communication is somewhat silent on the political feasibility of combined transport , but I am certain that , with Parliament 's help , a way forward will be found .
That said , we do note with satisfaction that the 1992 experiment now looks as though it is developing into a proper programme .
The aims of the programme are , as has been said , to manage the EU 's transport resources in an optimum manner , taking into account the demands of environmental protection , but transport habits will not be altered through the effect of market forces alone .
The aims of the programme are thus a key factor in our progress towards sustainable development .
It was so easy to use lorries when there was plenty of time and the roads were not congested .
Now that we have the Just In Time concept and a massive increase in transport volumes , we are confronted with a task : how do we ensure rational development ?
How do we transfer current traffic potential from the roads to more environmentally friendly modes of transport , such as the railways , inland waterways and the sea ?
My answer is quite simple : the carrot and the stick .
We must change patterns of behaviour in transport .
We must calculate all the costs of transport into a fair and effective pricing system .
We must impose rules for crossfrontier transport , driving and rest periods and , last but not least , we must remember Eastern Europe .
Again I agree with the rapporteur .
The proposal does not have any special focus on Eastern Europe , although the corridors into the Central and Eastern European countries are expressly eligible for assistance .
It is not the first time I have mentioned the Baltic , but here we have a good opportunity to tell the applicant states that they must not make the same mistakes as we have done .
We must tell them that transport today is a multimodal affair and that it is that we are seeking to achieve .
I am reminded that , when we mention the Via Baltica , we are not just talking about a motorway , we are talking about railways and sea crossings as well .
This concept can also be developed in the Mediterranean and the Adriatic .
It is essential not just to look at individual areas in Europe , but to combine the experience we gather in one area and use it elsewhere .
As I have said , I support both the report and the Commission 's initiative , and I hope that in the end we shall also get the Council on board .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the work his has done and for this really good report .
The European Union is in need of a reliable , Europe-wide transport system that effectively guarantees trade and mobility .
As an Austrian , I should like to highlight the importance of combined transport , that is to say the transport of goods using at least two carriers , with the goods being transferred between them .
Because of Austria 's geographical position as an immediate neighbour of the States of Central and Eastern Europe , it is particularly important to draw attention to the transport situation .
Road traffic has already reached capacity , and , in view of eastward enlargement and the increase in traffic that will result , we face a total collapse of the system .
We have , of course , also to take into consideration the increase in road traffic pollution .
If we are to take pollution seriously , then it has to be combated and real ways of preventing pollution sought .
This transport system , which embraces a variety of carriers , can play a key role in the way transport in Europe is organized in the future .
The social and economic demands of the community as a whole must take proper account of environmental protection and the safety of users .
The situation can be relieved only if road traffic is combined with transport by rail and on water , that is to say if the different carriers cooperate and what is called an intermodal transport network is created .
That method of transport is , unfortunately , still undervalued , and its capacities and the possibilities it offers far too little used .
The European Union researched and promoted combined transport through its PACT programme , a pilot programme from 1992 to 1996 , and made available ECU 22.7 m for that purpose .
That programme had positive results , and so the Group of the European People 's Party welcomes the fact that the programme has been extended .
PACT II runs from 1997 to 2001 .
Funding of ECU 35 m has been made available but , in my view , that is far too small a sum .
I am therefore hoping for more financial support for the PACT programme .
I am therefore also arguing for PACT to be interlinked with other EU programmes , such as PHARE for instance , as eastward enlargement takes its course .
The Group of the European People 's Party supports all of the amendments in the report .
The amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party on project selection and the granting of financial assistance was rejected in committee by one vote .
In selecting the projects , the Commission should take the regions and Member States into consideration in a balanced way and ensure that decisions do not cause any distortion of competition as between regions and Member States .
I hope this proposal will be approved in plenary for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
We know that we are all in favour of promoting combined transport .
We all agreed on this when we dealt with the forerunner to Mr Stockmann 's report .
However , we have seen that combined transport is not really growing , either in percentage terms or in total volume .
Perhaps the Commissioner could tell us whether , in the freight freeways project that he has put forward , combined transport can be promoted in such a way that - since this seems to be one of the main reasons why combined transport has failed to meet expectations - the forwarding agent can remain responsible for the goods during both loading and unloading onto the intermediate form of transport , usually the train .
The problem is that whereas getting the goods on the train usually works well , because the train is waiting at a particular place and will not depart until a certain time , unloading can be a major problem , because the train stops only briefly and in any event goods trains never actually arrive on time where they are expected .
In short , two things are needed : the establishment of responsibility at the points of departure and arrival , and at the same time greater cooperation from the railways and greater efforts to keep to the timetables .
This is where the problem lies , in the fact that each national railway company has its own responsibility , rather than all of them sharing it jointly .
Mr President , I should like to begin by warmly congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent report .
Given the failure of the negotiations on transit with Switzerland , the report is all the more topical .
As a Member for one of the most sensitive transit regions of the EU , the Tiroler Inntal or Brenner region , I particularly welcome the new and committed initiative towards combined transport , as we have already heard too much said but seen too little done .
Further developing the substance of the PACT programme is an important step in the right direction .
I am thinking here of the investment in intermodal transport equipment , the enhanced monitoring facilities and the increased promotion of specific projects as opposed to mere feasibility studies .
The financial framework that has been established and the increase from ECU 22.7 m to ECU 35 m are best described as token . Moreover , in view of the enormity of the task that professionally combining European goods transport demands , technically and logistically speaking , and the advantages - consumer-oriented and speedier transport of goods as well lasting prevention of pollution - that avoiding unnecessary traffic could bring , it is , sad to say , extremely unsatisfactory !
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Tourism
The next item is the joint debate on five oral questions to the Commission :
by Mrs Bennasar Tous , Mr Provan and Mr Sarlis , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( B40162 / 97 - O-0042 / 97 ) on tourism ; -by Mr Wijsenbeek , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party ( B4-0167 / 97 - O-0049 / 97 ) on tourism ; -by Mr Azzolini , Mr Pasty , Mr Parodi , Mr Danesin , Mr Santini , Mr Tajani , Mr G. Collins , Mr Donnay , Mr Kaklamanis and Mr Girão Pereira , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ( B4-0171 / 97 - O-0077 / 97 ) on tourism ; -by Mr Novo Belenguer , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ( B4-0172 / 97 - O-0078 / 97 ) on tourism ; -by Mr Novo and Mr Theonas , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ( B4-0173 / 97 - O-0079 / 97 ) on Community measures in favour of tourism
Mr President , your speed on votes is well known , but at least when there is a change of Commissioner and a change of report we request your indulgence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are debating an oral question on tourism , an issue that is of concern to all of the political parties .
There are many aspects of tourism which , when we look at them , raise enormous questions .
The European Parliament forwarded a proposal to the intergovernmental conference and to the Commission advocating the insertion of a provision in the Treaty stating that tourism is to be considered as a sector of the economy and that it should be governed chiefly by Article 130 so that many of its various aspects , such as the Philoxenia programme and several other programmes that have preceded it , can be approached in a legislative framework .
To our great surprise - and all of the political groups here have been surprised given the importance of the matter - the Commission has not promoted the recommendation of the European Parliament that tourism be included as a separate chapter in the revised Treaty with its own separate legal basis and capital . And the Dutch Presidency , despite being fully aware of Parliament 's recommendations on the subject , has itself done nothing to promote the inclusion of tourism , which makes an important contribution to the economies of the 15 Member States and provides employment for 10 million people , and has sat on its hands .
There has been silence . Silence from the Commission .
Silence not so much from Commissioner Papoutsis , but rather from the Commission as a whole , in that as a college it has made no real attempt to place tourism on the agenda of the intergovernmental conference .
Tourism it not the same as foreign policy , defence policy , the common foreign and security policy or other things like that .
It is different . It is closer to all of us , and just as there is a chapter for industry so , too , there should be a chapter for tourism .
I would like to know how the Commissioner himself feels about the matter . Other speakers will be making the same request .
What is the position of the Commission at least ? What plans does it have to raise the issue of tourism again or to put it back on the negotiating table , albeit now , at this late stage ?
Mr President , we have called for tourism to be included in the Treaty .
I am delighted to have this opportunity to talk to Mr Papoutsis as the Commissioner responsible for tourism rather than as the deputy Commissioner for transport , although the dossiers are closely linked , and this was why we felt that they should be separated a little further by giving tourism its own title in the Treaty .
However , the Heads of Government do not appear to be in favour of this , so perhaps Mr Papoutsis could tell us what the situation is at present .
It is absolutely vital for tourism to have a separate title , because otherwise it will be impossible in many cases for the Union to exercise its powers in this field , powers which people already wrongly dispute .
This is also why , without going into detail , Parliament has given its broad support to the Philoxenia programme , and we are also pleased to see that the Commission has now adopted a new approach to tourism and is setting about giving the Community tourism programme a little more body .
In previous years , we have seen tourism allocated ridiculously low levels of funding , but considerably more has now been set aside for the programme for the next five years .
From 1993 to 1995 it received ECU 20.5 million , whereas now it is to get ECU 70.3 m .
It is therefore essential for DG XXIII to come up with a decent programme .
However , I think the most important thing is for the Commissioner to ensure that tourism in Europe is presented to the outside world as a unified sector where the same rules and standards apply , which is why it needs to be included in the Treaty .
Mr President , when we talk about tourism - in fact we have done so very rarely in this Chamber - it always seems almost as if we are talking about a marginal , occasional or optional issue . It seems we can talk about it or just as easily forget it .
Instead , as others have already stressed , tourism is actually a highly valuable industry which indeed produces well-being and GDP , but above all produces employment .
The nine and a half million employees - a 1992 statistic which no doubt needs updating - constitute a formidable platform of employment , especially as it provides jobs for people in areas often less fortunate .
When we talk about tourism there is a serious risk of misunderstanding .
We think of Paris , Rome , Amsterdam , hence big city tourism , a type of tourism which needs neither promotion nor attention , far less subsidy .
It is an automatic , endemic tourism , which can have no need for extra investment .
What does need concrete commitment from the Commission and this Parliament is peripheral tourism in depressed areas .
Here there is another misunderstanding to be overcome : that famous subsidiarity .
What does it mean ? Leaving the peripheral areas the task and the burden of organizing , and of course financing , their own tourism sector ?
They will never do it !
That is where there is a need to intervene with united action , with a serious programme which has good ideas , but also considerable funding , to provide incentives for the areas where tourism needs to be subsidized .
So here lies the logic of taking up virtual , merely oratorical , positions , so far expressed in the tourism actions launched five or six years ago and extended only last year , but always as an experiment , something which still has to happen .
And then at last tourism , too , found a programme with an eloquent name : PHILOXENIA .
We were all a little under the illusion that this name would finally make it possible to pass ideas and financing that would give Europe 's commitment to the tourism sector body and substance .
In November came the cold shower : the ' no ' from the Council , a rather icy ' no ' , especially as it was backed by reasons that were barely credible and came from only three countries , whereas all the others believed in the need to intervene in this sector .
This programme , with all its potential and its wealth of good intentions , is fortunately coming back in through the window now , and at last there also seems to be a reasonably concrete project beneath the financial aspect .
So I ask the Commissioner to take the old proposals up again , for a cultural tourism , a social tourism , a tourism of the weakest , and finally give it body and robustness with new ideas , especially at the financial level .
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not want to be repetitive but we are dealing with an important sector ; a sector where , unfortunately , as we all know , we shall only make progress if we really make a considerable effort .
This is a sector representing over nine million direct jobs , an average of 5 % of GDP , and one third of the European Union 's service exports .
It is a sector which - and I think this is an important feature - helps the more and less favoured regions achieve something the European Parliament and all other European institutions are seeking : social cohesion .
Reference has been made to the PHILOXENIA programme which was on the verge of being approved last year and in the end was not approved .
We are convinced of the importance of tourism for employment and on the economy and want to know why and how the Commission is going to try and put pressure on the Council so that the programme can be approved next year .
If not , we want to know the economic assistance that will be given to this vitally important sector for the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PHILOXENIA Programme , which involves a series of measures for tourism and which , basically , we supported , has unfortunately not been put into practice in the most appropriate and desirable manner .
We therefore think that the European Parliament should take a political stance reaffirming the need to put into practice the actions which were envisaged for this field , which is a major source of jobs and which therefore plays a most significant role in the development of some less-favoured regions , thus promoting economic and social cohesion in the European Union .
Another reason for taking such a stance is that the promotion of tourism tends at the same time protect the environment and the cultural and architectural heritage and to encourage occupational training and sustainable and stable employment , so that financial resources need to be stepped up within the framework of the current and future policy .
We therefore consider it neither necessary nor appropriate to support the setting up of a common policy for tourism which might entail some centralization which is incompatible with national diversity and which offers little opportunity for transparency or participation .
We do not therefore support the motion for a joint resolution due to be adopted at the close of this debate .
It is important - and it seems to have been forgotten in this motion for a resolution - to reach the maximum level of consensus possible to press for the implementation in practice of measures approved long ago which the European Parliament already agreed to but which are still blocked .
Then we should not have the impression that proposals were being made which were of doubtful effectiveness based on dubious reasons ; what is essential and necessary is simply to make specific measures out of what is already envisaged and so essential for tourism in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares the views of the Members of this Parliament concerning the economic and social importance of tourism , particularly as regards its potential for increasing employment in Europe .
The Commission 's approach on the matter is expressed in the first objective of our proposal for the multiannual programme to assist tourism in Europe , the Philoxenia programme .
As the European Parliament has stated , tourism has substantial job-generating potential , and it does , of course , provide work , in particular , for vulnerable groups in society such as women and young people .
It contributes also , in a very significant way , I believe , to the strengthening of economic and social cohesion and to development in remote and island regions .
The Philoxenia programme has ambitious objectives , but it is also extremely important with regard to the creation of a legal basis which would facilitate the development at the European level of policies which can strengthen the national policies .
We had no wish to duplicate national powers or to infringe the subsidiarity principle in any way .
Indeed , when the programme was first presented to Parliament and whenever I spoke to the Council I made a point of emphasizing that the Commission had every intention of respecting the subsidiarity principle .
The main thrust of the programme is that Community measures must improve the quality and competitiveness of European tourism .
They must also focus on ensuring that tourists are provided with what they need and on promoting balanced and sustainable development of tourism through rational use of natural and cultural resources and of the tourism infrastructure .
The Commission believes that these basic objectives provide a balanced and precisely targeted framework .
As I told the House at the time of the debate and the Committee on Transport and Tourism when we discussed the Sarlis report , the programme had emerged after very difficult and protracted discussions between the Commission 's directorates-general and in the college of the Commission .
That had been the case because there are differences of view as to how this crucial sector should be approached at the European level .
The problem now is how to get agreement on the existing programme in the Council .
The Commission believes that the submission of an amended programme , as some sides are suggesting , would not increase the possibility that the Council would approve the proposal .
On the contrary , it would , in our opinion , create additional difficulties and delay the taking of a decision even further .
I must inform you that some Member States also wish to cut back on the present objectives of the programme that I have just stated for you .
The real reason for the delay is that in one Member State there is considerable anxiety about the programme and a perception that it violates the subsidiarity principle .
The more one talks with the Member States which have expressed reservations , the more one realizes that the discussion process is bedevilled by a host of misunderstandings .
It appears that the programme has not been adequately examined and that insufficient time has been allocated for explaining its real orientations and objectives to those who are actually proficient for the taking of the requisite decisions .
Mr President , I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to Members to take the initiative , in their own spheres , in their own countries , in their own fields of responsibility , in explaining the objective and potential of this programme to local and regional authorities and in making clear to them that the programme really does not infringe the subsidiarity principle .
When I spoke last week with the President-in-Office of the Council , with the minister of the Dutch Presidency who is responsible for tourism , I had a very lengthy discussion about the details of the programme and possible alternative proposals that could be acceptable to the Council , and I realized that even at this late stage not all of the sides , all of the Member States , all of the COREPER representations , have understood certain substantive observations put forward by Parliament that the Commission has drawn attention to and which could find acceptance with all of the Member States .
For that reason I appeal again to Parliament to play a part in this , to step up the political discussion , to approach ministers at the political level and everyone in the Member States with the capacity to promote acceptance of this proposal , so that we can find way out of the problem fairly quickly .
We have tried , so far , to get the presidencies , that is to say each six-monthly presidency , to initiate action on the matter and to request and appoint COREPER to embark on a discussion process in connection with the programme .
Over the course of this year we have used every opportunity that has come our way to explain our position to the Member States and to all of the social and political bodies and to convey our message at the major gatherings organized by the industry itself and by regional and local authorities .
The Commission has put in a presence wherever that has been possible and has deployed every argument at its disposal , fortunately , with the support of many of you who are here today , and I take this further opportunity of thanking you for your help .
Unfortunately , even now , this programme is still with the Council and it has not been possible to get a decision .
We hope that during the Luxembourg Presidency there will be some development on the matter , given that the Presidency has already requested the Commission to help set up a large conference on tourism and job creation during the Luxembourg Presidency .
I believe that this is a very important development and that we shall have your support in that endeavour . I believe that the next few months will bring some progress .
Turning now to coordination of the Commission 's activities , this Parliament , as you know , with many resolutions of its own , and , also , the Court of Auditors have urged the Commission to make Directorate-General XXIII responsible for coordinating its activities with a view to providing transparency and good use of the budget and to ensuring that the tourism sector is provided with a specific policy with priorities and objectives . That is what we have been striving for and achieving over the recent period .
The new director-general of Directorate-General XXIII has already started things moving .
In recent months six coordination meetings have been organized for directorsgeneral with responsibility for policies in other fields which have some connection with aspects of tourism . We are endeavouring to coordinate the other policies in areas in which they are relevant to tourism , in particular the structural fund initiatives and the more general actions on employment and training and in support of businesses and , also , of course , the single market policies .
This inter-service group on tourism now meets regularly , and priorities for 1997 are being discussed with representatives of the industry and of the Member States .
Like you I believe that efficient coordination of Community measures relating to tourism is vital .
It was with that necessity in mind that we made cohesion and complementarity between the measures of the Philoxenia programme and the other Community programmes which have a bearing on tourism a principal objective when we drew up that programme .
As regards institutional aspects , the clear support of the European Parliament for the insertion of specific provisions on tourism in the new treaty is very important .
Just as it stated in its report to the Council of 3 April 1996 , the Commission wishes it to be understood now , also , that it is not seeking new powers in the tourism sector , or in any other sector for that matter , and that it believes that it is up to the intergovernmental conference to deliver an opinion on the matter .
I want to be very precise about this because Mr Sarlis has been kind enough to question me on it .
Under the first protocol , under the first annex to the Maastricht Treaty , the Commission had an obligation to present a report at the commencement of the intergovernmental conference on the extent to which , if at all , the three policies - tourism , energy and civil protection - which are excluded from the Maastricht Treaty should be discussed at the conference , and we did present that report .
At that time the Commission did not wish , any more than now , to seek new powers - and I think that it is being wise .
However , in the report it expressed the view that something had to be done to create a legal basis to cover tourism in view of the sector 's status as the largest European industry and its very considerable jobgenerating potential .
In its report the Commission pointed out that the current absence of specific legal bases has not prevented the Community initiating and implementing certain measures to assist tourism , but that the measures that have been adopted have been based either on the provisions relating to other sectoral policies or on Article 235 of the Treaty .
At the same time , the Commission stated - in the report to which I have referred - that it was aware that resort to Article 235 may be much more difficult or even impossible in an enlarged Community in which the principle of unanimity in decision-making is retained .
How clearer could we have put the case when seeking at that time to progress to the adoption of a specific chapter in the Treaty to cover policy on tourism via that indirect method ?
We have never sought a common tourism policy on the lines of the common agricultural policy .
From the very beginning we stuck to the view and made clear that the principle of subsidiarity had to be respected .
Nevertheless , it is a fact that certain joint actions to assist European tourism in general do need to be initiated at the European level .
In that same report the Commission also emphasized the importance of tourism and pointed out that the continuation and cohesion of Community action in the sector would be facilitated by the inclusion of specific provisions in the Treaty .
Provisions which , in our opinion , would have to ensure that measures to assist tourism are based on a cohesive and coordinated approach and are more effective and transparent .
What can we do now , at this late stage ?
We can continue to press for dialogue , on the assumption that the big problems that still remain can be resolved and while there is still some leeway for discussion concerning the new policies .
However , judging by the objections that have so far been raised , I fear that this will be very difficult because only one Member State has formally lodged a specific proposal with the Commission and the others have shown no inclination to initiate discussion in connection with the proposals that have been put forward .
Lastly , Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Wijsenbeek for his good words and to assure him that DirectorateGeneral XXIII is now very actively engaged in trying to make up for the time that has been lost and to achieve more rational use of the available Community resources , meagre as they are .
We are doing this with the help that Parliament has given via the entering of the specific sum of ECU 4 million in the 1997 budget .
Irrespective of whether the Philoxenia programme is approved , Directorate-General XXIII is preparing to use that appropriation for the general benefit of tourism in Europe through the promotion of actions to assist employment and in the fields of information-gathering , access to information , the information society and , contingently , statistics .
Mr President , I am very glad that Commissioner Kinnock is going as a tourist to the Lothians .
I am even more pleased that Commissioner Papoutsis , as the Tourism Commissioner , is coming to my constituency of Cheshire and Wirral and I can assure the Commissioner that I am taking up the matter of Philoxenia with the new Labour government minister for tourism , Mr Tom Clarke .

Whenever we mention tourism to the Council , or indeed to the Member States , it seems to be that they collectively all go on holiday .
Mention tourism and they leave their brains to broil on the beach .
Speak about Europe 's biggest industry and our decision-makers become indecisive .
They sink back deeper in their deck chairs and tan themselves in complacency believing Europe 's most successful industry needs neither help nor understanding .
Most hopeless amongst these sunseekers has been the Dutch Presidency .
They could not even be bothered to summon a tourism council .
They have been a grave disappointment .
But let me touch on four areas of concern , most of which are set out in today 's resolution .
Firstly , the IGC in Amsterdam next week .
The failure to translate the unfinished business of the Maastricht Treaty into a title for tourism in the revised Treaty is madness .
It is , in particular , a snub to the tourism industry .
Many of them are small and medium-sized businesses .
Any other industry - shipbuilding , automobiles , the chemical industry - rightly receives the attention of Commission , Council , and Member States .
Tourism however has been abandoned .
It must be given a title and a proper legal base .
Secondly , Philoxenia .
It is quite absurd for certain Member States to stall the modest multiannual programme for tourism .
Tourism , of all industries , is one that functions and is dependent on the single market .
In other words there is a clear added value in placing tourism in an EU context .
This does not contradict the principle of subsidiarity and it is dumb to suppose it does .
Thirdly , tourism and the Euro .
If only the Council and Member States woke up - and indeed the Commission has been slow off the mark here - it should be realized that tourism is the best industry and activity to illustrate the benefit of the single currency to the man and women in the street .
It is the consumer as tourist who throws away 2 % of their holiday spending money each time to go on holiday inside the EU .
Rich Americans too have few bucks to spend in Europe because we retain national currencies .
Those working in the tourism industry know only too well the frustrations of moveable exchange rates .
Two-thirds of visitors to the United Kingdom come from the EU , but these tourists will be put off by the fact that the pound sterling has appreciated by 19 % against the franc and the mark in the past twelve months .
Finally , Mr President , let me state the obvious which seems all too obscure to the Council .
Tourism means jobs .
We spend hours in the European corridors of power talking about unemployment but why do we ignore tourism as an obvious job generator ?
It is time we stopped treating tourism like a holiday ; it is time to come home , to jobs .
Mr President , nobody needs to tell the Commissioner that we in this Parliament listen as closely to him as he listens to us .
It is important that we have this synergy , because the blockage is obviously in the Council of Ministers .
For a number of years now Parliament 's position on tourism has been quite clear and we are becoming increasingly frustrated because , regrettably , many in the Council are not prepared to look at the opportunities which this Parliament has suggested to the Commissioner to mop up some of the unemployment Mr Harrison has just referred to .
We are right to recognize the opportunities and the Council 's difficulties .
Subsidiarity in tourism is a very important aspect and nobody here would object to that .
We must keep trying to find a way through the maze .
It seems extraordinary that the Council refuses to endorse the Philoxenia programme , although we have agreed with the Council within the budget the amount necessary to promote the programme .
How can the Council take such decisions , either budgetarily or from a policy point of view ?
The two are not compatible .
The main issue which the Commissioner has correctly identified and which is in the main part of this question is what we should do to get tourism recognized within the Treaty .
We must have an independent and welldifferentiated common policy with a proper legal basis , in other words a chapter within the revised Treaty .
The Commissioner must push for that .
We recognize that perhaps he has difficulties within the Commission .
That is part of the problem too and we want to strengthen his arm .
Any advice on ways in which we can help him will be gratefully received , because the Commission is obviously very important in helping to push the Member States on the revision of the Treaty and to achieve what we have to achieve .
Coming back to the main issue to which the Commissioner has referred in his remarks , common action within the Commission : we all want greater coordination and we must have it , otherwise tourism will never get anywhere .
The Commissioner said that his new Director-General has already had six meetings , but let us see what action results from those meetings , as the saying goes , ' where is the beef , let us get on with it ' .
We are looking to the Commissioner to deliver .
Mr President , I am convinced , along with some of my colleagues , that in terms of tourism the Commission and the European Parliament are heading in the same direction .
I think that , as a result , the problems that have bene denounced are the responsibility of the Council .
I have no doubt about that especially since Mr Papoutsis , the Commissioner responsible for tourism policy , has highlighted its importance , with energy and firmness , within the Commission .
I would like to know if my impressions are right . The current Presidency of the Council has attached too much to the problems over PHILOXENIA .
This hope that is always placed in the next Presidency - does it mean that the problems lie with the country currently presiding over the European Union ?
At any event , I think that Mr Papoutsis ' demand is a good one in that we should explain to our fellow-citizens , our private companies , our public administrations that we do not want to replace national policies but to complement them .
We should explain how good it would be to open up Community support schemes .
It would be wrong to claim that a Community policy , with actions and resources , would not increase the overall competitiveness of European tourism compared with others , given the effects of tourism on employment , cohesion , the environment , the generation of resources , etc .
This has already been said but it is worthwhile repeating it here - in terms of employment and the economy , tourism means more for the fifteen Member States than coal and steel did for the six founding members of the European Communities .
Mr Papoutsis ' demand is a good one and we shall bear it in mind , but it is also pessimistic about the possibility of reforming the Treaty on European Union .
Let us wait until the second half of the year for the PHILOXENIA programme .
However , Mr Papoutsis , when it comes to our pessimism over finding a legal basis for the joint motion for a resolution , I wonder whether the Commission might be ready in the current situation , without any reform of the Treaty , to elaborate a legislative proposal on the basis of the current Treaty on European Union , tackling tourism from the consumer 's viewpoint .
This is not a casual question , since the European Parliament is already making a request on those lines .
Against that background , I should like to extend my warm thanks to Mr Papoutsis for his generous assistance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are always debating tourism in the European Parliament .
There have been a series of good reports over the year and much energy and hard work has been put into the subject by you and my colleagues before me .
We have all insisted on demonstrating the importance of tourism as a social , economic and cultural phenomenon .
About 200 million European citizens leave their homes every year and become tourists .
It is an industry that generates 9 million jobs and could generate far more .
We must try and convince - you and us - the sector itself and the majority of the Member States that tourism is a horizontal activity and that the PHILOXENIA programme does not get in the way of subsidiarity .
We must convince them that if we identify the aspects that can be run at European level , that would add value to the sector and ease the management of the SMEs to coordinate the relationship between tourism and the environment , stimulate the modernization of installations , conservation of the artistic heritage , rural tourism , reassess training , assist the search for new products that keep the industry in momentum and create permanent jobs , setting quality products and services as the main priority .
You , Commissioner , and I know that this is the content of PHILOXENIA , rejected by the Council to everyone 's great disappointment , especially mine as rapporteur .
I am aware of the considerable effort put in by yourself and your colleagues into properly running DG XXIII , but we should like you to put in more effort and enthusiasm in order to convince the rest of the Commission and the Council of the importance of tourism and make the latter give up its reservations and give the PHILOXENIA programme and all of its content the green light .
Transparent and open dialogue should then be continued over important matters such as VAT and the euro , prosaic but urgent matters , that if properly dealt with should help Europe become once again the leading tourist destination .
For this we need a legal base and an instrument for taking action , and that is the PHILOXENIA programme .
It is necessary so that you and your team can hold fluid and transparent dialogue with the sector , with enthusiasm , and along with the Council and the European Parliament , in order to establish a European tourism strategy , which we all need .
We shall back you , Commissioner .
Mr President , tourism is nothing more and nothing less than the sector capable of creating most jobs in the future in Europe - that is , the sector which could be the most helpful in solving our greatest problem .
On the other hand , tourism is a very diverse activity with a great knock-on effect which makes an important contribution to economic and social cohesion in Europe .
It therefore seems to us essential to give tourism a legal basis in the revision of the Treaty on European Union and , whilst the solution of including the tourism industry under Article 130 is not the ideal solution , it does have the advantage of being simple and possible and acceptable to the sector , especially Otreca .
I know , Mr Commissioner , that you agree with us on this objective .
I hope that it proves possible , for the sake of the economy and the citizens of Europe , to include tourism in the Treaty .
I should like finally to put a proposal to you : why not ask the Commission to carry out a study on the effects on tourism of liberalizing air transport ?
Perhaps the results of such a study would encourage those hesitant Member States to understand the enormous advantage which would spring from providing tourism with a legal basis in our Treaties .
Mr President , there is no doubt that tourism is a major economic factor as well as being critical to employment policy .
In Austria , for example , 17 % of GDP is earned from tourism .
That means that if we really want to take tourism seriously in those terms , then we have , in my view , to focus on at least three points . Firstly , we should accord tourism the status of an autonomous Community policy , and that has been stressed by those who spoke before me also ; secondly , we must do everything we can , that is to say , we must make available the resources to facilitate the PHILOXENIA programme , because that could in the end produce a Community policy that is to some extent a tourism policy for the Union ; and , thirdly , we must create opportunities to improve staff quality through mobility and training programmes .
Mr President , a few days ago we in the European Parliament held a meeting with those responsible for tourism and established that tourism is set to increase by about 10 % as a result of the introduction of the euro .
I therefore believe that the euro can be one of the main incentives for what is qualitatively speaking high-value tourism in Europe , and if we also succeed in making progress towards tax harmonization , for example , in the area of value-added tax in particular , then we shall probably have the best possible start .
Since tourism is very labour intensive , we ought also to consider whether reduced rates of value-added tax ought not to apply here .
The most important area has already been mentioned by Mr Pirker , that is , in my view , training and further training , and the LEONARDO programme in particular .
I believe that the LEONARDO programme offers many opportunities for our tourist industry and would ask that an even bigger effort be made here .
Mr President , I apologize for being late , but I was involved in another meeting and I thought this debate was going to start a little later .
On behalf of the Greens , I just want to restate a position we have already expressed on previous occasions : we believe tourism ought to have its own place in the treaty , and that is in line with the intention already expressed by the European Parliament .
But we do not think it is enough to include only the commercial and employment aspects of tourism , although these are important . We think it should be valued for its cultural aspects and for relations between different people and cultures , as a means of getting to know them and their societies .
So we believe it is very important to highlight not only the economic and commercial side but especially the cultural side and development of relations between the various cultures , to promote the construction of Europe .
This is a first important point , frequently debated in the Committee on Culture .
But as Greens we want to highlight the fact that tourism can also have great environmental and social impact , and that is why we have some doubts about the resolutions which have been tabled .
It cannot be dealt with in isolation from the serious effects certain forms of tourism have had on the environment in Europe .
Account must also be taken of the fact that certain types of mass tourism , with countryside and coastline being covered in concrete , have not only had an environmental impact , but have also reduced the potential for employment in the future and have blocked other activities more compatible with the environment .
So in social terms , we believe the consequences of certain types of tourism need careful evaluation .
There have been forms of tourism which have expropriated the inhabitants of certain areas , and tourism multinationals have imposed their logic and their personnel , totally changing the way of life in entire territories .
Without careful evaluation of the environmental impact and the social consequences , tourism cannot be regarded as exclusively positive from the commercial point of view .
So , yes to incorporation into the treaty , but with the proper precautions , including these environmental , social and cultural aspects .
Mr President , allow me to emphasize to the House that if provision is made in the Treaty we shall be freed from the sort of trouble that we have had with the Philoxenia programme .
Until it gets a proper mention in the Treaty , tourism will continue to be pushed about from pillar to post .
Mr President , the Commissioner has appealed to us most urgently to bring pressure to bear on the Council .
For our part , I would urge the Commissioner to attend the meeting of the tourism group at 3.30 p.m. this Thursday , where the President-in-Office of the Council is to make a policy statement .
Commissioner , if you are serious about this , be there at 3.30 p.m. on Thursday , then we can have a joint discussion with the President-in-Office .
If necessary , you can put your urgent request again .
Can we count on your attendance ?
Mr President , I will look at that possibility and try to be at the meeting .
In the event of my not being able to be there , depending on my programme , a representative of the Commission will certainly attend .
Whatever the case , however , I can assure Mr Cornelissen that I am constantly in touch with the Dutch Presidency about the IGC and developments concerning a specific chapter for tourism and the possibility of achieving an agreement on the Philoxenia programme even at this late stage , in the final weeks , through the COREPER framework , without a Council meeting .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.25 and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Question Time ( Commission )
The next item on the agenda is questions to the Commission ( B4-0170 / 97 ) .
Question No 32 by Mr Juan Izquierdo Collado ( H-0347 / 97 )
Subject : Suspension of the LEADER programme
Does the Commission acknowledge responsibility for the suspension of the LEADER programmes following a fax from Mr Legras , Director-General of DG VI , which has no real legal basis ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a communication of 15 July 1996 , the Commission informed the Spanish authorities that accumulating structural fund resources in support of one and the same project cannot be approved .
What was being asked for at the time was both a Community subsidy under the LEADER programme and , in addition , Community co-financing under a Community support programme .
After detailed discussion of this matter with the Spanish authorities , the Commission is now able to approve the accumulation of aid that is being asked for , provided that effective and reliable project management is guaranteed , so that it is possible to make a clear distinction between the types of aid accorded for the project in question .
Only in that way is the Commission able to guarantee that the Community resources are used in an efficient and transparent manner .
As a general point , I should add that accumulating aid is not in itself a condition for the implementation of the LEADER programme .
In the majority of the Member States the LEADER programmes progress absolutely normally with no accumulation of resources .
Commissioner , the fact is that a good many LEADER programmes in my country are being held up for a year .
The execution of those programmes has been paralysed and this has stopped jobs being created and innovations being fulfilled .
Why ?
Because the Council or the Commission have decided that LEADER II must be run in a different way to LEADER I and a Director General 's fax has produced such a commotion that we have seen an perfect example of red-tape and its harmful effects on the dearest aims of the Union , i.e. efficiency and job creation .
Commissioner , I hope that your answer will send a clear message to many mayors and councillors who are setting much store by your words that the LEADER programme 's continuity is guaranteed in all transparency and , otherwise , that the Spanish Government is asked to take immediate action .
I hope that your words will be quite clear .
Mr President , Mr Izquierdo Collado , let me first thank you for agreeing with me that LEADER II is in itself a sound Community initiative .
But when , in the case of a specific measure , it is not clear whether this is a single measure or two separate measures , as happened here , that is something that has to be cleared up .
But it is not a reason for simply shelving that procedure .
If , in future , you should encounter similar problems where , either for reasons similar to those you mentioned or for other reasons , the implementation of a LEADER programme has come to a halt , then I would simply ask you to let me know about it .
I should be glad to look into the matter .
Commissioner , how is it that abusive action by a Director General of the Commission can paralyse the LEADER II programme , just because of problems raised by LEADER I ?
There were problems of an accumulation of Community subsidies in the case of the LEADER I programme and a lack of controls over the programme by the Commission .
But the two things are not linked .
Unblock LEADER II and control LEADER I. I think that we are down that road , given that under LEADER II there is now a payment body in each Member State .
But I would still ask the Commissioner to make sure that the same things do not occur again . I hope that the Commission will control the excessive powers of some of its employees .
Mrs Redondo , let me say it again : we are talking about LEADER II and not a mixture of LEADER I and LEADER II .
One thing is absolutely clear : LEADER I has already expired and we now have the LEADER II Community initiative .
I can assure you that it is not my intention nor that of my services to create additional bureaucracy here .
What we actually need simply a proper system .
And we have to have that system because we could otherwise come up against problems later when it comes balancing the books .
I repeat : if there are problems here , for whatever reason , I am prepared to help solve them .
Please tell me about them .
Question No 33 by Mrs Mary Banotti ( H-0409 / 97 )
Subject : Abolition of duty-free sales
Has the Commission considered the implications of the possible loss of 140 000 jobs in the European Union on the abolition of duty-free sales ?
Given the high level of unemployment in the EU at the moment , does the Commission not consider that the deadline for abolition of duty-free in June 1999 should be further extended to consider in particular its effect on regional development and employment ?
Mr President , when the directives on the abolition of tax controls at borders were adopted , the Council decided to cease permitting duty-free sales as of 1 July 1999 , although it made provision for a transitional period which has to be used for the taxation of intra-Community trade to allow the adoption of the measures necessary to cushion the social impact in the regions affected and at the same time regional difficulties - particularly in border regions .
The Commission regrets the fact that the sector in question has not used the transitional period provided for by the Council to develop a strategy to cushion the effect of removing the tax advantage of duty-free sales .
There was never any question of the Council decision , which actually dates back five years , being rescinded .
In fact , the dutyfree sector actually increased its turnover between 1991 and 1995 by some 50 % and in so doing naturally created an unacceptable means of exerting pressure .
That increase in turnover also shows the importance of the tax advantage to the sector , accounting for 35 % of turnover on average .
With financial support of that nature , it would be possible for any marketing sector to create at least the number of jobs mentioned in the question .
It is telling that the arguments - including the argument about jobs - cited here in support of extending the transitional period , are exactly the same as those which led to the 1991 Council decision .
It is not therefore the Commission 's intention to propose an extension of the transitional period .
I am quite amazed at the Commissioner 's answer .
Clearly , the Commission has been remiss in assessing the damage both to the shipping and airline business resulting from the abolition of duty-free : its effect on costs and fares and above all , in the regions , its effect on employment .
Already it is estimated that at least 1 , 800 people could lose their jobs on the ferries in Ireland .
Why is it not possible to do a proper study based on the realities we face today ?
A huge number of jobs are involved and maintaining duty-free has particular relevance for regional development .
You can argue that , simply because they have a tax advantage , they should not be allowed to continue in this line of business and that anybody else would be able to continue with that sort of advantage .
I do not think that is good enough given the appalling vista we have before us of job losses in these areas .
Would you agree that the Commission has been remiss in the way it did not conduct adequate studies into the effect of the abolition of duty-free ?
Mrs Banotti , I have to be quite candid with you and say that : firstly , it has long been known that this decision was coming , but instead of preparing for this new and necessary situation , the sector has done exactly the opposite and used the tax advantage to increase turnover .
And so it cannot be argued that jobs are now going to be lost because duty-free is no longer possible .
You could equally ask how many jobs have already been lost in normal trading which was at a clear competitive disadvantage as a result of this situation .
I would like to support what Mrs Banotti said .
The UK also has a problem .
As in Ireland , we will be facing many job losses in the ferry industries and in regional and local airports.The effect will be disastrous .
Although the Commissioner said that this has been known for some time , the studies which have outlined the sort of job losses we are talking about have in fact been relatively recent .
In the light of those studies , the Commissioner should give further thought to the number of jobs which will be lost and the effect on transport facilities both in the UK and Ireland and other countries affected .
It goes without saying that a restructuring measure of the kind needed here is bound to involve problems and difficulties .
We fully acknowledge that .
But I do not believe that it is compatible with the principle of the internal market permanently to allow structures which clearly disadvantage normal trade , while special provision is made for some , according them a clear competitive advantage .
The Commission is therefore in agreement with the Member States and the Council on this issue and does not intend to submit a proposal for amendment of the kind you are requesting .
Thank you for your kind treatment of us , Mr President .
I am very glad of it .
Mr Fischler , I think your answer was a bad one .
I think it was bad because there is unemployment . If there were no unemployment , it would be OK to abolish the system .
But regions are affected . In my region we have the highest rate of unemployment in Denmark , and we shall lose 2900 jobs .
People will really be devastated by this measure .
It cannot be the Commission 's intention to create unemployment .
Create new jobs , before you start to close jobs down .
I think it was a bad answer , and I think you could have been better prepared in the way you are answering us .
Mr Blak , I thought you were going to be speaking on a point of order .
But it is Mr Cassidy 's turn and so I am now giving him the floor .
If the Commissioner then decides to answer your question , it is up to him .
Mr Cassidy , you have one minute .
I should like to congratulate the Commissioner on his robust answers to Mrs Banotti and to Mr Truscott .
The fact is that the very name duty-free is misleading .
A more correct appellation would be tax-free .
Secondly , it has been admitted by one of the operators in the United Kingdom that the ending of tax-free sales would mean an extra £ 15 on the average charter air fare .
In other words , nearly ECU 20 .
The British exchequer loses several hundred million pounds a year on this trade .
It has no place in a single market .
It has an effect on other sectors of the retail trade as the Commissioner has pointed out .
It is also hotly opposed by the Consumers Association .
So will the Commission stick to its guns on this issue ?
Ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost , it is not my personal responsibility to make proposals on this .
That is for my colleague , Commissioner Monti .
But in so far as I can judge or see from the Commission perspective , we continue to stand by what I already said , including as a Commission .
Secondly , should problems of transport costs arise here or transport difficulties , then I should like to make it absolutely clear that that would have to be met from airport fees which , in Europe , are not exactly the lowest , compared with the international picture .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
Mr Andersson , on a point of order .
I would just like to state that it is a little unfortunate that the discussion on this important issue , which concerns so many regions in Europe , has concentrated on only one region .
May I just say that there are many regions which will have the same problems when tax free shopping disappears and we would like to act as the mouthpiece for what will happen in these regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission position on the obligations of the Member States , under Articles 5 and 30 of the EC Treaty , to prevent individuals disrupting the smooth functioning of the internal market and the free movement of goods has already on several occasions been explained to the House .
In an effort to bring to an end attacks by French farmers on agricultural products from other Member States , the Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , brought an action for infringement of the Treaty before the European Court of Justice .
The aim of that action is to get the French Government to meet its obligations under Articles 5 and 30 of the EC Treaty .
That case is pending before the Court of Justice under Registry number C-265 / 95 .
The deadline for the oral procedure has been set at 10 June 1997 .
Since the Commission has taken the court action available to it under the Treaty to enforce Community law , we must wait for the Court 's judgment .
Following fresh attacks on 24 April last and then again recently , the Commission urged the French authorities , on 24 April - after the first incident - finally to use their powers and guarantee internal security .
In addition , Commissioner Monti wrote to the minister responsible for the internal market in France , drawing his attention , as a matter of urgency , to the fact that he had to secure the conditions necessary for the operation of the internal market .
We have also made it publicly clear that the Commission is not prepared simply to tolerate such attacks , and we shall be considering whether the Commission can take further legal or administrative measures to put a stop to this situation .
Commissioner , as you see this is indeed a very tricky problem and a very serious one , because these violent acts - taking place frequently , as you admit - against Spanish farm produce on French roads , have a terrible effect , destroy the single market and endanger people 's personal safety .
The most serious aspect of all , Commissioner , is that this aggression is achieving the desired results .
According to news that has come to us over recent days , the overwhelming majority of exports of fruit and vegetables from my country to France has been diverted to other markets , which has obviously led to a sharp price drop .
The damage done is therefore far greater than merely a calculation of the quantity and face value of the destroyed goods .
My question is : do you think that the current measures and the action taken by the Court of Justice in Luxembourg will be enough to solve this problem or will you need new measures and new powers to take determined action and avoid these uncivilized attacks ?
Mr Sanz Fernández , I should like to make it clear that the question of whether actions for damages are likely to be successful will depend , in the first instance , on the judgment reached by the Court of Justice .
Apart from that , damages are primarily a matter for the national courts .
Such claims have therefore to be brought before the national courts .
Commissioner , I must insist on the attacks against Spanish farmers when their fruit and vegetables are being transported through southern France .
These are repeated acts of violence .
You only have to look at the number of European Parliament resolutions to see that - the number of violations of Article 5 of the Treaty , which obliges all Member States to adopt all the appropriate general or specific measures to ensure compliance with the internal market , i.e. the suppression of any obstacles between the Member States to the free movement of goods .
In this case , however , there is an added dimension of unusual violence , of out and out vandalism .
It is not enough to condemn these acts .
We must compensate for the damage done not only to vehicles but also to the goods , because the loss of those goods in particular must be compensated for .
I refer , Commissioner , in particular to the latest measures taken to deal with these acts , to which you and the previous speaker referred .
What does the Commission plan to do in the future to deal with these incidents ?
Mr Camisón Asensio , when you say that this also constitutes violence and vandalism - and that may very well be the case - it remains clear that such attacks have to be proceeded against under criminal law .
But criminal law is in any event national law .
Criminal proceedings would have to be conducted in France .
What the Commission has criticized over and over again is that the French police authorities have been anything but active in intervening on-the-spot when such attacks are taking place .
We have also been able to document that irregular conduct .
We have just today - the oral procedure is today taking place before the Court of Justice - submitted videos and other documentation to prove this .
I hope then that something will finally be done and that the new French Government will take up this matter .
Commissioner , you know that the European Parliament has repeatedly protested , with the Presidency 's blessing , in order to highlight the importance of farming and preserved food in the region of Murcia , against attacks on lorry drivers and products from Murcia in France .
I thought your last answer was evasive .
I would like to know whether the Commission is taking action or intends to take action to make sure that the loss of products is compensated for . But I see that this is a question that does not interest the Commission .
My second brief question is this : if these questions demonstrate that the fruit and vegetables COM and the CAP reforms of 1992 are not properly functioning , perhaps these events should actually lead to a proper reform of the fruit and vegetables COMs and the common agricultural policy ?
Mr Marset Campos , if I may begin with your second question , I should like to make it clear to you that those attacks took place specifically before the new organization of the market in fruit and vegetables entered into force , after the old organization of the market then .
I cannot therefore see how the attacks are linked to the new organization of the market in vegetables .
Far from it , I am actually expecting the new organization of the market in vegetables to result in new developments , as we further encourage producer groups .
As regards your first question concerning the possibilities of the Commission intervening directly on site , I have , unfortunately , to say that the Commission does not have its own police or similar units , and I assume that the European Council in Amsterdam next week is unlikely to set up a Commission police unit of that kind .
So - unfortunately , I have to say - we are always dependent on the forces of law and order of the Member States .
Regrettably , all we can do is approach the Member State and ensure it meets its obligations .
If it does not , then our ultimate weapon , so to speak , is to bring the matter before the Court of Justice .
We have used that ultimate weapon and proceedings are now under way before the Court .
Nor are there any further possibilities under the Treaty either .
Question No 35 by Mr Roy Perry ( H-0436 / 97 )
Subject : Regional policy / islands
Is the Commission giving support to the proposal at the IGC from Greece and Spain to include a clause in the new treaty on islands ?
Mr President , it was the Commission 's understanding that suitable measures would be drawn up to resolve the special territorial issues that arise for certain regions , including the islands .
These measures should of course not interfere with the internal market or free trade or , for that matter , the rules of competition .
As one of the matters to be discussed at the Intergovernmental Conference , Greece presented a proposal over a year ago , when the negotiations started , to amend Article 92 ( 3 ) and Articles 130a and 130f of the Treaty in order to take explicit account of the special circumstances arising in the island regions .
The Commission had favoured the insertion of a text in the final declaration of the Conference , in which the special concerns of the island regions would be noted .
In the Commission 's view this political recognition is sufficient because , with it , the Treaty makes it possible in the future to take account of the situation on the islands .
Finally the situation of the islands is different to that of the regions on the periphery of the Union .
Here the three countries affected , France , Spain and Portugal , are seeking the inclusion of these areas under Article 227 ( 2 ) and the addition of a protocol on how this Article should be implemented .
I appreciate the Commissioner 's response .
I was somewhat relieved that it was not Commissioner Fischler , who comes from a landlocked country , who answered my question .
I certainly hope that the IGC will be able to recognize the needs of islands .
If that is included within the findings of the IGC and in the subsequent Treaty , can the Commissioner give me some idea of what sort of proposals the Commission might think it appropriate to come forward with to help islands and , in particular , the Isle of Wight , which I represent in this Parliament ?
I think we all realize that we are now at a stage where the very last details of matters under discussion at the Intergovernmental Conference are about to fall into place .
These are the last days of meetings between the personal representatives , then comes the summit , which means that I cannot go any further than I did in my first answer , that is to say that the Commission supported the proposals that had been put forward and that we think it would be appropriate if the final declaration contained a text which made it possible to give special consideration to the islands .
I myself should guard against making any pronouncements on what should be done in specific cases and in relation to individual islands .
That is something I should not venture into , given the many Members who are familiar with islands , which I , as a Commissioner , could of course not know with the same degree of detail as Members of Parliament .
As we all know , Finland is the country with the highest number of archipelagos and waterways in the whole of Europe .
We sing in our national anthem that we are ' the land of the thousand seas ' .
In fact , we have 76 000 islands which are larger than 1.5 hectares .
But still no attention is being paid , in the proposed Article or the proposal for the opinion from the Intergovernmental Conference currently underway , to the need which exists in Sweden and Finland , and perhaps even Denmark , for an archipelago policy .
The opinion mentions ' island regions ' .
Instead , I would like to see this become ' archipelago regions ' , in other words , areas where water divides the land and brings with it the need for a totally different social structure .
I also hope that when we specifically follow up on this report it may lead to a different view of transport aid in the regions .
I am totally convinced that Commissioner Liikanen could give a very good account of what it is like to live in a country where water really does split the land .
It is quite correct that , when we look around the European Union , we see many regions in which islands play a major role , and that is quite clearly the case , as the speaker pointed out , for the Finnish region .
What we are talking about , and what today 's question hinged on , is , first and foremost , whether we would support the proposal to take special account of the islands ' problems in the final declaration of the Intergovernmental Conference , and I gave an affirmative answer to that .
Clearly , as a Dane , I know some of the problems there have been in our region , and I think that people in any country where there are islands have a common view on many of these problems which , as the speaker indicates , can have to do with transport , but also education and all manner of things . I therefore consider it important that that possibility should be included in the new Treaty .
The reply on the particular predicament of islands which are remote from the centre of the Community was positive and very understanding .
However , I would like a clarification from the Commissioner on something that I am not sure about .
She has said that the Commission has a grasp of the situation and that there may be an announcement .
What the questioner asked , and what we are asking , too , is whether a clause on islands will be included in the Maastricht II text after the IGC . Whether , that is to say , as the final touches are added , as she puts it , there will an interesting announcement on the matter which would still , all the same , be non-binding and a pious aspiration .
I would like her to clarify that .
As I began by saying in answer to the first supplementary question , we are now at a stage in the Intergovernmental Conference at which it very much depends on what the Member States do and on what degree of priority they assign to particular questions .
It is not possible for me , as a Commissioner , to give any guarantees on what the final outcomes of the Intergovernmental Conference will be .
The information I can give is that the Commission has supported the concrete proposal put forward amongst others by Greece , Spain and Portugal , and we will continue to do so .
I cannot say whether it will be adopted or what form it may take if it is , but I can say that the Commission has supported it in the negotiations so far , and we will also do so in the final stages .
The time allowed for the firts part of Question Time has come to an end .
Question No 36 will receive a written anwser .
Question No 37 by Mr Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0425 / 97 )
Subject : Exemption of EU employees from paying income tax
Staff employed by the EU in the Member States , e.g. in the Commission 's and Parliament 's offices , are exempt from paying income tax in the country in which they live , yet they and their families benefit from public services , such as health care , transport and education , which are financed by taxes .
Does the Commission intend to try to change this state of affairs so that EU employees , too , have to pay income tax in the country in which they work ?
Mr President , the Commission 's representations in the Member States employ both Commission officials and workers recruited from the Member States in question .
For example , on the staff of the Commission 's representation in Sweden there are six officials and eleven employees recruited in Sweden .
Thus two-thirds of the staff are locally recruited .
They pay income tax in accordance with national taxation laws .
As regards the income tax position of the Commission officials , it should be noted that the Community has its own taxation system .
EU officials pay a progressive Community income tax .
The Union also has its own social security and health insurance system , to which the EU officials pay insurance contributions and by which they and their families are covered .
On the question of indirect taxation it may be noted that both EU officials and locally recruited staff pay indirect taxes .
Thus within the EU representations there are staff belonging to two different taxation systems .
It might of course be wondered whether in future the proportion of locally recruited officials on the representations ' staff should be increased still further .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
I would like to say that I think it reasonable that anyone who is working and located permanently in a Member State should pay income tax in that country .
They not only receive the benefit of health care in that country but also communications and education etc .
EU employees working in Sweden are also protected by the Swedish military and can enjoy the Swedish royal family and much more .
I think that it is reasonable to pay tax in the country in which you make use of the public sector , regardless of the capacity in which you are employed by the European Commission .
Furthermore , I think that tax exemption of this kind is provocative , as it also strengthens the view that there are huge benefits attached to employment within the EU system .
I do not think that there can be any good reason why some people do not pay tax in the country in which they live and work .
I wonder if you are going to take any steps to change this state of affairs so that everyone who is employed by the Commission is treated equally in this respect .
I am also from Sweden where we have debated EU staff conditions ; we have also debated the employment conditions for Members of Parliament , and both are of course equally important .
I think that it is extremely important that the relationship between the general public and those of us working here as elected representatives , or at the Commission 's office in Sweden or in other Member States should be as good as it can be .
My next question is : does Commissioner Liikanen not think that it would be possible to improve this relationship by actively removing those instruments , or those rules which make it difficult for many people to feel comfortable with what goes on in the EU ?
I would very much like an answer to this question .
Of course we must improve our relationship with the people in all the Member States .
Historically , employment legislation governing EU employees has been designed to treat all permanent staff in every EU country in exactly the same way .
This has led to a situation in which anyone working permanently for an EU institution has the same rights in all EEC countries .
I am well aware that this situation has been difficult to explain in Sweden .
In general the problem with salary privileges is not so great .
We have examined this quite carefully and compared the net salary level for foreign diplomats stationed in Brussels with the net salary level of an EEC member of staff also stationed there .
I have to say that in the majority of cases the differences are quite small .
This discussion has been more noticeable in those countries where people are working on their home territory .
Question No 38 by Mr Bryan Cassidy ( H-0439 / 97 )
Subject : Age limits in recruitment to the European Commission and its associate organizations
Is the Commission aware that the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions does not use any age limits in its job advertisements because it stopped this practice a few years ago ?
Will the Commission follow the excellent lead given by the European Foundation and stop using age limits in the Commission 's own recruitment advertisements ?
Mr McMahon , on a point of order .
Mr President , I tabled a similar question but for some reason it was put way down on the list .
It should have been taken with Mr Cassidy 's question as it is on the same issue .
This is the second month that this has happened .
Mr McMahon , it is not the European Parliament services that decide which Commissioner answers the questions , but the Commission itself .
Mr Liikanen wishes to answer you any way .
You have the floor , Commissioner .
I am very conscious of the fact that the Commission has made an effort , in particular since Commissioner Liikanen took on responsibility for this dossier and we welcome the fact that for A Grades there is now a limit up to 50 .
But the fact remains that one of the important institutions , the European Centre for Living and Working Conditions in Dublin , does not exercise limits in age .
The parliamentary groups in this Parliament , thanks to the efforts of the Intergroup on Ageing in Parliament , no longer exercise age limits .
It is a bit of an old-fashioned survival , I would respectfully suggest .
I hope the Commissioner will press on with the negotiations with what he called the organisations syndicales . Am I correct in assuming they are the stumbling block in this affair ?
Mr President , the trade union organizations think that independent public administration requires in principle that officials should start at an early age and pursue their career there .
We have had some discussions on higher age limits where they have been more hesitant , but that is a discussion we must take .
The second point that I want to make is that even with no growth in Commission staff in the future and despite extensive recruitment over the last ten years , it is plain that - even although I hope we will be more flexible in the future - we cannot stop recruiting young people because , otherwise , the Commission 's entire staffing structure will become noticeably top-heavy .
Thirdly , I am ready to try and find with an open mind solutions in those areas where this is possible .
The only exception perhaps is that we should have a kind of basic grade for young people coming directly from university although we could try to find more practical solutions for those with professional experience .
I understand the intergroup in Parliament on this issue is holding a small seminar on Thursday .
My director-general will attend and contribute to the discussion with details of the problems concerned .
The final point I want to make is that our real problem is the huge number of applicants .
If we have tens of thousands of applicants and we can only recruit one or two hundred , we will encounter many practical problems in the running of such an operation in the future .
I am sure that it will be useful to discuss the details later this week .
I heard the Commissioner with some interest .
Does he not think there is some hypocrisy here in talking about a flexible labour market while politicians are going around the world saying no-one will have a job for life and that people will have to adapt and have several careers ?
In their own backyard the Commission are openly practising this job for life approach and , if you do not get on the bottom rung of the ladder then there really is a block on you .
Is not hypocrisy being preached within the Commission when they are saying one thing to the general public about unemployment and about the economy , and yet , in actual practice , they are doing the complete opposite .
When are they going to match their rhetoric with their actions within the Commission itself ?
Similarly , on the IGC , is there not something wrong with the Commissioner proposing a non-discrimination clause on ageism at the IGC while at the same time the Commission and the institutions are practising what they are trying to abolish ?
I am sorry that Mr McMahon did not have the chance to listen to my reply because I explained that a large part of the Commission officials are above this age limit .
There are no age limits for temporary agents which is a type of recruitment which we are carrying out , for instance , for BSE .
Secondly , as regards the new countries , where we have recruited most officials during the last two years , half of the recruitment has been of young people for the A6 , A7 and A8 posts , but another half with staff who are older , up to the age of 60 in fact .
I am certain that if we look at the recruitment practices of the public sector in general and how people are being recruited as new officials , the record of the Commission is not so bad .
I am still willing to give thought to whether we can have a more open system for all those jobs where we need professional experience .
For those young people who come directly to assistant jobs , whether we have age limits or not it is very clear that these jobs are for people without professional experience as a first step in the administration .
Commissioner , I have read your written reply and I heard what you have said .
I read between the lines a degree of personal sympathy for what we are trying to do .
I do not know if you know , but Parliament voted in February to delete the reference to age limits from the Annex to the Staff Regulations .
I hope you will do the same thing in the Commission .
I find it surprising that anybody should be justifying an age limit by the fact that there are too many people applying .
I cannot imagine that any business in this world would apply that criteria .
Do you agree ?
One thing in Europe today is clear : unemployment is a major problem for people of about 45 to 50 years old .
Why ?
Because they tend not to be recruited in the labour market .
That is a fact .
That is a real problem of unemployment , because employers prefer to recruit young people .
Unfortunately , that is the case .
I hope we can change it but that is the case in countries with high unemployment .
As far as the Commission is concerned , we are ready to be more open in the future .
We want to have young people also .
We will recruit very few now because of budgetary constraints .
We cannot forget total generations .
We must recruit young people , but be open in areas where we need professional experience and also people who are not young and we will recruit without age limits .
I would like to join those who express some amazement that those of us who have to meet the public boast about the non-discrimination and the law on that subject within the Union .
And yet we have had really amazingly blatant and naked justification for a system which imposes effectively a ban on people who are very often experienced .
I noted some of the justifications : young people would be happy , loyal and have a good career .
Why does that not equally apply to someone over 50 ?
Indeed , they may be happier and more loyal because they would probably appreciate it and bring experience to bear .
We are not asking the Commission to stop recruiting young people , we are asking it not to put a ban on recruiting older people .
I do not understand how the Commission can possibly go on with this policy .
Is there any timetable it has in mind when it is going to stop it ?
Mr President , I am sorry I was not quoted correctly .
As much as I would like to talk about happiness in life I did not mention that in my reply .
As far as age limits are concerned , I said that I am presenting here an opening .
I still hope that I can go forward with the line I have presented here today .
The time allowed for questions to Mr Liikanen has come to an end .
Question No 39 will receive a written answer .
Question No 40 by Mr Josu Imaz San Miguel ( H-0414 / 97 )
Subject : Drift nets
The Presidency of the Fisheries Council suggested to the Commission at the last meeting ( held on 14 and 15 April ) that a new proposal be drawn up to tackle the problem of drift nets .
As the Presidency suggested , the new proposal should include the latest , most up-to-date information on this subject .
Italy 's change of position , as publicly expressed by Minister Pinto in Venice on 29 November 1996 , in favour of a total ban on drift nets , and the specific provision on using drift nets in the Baltic as opposed to other fishing grounds open the way for a majority within the Council in favour of a total ban on such nets in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean .
Has the Commission drawn up a proposal along these lines ?
Does the proposal include a total ban on these nets , with the exception of the Baltic Sea ?
As the Honourable Member knows , the dossier referred to in the question is the one which has caused the Commission , and me personally , as Commissioner responsible for it , the most headaches .
One matter remains : after the decisions taken in the Council on the plan to restructure the Italian fleet and especially on the position taken by Germany on a request from the Spanish Minister , there is the decision that the Commission initiate a series of informal bilateral contacts with the Member States to consider the feasibility of a new amending proposal which may be varied in nature : for example , there might be a split between the Baltic Sea and the Atlantic Ocean , or similar actions .
So the Commission is making the preparations and starting these bilateral contacts .
But I have to say to the Honourable Member that it is not the Commission 's intention to superimpose the ' drift nets ' dossier on the ' technical measures ' dossier , which the Commission intends to conclude in the Fisheries Council on 30 October .
As the Honourable Member can readily understand , this is to avoid cross vetoes or more or less transparent attempts at bartering between the various dossiers .
The Commission therefore means to end this round of consultations and settle the position or present a new proposal by the end of the year .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your answer .
Although this is giving you and the Commission a headache , I am convinced that the Commission is doing serious work on this matter and working in the right direction , according to the timetable you have set .
I should like to ask two further questions .
Is the Commission going to make a practical proposal on this matter in the autumn , for October or just after ?
Then it could plan on banning these nets by summer 1998 .
Secondly , does the Commission envisage in its proposal any reconversion plan as i think that that would be very positive for the French , Irish and British fleets , funded through the IFOP or any other type of European fund so that these fleets could be paid for the additional net investment required and so that they could be given the necessary training to convert to more selective fishing methods .
I believe that the Commission will present a proposal by the end of the year .
As you know , everything depends on the procedures in which the Council and the European Parliament take part , and as the Commission is not the only matter of this procedure , it will have to wait and see .
As for your second remark , this is one of the subject of the bilateral consultation that we are holding with the Member States .
I should like to point out that , in respect of Ireland , there is only one boat left fishing with drift-nets ; that means there is no need for a major reconversion plan there .
Once there is an agreement , the Member States using drift-nets in the Atlantic will have to send control vessels : you can imagine what the economic cost of that initiative would be .
As for Britain , last year it had only five or six drift-net boats in use under the British flag .
That too would not require a major reconversion plan .
The question does arise in the case of France . It still has a fleet of 40 boats , an old fleet still using drift-nets .
This is something that could be considered in the bilateral talks , in similar terms to the procedures applied in the Italian plan .
I repeat , there are procedures and also financial aspects .
Question No 41 by Mr Robin Teverson ( H-0420 / 97 )
Subject : Task force on future of CFP
In the recent round table discussion on the future of the CFP , Commissioner Bonino said that a ' Task Force ' is being put together in DG XIV to deal with this .
Has this been done , what is the timetable , who is on it and how will it work ?
In addition , can the Commissioner outline its terms of reference and the European Parliament 's role ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , under the auspices of the Directorate General for Fisheries , a task force has already been set up charged with preparing the revision of the common fisheries policy , as provided for in the base regulation , through a report to be presented to the Commission by the end of 2002 .
The first task of this group must be to define the methodology of the work , and in this context a seminar with the European Parliament will be organized by the end of the year , in which all interested Members of Parliament can participate , to establish the content and above all the methodology necessary to make a good discussion possible before the proposal is drawn up in 2001 .
Personally , I think the whole process should be based on wide consultation of all the players and interested parties . So on the one hand , very close contact with your Committee on Fisheries throughout this whole process , which is a long term process , and on the other , obviously , consultation with the Member States and the sector .
The idea we are developing inside the Directorate General is a questionnaire to be distributed as widely as possible , in other words trying to have a bottom-up approach , at least in the first stage of the process , so that we can take stock of all the concerns , and indeed suggestions , which emerge from various quarters of the sector , although some subjects , obviously , may be less controversial , while other ideas may be usefully taken into consideration .
From the point of view of methodology , we feel the first important deadline for this task force is the organization of the seminar by the end of the year , with the participation of the European Parliament .
Thank you Commissioner , for a very useful reply there .
I certainly have been very pleased that such a working party is being set up and that it is going to be reasonably broad-based .
The question I would like to ask going on from that is how broad do you think the questions will be that they will be able to ask ?
Will it just be a question of how a common fisheries policy should change for the future , or will they actually consider the broad spectrum of alternatives which might go from complete renationalization - not something that I would advocate - but through regionalization and into a completely unified European fleet .
Is all that spectrum within the remit of the working party or is it really within a new common fisheries policy as a common fisheries policy ?
The idea - at least for those putting the questions - is for very broad questions to be asked .
That does not mean that in the follow-up of the process we will be able to retain or accept all the suggestions .
If we just want to ask what people want to change about the existing common fisheries policy , there is really no point to the use of a methodology such as a questionnaire .
You can use other tools .
But if we accept this use of a questionnaire , it has to be as broad as possible and address the questions you are asking : such as regionalization .
Provided , of course , we understand quite specifically what we mean by regionalization because , as far as I can understand , throughout the fisheries sector the Member States have quite different views on what regionalization is supposed to mean .
So on this particular issue , one question is not enough .
The problem is to have broader questions with alternatives that can give us at least a broad idea of what everybody thinks .
So we want to start in 1997 to give ourselves enough time for a full revision .
Maybe at the end of the process we will remain with the same common fisheries policy or a slightly different one .
This I cannot predict .
But a revision is not a simple modification .
The name itself means that everything can be called into question .
Since we are trading and cooperating in a variety of ways with Third World countries and our fleets are operating in Third World country waters - will those countries be taken into the Commissioner 's confidence when she is drawing up the new common fisheries policy ?
Will we be permitting the Third World countries to have some kind of meaningful representation so that we hear their voices as clearly as we hear the voices of our own fishing people ?
My reply is that from a strictly procedural standpoint , this is not possible .
But what we are trying to do is to have informal consultations , mostly with countries with which we have development policies or fishery agreements .
But I cannot get information from the legal service .
We can only have informal consultations mostly related to international agreements .
Mr Morris , listen for one moment .
If it is a point of order , you have the floor .
But your question must be about the same subject . I shall have to stick to the Rules and you know that you cannot open a new debate .
But if it really is a point of order , you have the floor .
I wish to be helpful .
As you know , we now have an ongoing ACP fisheries working party .
I was wondering whether or not the Commissioner could work through that agency ?
Thank you for your help - but it was not a point of order .
I think Mrs Bonino wants to reply .
The Commission is in favour of having input from this working group , not with binding documents but in an informal consultation .
The time allowed for questions to Mrs Bonino has come to an end .
Questions 42 to 45 will receive written answers .
Mr President , I can deal only with the factual issue concerning Directive 95 / 47 / EEC and other directives that may be relevant here .
I cannot , of course , comment on the political disputes that have begun and are continuing in Spain on this matter .
The directive that regulates television standards , requires standardized transmission systems for digital television , and that is a clear technical requirement that is designed to guarantee that all broadcasters transmit in the same format .
This is intended to prevent a number of standards , such as the Pal and Secam variants , existing side-byside in the digital age .
The directive then regulates the way in which services are provided so that broadcasters are able to charge customers for programmes broadcast to subscribers .
Those are the conditional access services .
Customers are generally able to use those services by using a chip-card which they insert in their decoder .
Under the directive , those services must be available to all broadcasters under fair , appropriate and non-discriminatory conditions , that is to say that the directive does not provide for any technical resources , it does not contain any standards , nor does it speak out in favour of any particular system .
It is up to the market operator which system he chooses .
The directive does not therefore opt for either simulcrypt or multicrypt .
Both allow operators common use of conditional access systems .
The common or combined use of conditional access systems means that a viewer , who initially subscribes to the services of one broadcaster , is subsequently able to use those of another supplier without having to acquire another decoder .
That is the important point .
The directive itself does not deal specifically with agreements and contractual relations between market operators .
They have to regulate that among themselves .
But it is made clear that such agreements must result in fair , appropriate and non-discriminatory conditions , that means then that where such agreements have to be made , this is not a serious disadvantage but a method that can be applied to specific technical solutions , to which the directive also refers .
We are , of course , aware that this is very much a matter of dispute .
We tried , first of all in talks with the Spanish Government , to ensure that its legislation was compatible with the directive , and we also invited both parties to the dispute along with a technical expert who made it sufficiently clear that both the systems that each uses are open systems .
Both sides are currently in negotiation , though we remain under an obligation , should the negotiations prove unsuccessful - and we shall know the outcome next week - to consider the legal aspects and then decide whether the Spanish law is compatible with EU law .
What we are looking at here is not only whether the directive is being infringed but also whether Articles 30 and 59 of the Treaty and directives 83 / 189 / EEC and 95 / 47 / EC are being infringed , the implication being that the other provisions may also be pertinent .
Commissioner Monti is partly responsible for this , and we are working together .
I told Minister Arias Salgado personally about this review and pointed out that if the parties cannot agree , the Commission will take a decision .
That will have , of course , also to ensure that no decision is taken in favour of one party or the other .
If , contrary to what we decide , that does happen , we shall have to take legal action , and , if necessary , if the Spanish Government has not acted legally , it will have to compensate for the damage its actions have caused .
Commissioner , the Simulcrypt system needs pacts . That is it main defect , because all the owner would have to do is make difficulties over the pact and the whole agreement would collapse in ruins .
That would create an owner-dominated market , a de facto monopoly , to the detriment of media pluralism and free competition .
The Member State cannot allow such an abuse as it would not be fulfilling its obligations , as you said , to create non-discriminatory conditions , as we are obliged by the Directive you have mentioned .
Until the pact between the first two operators is unblocked , the problem will continue for the others and other undesirable duopolies or oligopolies will emerge .
That would lead to the harmful situation of market collusion .
This pernicious situation in Spain has been solved by the recent law banking on the Multicrypt system .
That enables immediate compatibility if there is no agreement within two months .
The Commission does not share that view because what is currently provided for under Spanish legislation is in fact a monopoly , with only one system being accepted .
An alternative , which already exists on the market in Spain , by the way , is being excluded .
How anyone can consider that a prime example of free trade , I fail to see .
On the basis of our own directives , only a system that does not permit access to another broadcaster can be excluded .
We also brought in a technical expert , whom many describe as the king of decoders , if you do not find that description a little over-the-top , and that technical expert made it absolutely clear in the talks we had with both parties to the dispute that both systems are open , although they use different technologies and that the fact that it is necessary to negotiate in the case of the one system does not mean preclude a fair outcome .
The directive actually provides that the negotiations must be fair and non-discriminatory .
Let us just assume that the negotiations that have taken place this week were conducted by one side in an unfair and discriminatory manner .
That party would not then be acting in accordance with the directive .
But it is not possible to prescribe a single technical solution which , moreover , is not yet on the market .
That is not compatible with the directive .
The situation is , I venture to say , a little bizarre .
There is a system in Spain that already operates ; thousands of viewers are working with that system and are completely satisfied .
The system is technically open , as the expert confirmed to us , but a different system , that is not even on the market , is to be made compulsory .
That is a situation in law or in fact that we do not find credible .
I understand that the Commissioner does not want to enter into Spanish domestic affairs , but the situation is such that you should know that the day after a representative of the affected company appeared before the court , it decided that he should not be able to leave Spain .
But I understand that you do not want to get involved .
Mr Bangemann , there has been no agreement .
Yet the Commission will have to take a decision on Spanish legislation because it is seriously harming this company which has run the risk of innovating , of launching its product on to the market .
I go along with your interpretation .
I do not go along with the interpretations of the Partido Popular and the interpretation of their Minister who on his return from Brussels said that you - or Brussels - were violating the Treaty of Rome in the case of digital TV .
Do you agree , Commissioner , and when will the Commission finally deliver its decision on this matter ?
Mrs García Arias , I have made myself very clear here , and all we have done is to try to bring about agreement , including with the Spanish Government , by the way , because it makes no sense for us all to find ourselves before the Court of Justice again .
Someone would have to pay compensation , and the viewers would be no better off .
In Germany too , we brought the warring factions together , and they reached agreement .
That is why we tried to do the same in the case of Spain , but that does not , of course , mean that we want to shirk our duty to take a decision .
I have said that if agreement is not reached - and we shall know next week whether or not it has been - then we shall take a decision based on the directive I have quoted , but also based on Articles 30 and 59 of the Treaty of Rome .
I do not know whether it was the Spanish minister or someone else who said that we are not applying the Treaty of Rome .
I cannot understand that , since we are applying Articles 30 and 59 , and so our decision will , naturally , be based on the directive and the Treaty of Rome .
Commissioner , I too understand that you do not want to enter into political differences in my country , but I must insist on this .
We have already spent quite a while on this and , knowing how the Commission works , this matter should be settled and concluded today .
My concern , Commissioner , is quite legitimate .
Whereas Simulcrypt meets the requirements and the Directive 's provisions , if Spanish law prohibits it that would harm not only the company producing it but also large numbers of citizens - potential and actual consumers of that products - and if it is alright for other European countries it should also be for Spain .
Therefore , Commissioner , I again ask you to deal with this matter as quickly as possible and prevent legitimate interests from being harmed : those of the media company promoting the system and those of the consumers who have already chosen it .
We do not want a situation in my country where public opinion - as is already beginning to be the case - is unsure whether the two decoders are legal and is even beginning to think that Simulcrypt is illegal , fraudulent or something of that ilk .
This doubt can only be cleared up and the rights of the company and the consumers will only be restored once the Commission takes a decision .
This is an example of the attack I mentioned earlier .
Mr President , I have already said that we shall be taking a decision next week .
That is swift work for the Commission !
I think that we are looking at this askew .
What the Spanish law proposes is that an agreement be reached and it sets a timetable for that agreement ; if an agreement has not been reached within that time , it proposes that a universal decoder be adopted .
But I think that this is neither the time nor the place to discuss this matter .
The place to discuss differences over the arbitrary adjudication of the previous government is not the European Parliament : it is the national parliament where those problems should be dealt with .
As he rightly said the Commissioner can only say that Community law must be complied with and we shall know whether or not the agreement has been reached .
The Commissioner will tell us next week .
Mr President , you are casting me into despair here , because when I get a question from a Member of the House - three of them - which the President allows , I have to answer .
You would not perhaps have put the questions , nor did you , but when members of the other groups put them , the Commission has to deal with them .
Factually you are incorrect because our directive contains specific provisions on what is and is not permitted in relation to decoders .
That is the only issue here and that is why I have confined myself to it .
The directive does not , for example , say that there should be only one decoder .
We deliberately avoided that .
We did reserve the right in the directive to set a standard for a single decoder .
Were we to do that all of the parties involved would be very dissatisfied and suffer severe economic disadvantage , as the standard would probably not be met by any of the decoders currently in existence .
We have reserved for ourselves this ultimate weapon , if I may so describe it .
We did not allow the national governments to have it .
And so what we have here is a European problem and not just a Spanish problem .
I concede that the Spanish affair is livelier , but our problem is also a difficult one .
It can , however , be resolved .
Mr Bangemann , we shall remain with the same question but break up this Spanish momentum and open it up to a wider European area .
Mr Caudron has the floor for a supplementary .
Commissioner , I wanted to speak in this debate as I was the rapporteur for this directive , and I wish to confirm what you said .
I have no particular technical question to ask , as I was partly responsible for the choice of solutions made in order to avoid monopolies or oligopolies , to avoid hold-ups and to enable numerical TV to be launched in Europe , as has been done .
I therefore fully agree .
The only question I wanted to ask , Commissioner , is a real one : you have set a timetable , i.e. you and the Commission will take a decision within a week .
Could you tell us what the rest of the timetable is ?
Where will it lead us ?
What is the timescale available for unblocking this situation ?
As far as the Commission is concerned , we shall be telling the Spanish Government next week what our legal opinion is and where , in our view , the Spanish law is incompatible with the directive and the articles I have cited .
The Spanish Government may accept our view but it may also discard it .
In that case , we shall have to go to the Court of Justice and that is bound to take rather longer .
The question that we have not fully considered is whether we should ourselves then take a temporary measure or seek an interim order from the Court of Justice , since the Spanish law provides for a deadline , namely 7 July , after which no other decoder is to be permissible .
To prevent economic disadvantage , it might be appropriate to apply to the Court of Justice for an interim order , so that the deadline does not mean that an existing decoder has suddenly to be withdrawn from the market .
We shall look into that , but I can make no other promises .
If the Court of Justice decides that we and not the Spanish Government are right , then that government will of course have to pay compensation to the company that it has disadvantaged as a result of its decision .
That is clear but it is not particularly productive .
That is why we have tried to reach an agreement and we are still trying to ensure that if agreement cannot be reached , then the Spanish Government will at least agree not to apply the law but wait until the Court of Justice has reached a decision .
Then both systems will be able to develop alongside one another in Spain .
But I cannot , of course , tell you what the Spanish Government will say .
We are doing our best to arrive at a balanced and sensible solution .
But I cannot guarantee that all involved have adopted the same approach to the dispute .
It is , as I have said , a lively one .
In the bullring , there are bulls that will simply not be pacified .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
We return not to bulls but to the Spanish momentum with the last two supplementaries .
First of all , Mr Hernández Mollar .
Mr President , a Spanish momentum is a European momentum .
What is happening is that certain members from the Socialist Group want to destroy - yes , destroy - the general interests of European citizens and Spanish citizens in particular .
You at the Commission probably know that , in respect of digital TV services , the Governing Board of the DVB decided to postpone application of the Simulcrypt cable system as a European standard .
As a result there will probably be no European Simulcrypt standard until the end of 1997 or early 1998 .
On the other hand , the common interface for digital receivers was approved in May 1996 by the DVB , after its ratification by the National Standards Organizations that year , and its formal adoption as the European standard in February 1997 by the Cenelec .
Faced with such a problem , i.e. the degree of standardization of the Simulcrypt system , I would like to ask the Commissioner what his opinion is of this disadvantageous situation and what negative effects it could lead to , in terms of the aim of offering all citizens as quickly as possible digital TV services by means of a universal system , while keeping the maximum amount of media pluralism .
When we lay down a universal solution - and the time will come - then both of the systems currently on offer in Spain will have to go .
That is a difficult technical issue .
I do not know whether you are clear about it .
There are two possibilities : either you have a uniform decoder , through which all services , including conditional access , pay-TV etc , are able to be supplied .
That , if you like , is the ideal solution .
For that , there has to be a technical standard .
We shall get there one day , as the industry is working towards it .
But we do not want to dictate it ; were we to do so everyone now commissioning or offering decoders would suffer enormous economic disadvantage .
They would have in fact to take their decoders off the market .
And so we said we would stipulate only a minimum .
That minimum is : anyone using a decoder must use one that is accessible to others .
That is not a matter of laying down a special technical procedure , it is simply ensuring access .
The Spanish legislation is not doing that , it is prescribing a decoder - not even a uniform decoder , by the way , but a decoder with a common interface .
That is another technical system .
That is not the ideal solution , namely that there should be only one decoder in existence , but it is a decoder that can , using a technical device , be made open to others .
Other decoders that are also open are not allowed .
That is precisely what the directive does not permit .
Do you follow me ?
If you read the directive through once again - Mr Caudron confirmed this and what Mr Caudron says is true - you will see that what I have described to you here is the legislation in force .
That is the problem with the Spanish law .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann , but just one last question , again in the Spanish momentum .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo has the floor for the last supplementary question .
My question is not the same , because I put it in a European key and with an extremely constructive intention .
Commissioner , this afternoon you have been very clear .
You know that on many occasions , when faced with a Solomon-like decisions , the introduction of a few keys can open the way to a solution .
You said that if there is no agreement next week , the Commission will adopt a decision and position .
With a constructive intention and in order to avoid such a Solomon-like decisions , could you not propose - if there is no agreement and the Commission had to take that decision - the terms of the Commission position ?
I am sure that if you could put forward those terms , an agreement might come about . That is my question .
The difference between you and Solomon is that he was far wiser than you , if you will allow me to point that out here .
Were I now to tell you how our decision looks , then both the parties currently engaged in negotiation would probably withdraw from those negotiations .
One side would be so certain of being acknowledged to be in the right that it would say : ' I do not need to negotiate any further ! ' Therefore , it is more in the tradition of Solomon , and so somewhat wiser , not to say what we shall be doing next week .
That concludes Question Time to the Commission .
Questions Nos 49 to 53 will receive written answers .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Agricultural prices 1997-1998 - Arable crops - Improving agricultural structures - 1998 set-aside
Mr President , first of all I should like to take this opportunity to welcome Mr Fischler and the President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers , Mr Van Aartsen , to our Chamber .
It is a pleasure to see you both here for this report .
It shows how important it is .
I have great pleasure in presenting the price package proposals as amended by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I should like to take this opportunity to go through the amendments in order , put a little bit of meat on them and say why the Agriculture Committee has proposed them and then perhaps look at the costs and talk that through .
First of all , moisture content for cereals .
We have proposed that the 15 % moisture content for cereals should be extended ; in other words , it should not just last this year but continue .
One of the major problems for northern Member States is the moisture content of cereals .
It is extremely costly and the misuse of a valuable resource to have to try and bring cereals below 15 % moisture .
Therefore I hope the Commission will stay on 15 % .
That is budgetary-neutral .
On protein crops , there has been a great decline recently - in fact , in the last two years - in the amount of such crops .
I would like to see some sort of improvement in the support system to help protein crops .
It is particularly relevant at the moment because we have just had a great debate for almost 18 months over BSE and the problems of animal protein .
This is therefore a great opportunity for the European Union actually to produce more of its own protein and a vegetable protein at that .
I feel it is important that we seriously consider the opportunities opened up here .
The committee proposes to help the paddy rice industry .
This is by way of assisting some of our southern Member States .
One of the things that I have learnt since I came into this Parliament is that we are 15 Member States .
I therefore have to look at all Members and all their regions and their problems .
The rice sector has had a particularly difficult time in recent years .
I am proposing a simplification of the present legislation .
It provides the opportunity for quick support for the rice industry without great or long-term costs .
The cost of these proposals will be somewhere in the region of ECU 60m and that includes all its accompanying measures .
With regard to sugarbeet , we have recommended that the Commission review the fixed element of sugar storage refund .
It is more than 10 years since we made these changes .
This arrangement should now reflect the present changes in costs and probably should be reviewed , if possible , every three years .
I am also proposing help with production costs in Spain and Portugal .
This must , quite specifically , come from the national budget and not from the European budget .
With flax and hemp I propose to bring hemp back into line with flax .
Hemp is a useful alternative crop , it is environmentally friendly and it would cost only ECU 1m .
On wine , if the ban on distillation were brought in as early as has been proposed by the Commission , it would cause undue hardship for southern vineyards .
We are therefore proposing delaying application of the ban for one year .
The approximate cost is again ECU 1 million .
I am almost disappointed to say that , unfortunately , these measures and my report actually cost ECU 170m .
That money must be found somewhere .
We are in a situation of budgetary constraint .
We have to understand the fact that in the Committee on Agriculture we cannot continue adding to the budget .
There are a number of possibilities .
Two have been proposed within the present price proposal package .
One is an amendment concerning monthly increments for cereals .
This has been re-presented in the amendments .
The deletion of monthly increments would reduce the budget by ECU 160m .
Having spent ECU 170m in the budget , this was one way of making the package virtually budget-neutral .
For those who do not understand , monthly increments are an increased monthly payment paid to farmers for delaying sending their cereals into intervention .
It would be popular in some respects because I see intervention generally being used as little as possible and being an emergency proposal .
I also support another proposal which is to make the budget neutral overall .
It comes from Mr Böge who has put down a number of proposals .
It is a question of finding the money from the budget .
In my explanatory statement , I call upon the Commission to fix the rate of set-aside , I put a date of July and I suggest the rate be 5 % .
At this point , I would add that I believe that set-aside has been a brilliant option under the MacSharry reforms .
It has been a good balancing measure .
It has stopped over-production .
It has stopped intervention and it has been good for the environment .
One of the things that was said against it initially was that it would be environmentally unfriendly .
This has not proved to be the case .
However , the Commission at the moment has placed an export tax on cereals from the European Union because , in theory , we are short of cereals .
This tax is something like ECU 10 per tonne .
Therefore I see little point in raising set-aside above 5 % for next year .
Whatever measures are agreed by the Council , agriculture can come to terms with them provided we have sufficient time .
That was why I suggested that the Commission and the Council fix the set-aside rate as early as possible and , if possible , by July , as stated in my report .
I was given a price proposal with a 0.45 % increase .
One of the problems as a rapporteur is that you try to find a little money for everyone but at the same time to stay within sound budget principles .
If we want more power for this Parliament and more respect and responsibility , we have to be responsible in our approach to the budget .
I hope that I have made some responsible proposals and I look forward to the Commissioner 's reply .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , my report deals with the postponement of the advances for oilseeds and the reduction of the per hectare compensatory payments for arable crops .
There are a few points I should like to make .
The MacSharry agricultural reform was conceived as a U-turn in agricultural policy , involving a reduction in surpluses and an adjustment to bring us into line with the GATT agreement , with radical price cuts for cereals , oilseeds and protein crops .
At the same time , livestock premiums were introduced for dams and male bovines , and the intervention prices were reduced sharply .
It was on this basis that the per hectare compensatory payments came into existence .
So it was no coincidence that - in France , for example , and in some other parts of the European Union - the highest earning regions also received the highest compensatory payments , though I should make it very clear that , on this occasion , this had nothing to do with a European Parliament resolution .
This , however , was the carrot with which farmers and their organizations were persuaded to accept this agricultural reform .
Commissioner Fischler has also , on several occasions , promised to continue compensatory payments until 1999 .
In your current proposal , you have envisaged linear cuts , justified first on the basis of the BSE crisis and then by the good cereal harvest .
Those arguments have now collapsed , as the 1997 agriculture budget is sufficient to meet the financial obligations in full and on schedule .
A linear reduction in aid is unimaginative and , in most cases , unfair - that much is apparent .
It makes no allowance for the natural conditions existing locally or the farmers ' potential yields , and it also completely disregards the unfavourable trend of incomes affecting certain sizes of farm .
A young farmer who has invested in a mixed operation , combining stock and arable farming , has his back to the wall as things stand at present .
The only way forward available to young farmers is tenancy , and the tenancy agreements are generally based on this firm promise that the per hectare payments will be available until 1999 .
Commissioner , I am sure that you have excellent specialist staff at the Commission .
If they had looked more closely at the different kinds of problems facing farmers in the various regions of Europe , I feel sure that this undifferentiated approach would never have occurred to them .
It is completely unbalanced and will inevitably result in a serious loss of trust among farmers .
I unhesitatingly reject the Commission 's proposed radical reform of the financing of the cereal market .
I myself come from a German Land where farms - with an average of 20 cattle - are much smaller than in many other regions of the European Union .
In general , they cover between 20 and 50 hectares .
This is another point I wish to bring to the attention of the President-in-Office .
I have today obtained figures from my Land government .
It seems that 49 , 143 of our farms receive compensatory payments averaging DM 8 , 595 per year .
No Commission official would work for a single month for that kind of money .
Commissioner , these farming families have a hard struggle .
It will be a slap in the face for them if you were to regard them as ' over-compensated ' .
Any reduction in compensation would be particularly damaging to the mixed farms .
Cutting back the per hectare payments for arable crops does not do anything at all for the forage growers , who are particularly hard hit .
This is the critical weakness in the Commission 's proposal .
If there really is overcompensation , then it must be judged objectively by reference to the prices the farmer can command in his market and in his local currency .
Countries that have benefitted from continuous devaluations can command very high prices for products covered by market organization .
So we do need a revised proposal on the form to be taken by the compensatory payments .
The Committee on Budgets also supports our proposal that the payments for oilseeds for 1997 should not be postponed because the budgetary resources are available .
Our proposals fall within the agriculture guideline .
Mr President , I hope you will let me finish .
We were ordered to speak here this evening - normally I would have been called at 3 p.m. today .
The previous speaker was allowed eight minutes .
I am a rapporteur too .
I believe I am entitled to another three sentences .
Please be kind enough to let me finish , because it is necessary .
The President-in-Office has come here to listen to what I have to say - or at least , I hope he has !
To prevent any wrong turnings , it is absolutely essential that proposals for the period after 1999 should be submitted very soon , because the credibility of political decisions and confidence in a united Europe are at stake .
I ask the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to withdraw its proposal to postpone the advance payments for oilseeds and to guarantee payment in full of the per hectare compensation for the years 1998 and 1999 , as envisaged in the agricultural reform .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I think this evening may result in a further contribution to ensuring that Parliament discusses the merits of certain important proposals from the Commission , but I also the debate will give you encouragement , Mr Commissioner , to pursue the policy of reforming the CAP .
I have been following your work carefully , including at the recent conference , but I think we need to do more .
In a word , we should not wait for the market to be opened up to the new countries - Poland , Hungary - we should start accelerating reform immediately .
If these debates can help the process along , that will certainly be positive .
To some extent that is also the reason why , as rapporteur , I have dealt with the Commission 's proposal in a waya which not only takes account of the legal side , but also looks at an overall restructuring of the system of organizing agriculture at Community level .
Agriculture and related activities , especially Mediterranean ones , are now increasingly suffering a kind of ostracism .
This related production is very important because it provides the opportunity to maintain income in difficult and marginal locations , especially in areas where economic and social cohesion is very important : Objective I areas .
Durum wheat is one of these forms of production , olive oil is another , tobacco is yet another .
Specifically looking at durum wheat , I think the proposals should be rationalized to provide for a maximum area for durum wheat set by the individual countries and then distributed at territorial level .
I believe that is an intelligent and serious proposal , which also seeks to counter a series of frauds possibly present in the management of durum wheat farming , but above all it is capable of providing marketing strategies for this product , because some producers very often grow it just for the premium .
So this method is important because it anchors the production to the territory .
I also think the proposals approved by the Committee on Agriculture are important .
I should add , Mr President , Mr Commissioner , that those proposals were approved unanimously and have two basic aims : one relates primarily to the possibility of widening the 5 per cent limit , so it is substantially about lifting the national , and therefore the regional , quota ceiling for young farmers .
Quotas are a rigid instrument .
We believe young farmers should have an opportunity to enter the market and , above all , achieve a turnover which no longer exists in the agricultural sector .
So making 5 per cent of the quotas available to young farmers is very important .
We consider it a choice the Commission and the Council must accept after the united support of Parliament and its Committee on Agriculture .
The other proposal relates to certified seed .
We agree with what is happening , but we are also convinced that biodiversity must be maintained as a fundamental factor .
Maintaining biodiversity and also some of the special characteristics of seed , especially durum wheat seed , is very important for small farmers .
We have added Germany and Austria to the list of traditional producers because we think there is a market need , and at the same time we have updated the quotas of durum wheat allocated to the traditional producer countries .
I think it is a pretty well-balanced proposal , which takes account of the united opinion of the committee , and will make a good basis for you , Mr Commissioner , for a discussion in the Council .
That is all I have to say , and I just hope this will be accepted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the oral question to the Commission on my initiative and supported by the Committee on Agriculture , Fisheries and Rural Development , is fully justified because it is vital that the Commission take a decision on set aside in the framework of the 1997-1998 price package .
The set aside rate , when it differs from that provided for by the basic regulation , should be made known within a sufficiently short time so that European Union producers can proceed to their land planning and seeding in full knowledge of the facts .
Given the sowing periods , in certain Community regions , the Commission should make a proposal as quickly as possible .
Since the CAP reforms of 1 July 1993 , the cereals market has recovered its balance as a result of the production cut and , above all , the recovery of the internal market , especially for animal food .
This situation has led to a major reduction in European Union cereal stocks .
Two of the reform 's main aims have therefore been achieved .
However , these results need to be kept up by ensuring the maintenance if not an increase in intraCommunity consumption .
Later on , we noted the emergence of Asian demand which seems to be lasting .
The European Union must ensure that it regularly meets demand from its traditional non-Community customers .
During the 1995-96 farming year , we noted that the inadequacy of our cereal production hindered the fulfilment of some of our commitments , especially to the Middle East and North Africa .
The Commission even had to impose export taxes on cereals in December 1995 to protect internal supplies .
We also saw that the record harvest in 1996-97 , some 202 million tonnes , was easily absorbed by the internal market and exports .
Before the 1996-97 harvest , Community stocks were assessed at 24 million tonnes ; now they have risen to barely 28 million tonnes , not enough when you consider that 30-35 million tonnes would be needed to guarantee Europe 's food safety over two months .
Today , the drop in world cereal stocks is threatening the planet 's food safety .
These stocks are currently assessed at 55 consumption days .
In 1996 , they had dropped to barely 51 days .
Experts reckon that , below 70 consumption days , world food safety comes under threat .
To conclude , I should ask the Commission to fix the set-aside rates by 30 June 1997 and take into consideration unexpected weather conditions , increasing market demand and relatively low stocks .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I am very glad to see that the President-in-Office of the Council , Jozias van Aartsen , has been able to join us for this important debate , and I hope this will become regular practice in agricultural matters under the various Council presidencies .
Since I am expected to comment on three reports , one oral question and quite a number of amendments , I hope you will appreciate that it is bound to take up a little time .
I should like to start by giving details of a few circumstances that are important as an aid to understanding the Commission 's price package for the 1997-98 budgetary period .
A number of market organizations need to be reformed in order to prepare the European Union for the challenges of the next ten years .
Specific Commission proposals already exist for some areas of production , and others will follow in the course of the year .
The reports on the olive oil sector and the tobacco report are currently the subject of detailed discussions by both the European Parliament and the Council .
To enable the additional work of reform to begin , the Commission has produced a number of analyses providing information on the present position , the structure and , especially , the long-term prospects of the markets for cereals , milk and meat .
Similar documents for agricultural development are also in preparation .
We should establish clearly that , as regards the price proposals for the coming year , we are going through a kind of transitional period .
The price proposals are therefore essentially based on prolonging the period of validity of the existing rules .
Where we think it necessary , however , some regulations will be adapted to reflect changes in the economic environment .
The downward trend in interest rates is resulting in an adjustment of the monthly surcharges on the intervention price for cereals and rice and on the storage cost compensation for sugar .
As the Council cut the flax subsidy by 7.5 % last year , without at the same time adjusting the subsidy for hemp , which can replace flax in the rotation of crops , we are proposing that the hemp subsidy should be reduced in the same way this year .
The subsidies for fish farms , introduced in 1992 to compensate for falling prices , should also be brought more closely into line with the actual price trend .
According to a study by the British Department of Agriculture , the last four years since the introduction of the reform have seen over-compensation totalling ECU 14.3 billion .
Not in the United Kingdom , sir , but in the European Union !
I had serious doubts about the conclusions of this study and the methods used .
I therefore instructed my staff to examine this matter very carefully .
The result is this : according to the Commission 's services , the extent of the over-compensation is about ECU 8 billion over the last four years .
I should prefer not to pursue this argument further at this stage , but I would point out that the Commission 's proposed ECU 1.4 billion annual reduction in the compensation payments seems quite modest in comparison with past over-compensation .
I now come to Mr Sturdy 's report .
The actual price proposals encompass 16 Regulations , 9 of which were accepted as proposed by the Committee on Agriculture .
I should like to thank the Members of the Committee on Agriculture , and especially Mr Sturdy as the rapporteur , for their constructive assistance in drawing up the report on the price package .
Let me now take a closer look at the amendments to the other seven proposals for regulations .
First , in some of these amendments you are asking that the monthly subsidies should be retained at their present level .
But the agricultural sector , like other sectors , is a beneficiary of falling interest rates , something we cannot ignore in our price resolutions .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 , 7 , 11 , 15 and 17 .
On the other hand , Amendment No 47 calls for the abolition of all monthly subsidies for the cereals sector .
From our viewpoint , however , this would be a major change which would not be consistent with the idea of continuity of the price proposal .
Secondly , Amendments Nos 6 , 8 and 9 refer to the rice sector and are intended to expedite the reform agreed upon last year .
The major problem in this sector at present is the large quantity of tax-exempt imports from the overseas territories of the EU .
However , this problem can only be solved in the context of Council discussions .
The consequence of any such change would be to reduce protection and budgetary costs by raising the subsidy .
As far as Amendment No 5 is concerned , it makes little sense in this situation to support imports by setting the import quotas in advance .
Thirdly , Amendments Nos 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 , relating to the sugar sector , are intended to reintroduce government subsidies in Spain and Portugal .
This question was examined in detail in 1995 , when the market organization for sugar was extended by six years .
The Commission is therefore against re-opening this matter again at present .
Fourthly , Amendments Nos 18 , 19 and 20 regarding flax and hemp .
We reject these amendments for the reasons already mentioned .
Fifthly , Amendments Nos 25 and 26 on the tobacco sector . Although it is true that the issue here is to match production to market demand , this problem can only be solved by a revision of the existing regulation .
Sixthly , Amendment No 2 on protein crops envisages improving the competitiveness of protein crops as compared with other agricultural crop plants .
The Commission is sympathetic to the aim of this proposal , but has already proposed an improvement in connection with the resetting of the agricultural premiums .
If I may remind you , the compensatory payments for protein crops are being retained , whereas those for cereals and oilseeds are to be reduced .
Seventhly , Amendment No 30 on olive oil . The radical changes proposed should , in our view , be discussed in the context of the reform proposals .
Eighthly , Amendments Nos 27 to 29 on the beef and veal sector : the premium regulation for bulls provides only for a payment at the age of 10 months .
At that age , however , no distinction can be made between bulls intended for the bullring and other bulls .
The second premium for bulls at the age of 22 months has been done away with in the meantime , as you know .
Ninthly , Amendments Nos 1 and 4 on the extension of the exceptional regulation on moisture content - Mr Sturdy has already mentioned this .
This decision is within the competence of the Commission , so that the amendment is superfluous .
I do recognize , however , that this kind of exceptional arrangement has always been granted in the past and would be compatible with the overall concept of this price package .
Tenthly , Amendment No 10 : although I cannot accept the wording of this amendment , I think that the idea of including rice seed in the new common organization of the market is worth consideration , provided that all necessary precautions are taken to prevent serious disruptions of the seed market .
Eleventhly , Amendments Nos 21 to 24 relate to the wine sector and their purpose is to postpone by one year the resolution adopted as part of last year 's price package excluding dessert grapes from distillation .
These amendments are not acceptable to me .
A resolution exists , and it must now be implemented .
I do however accept that this change may cause local market problems when it is first implemented , so I shall pursue these reflections further ; I believe a reasonable temporary solution might be found within the framework of the common organization of the market for fruit and vegetables .
Twelfthly , Amendments Nos 48 to 50 relate to increasing the total surface area for new plantations for the budgetary years 1997-98 and 1998-99 .
The new plantations for the first of these years are already laid down in Regulation 15 / 92 , so that any further increase would be unjustified .
Amendments Nos 49 to 51 call for the abolition of obligatory distillation , but in my view it would be more sensible to clear up this question in the course of the reform of the wine sector .
Now let me come to Mr Funk 's report , and my thanks go to him also .
This report deals with the problem of the advance payments for oilseeds and the proposal to reduce compensatory payments for arable crops .
With regard to the proposed postponement of the oilseed payments , the latest information on the implementation of the 1997 budget makes it clear that adequate savings would probably be achieved .
Those savings will be sufficiently high to create the possibility of affording the next advance payments for oilseeds out of the 1997 budgetary funds on the basis of the existing regulations .
This , however , does not solve the problem for 1998 and 1999 .
On the assumption that the Commission 's draft budget for 1998 , rather than that of DG VI , is correct , we need to achieve savings of ECU 1.353 billion from the reduction in compensation for arable crops ; otherwise we would have to carry forward the 1998 advance payments for oilseeds to the 1999 budget .
The only effect of this , however , would be to postpone the problem until the 1999 budget .
Another possibility , which in fact has already been mentioned here today , would be to reduce all the 1998 budget estimates to the same extent , but that would create problems of its own , especially with those estimates where resources are in very short supply , while the over-compensation in the cereals sector would remain .
This shows clearly that the effect of postponing the advance payments would merely be to achieve apparent savings , since the savings achieved in one budgetary year would result in expenditure in another budgetary year .
By reducing the compensatory payments for arable crops , however , we achieve genuine savings in all future budgets .
I should like to emphasize that the EAGGF budget , by its very nature , must be subject to fluctuations .
For example , who at this early stage could predict the size of the autumn 1998 harvest ?
The implementation of the budget , as a matter of compliance with the principle of budgetary discipline for which the European Parliament , among others , has so often called , requires that the Commission should avoid unnecessary expenditures where possible .
The European Court of Auditors also regularly emphasizes this aspect .
If there is over-compensation in one particular sector , something that the calculations mentioned initially indicate has occurred in the arable crop sector , the Commission must take the necessary action .
On that basis , the Commission simply cannot avoid maintaining its proposal that the compensatory payments for arable crops should be reduced .
Regarding those amendments which relate to modulating the compensatory payments for the various producers by reducing the set-aside premium , but without any change in the cereals premium , I would say that this idea is already reflected in the Commission 's proposal .
A detailed analysis of the breakdown of the compensatory payments in the arable crop sector will be one of the key points of the future sectoral study .
The development of set-aside has had an important influence on cereal production in the Community in recent years .
Setting the level of compensatory payments for set-aside at the same level as compensatory payments for cereals would bring about an indirect modulation .
I should also like to say a word or two about Mr Baldarelli 's report .
First , I should like to thank the rapporteur and the members of the Committee on Agriculture for their positive attitude to the Commission 's proposal for changing the special arrangements applicable to durum wheat .
The proposal corresponds to the efforts to simplify the market organization , which is also supported by the Council .
It is very clear , however , that this simplification must not result in an increase in budgetary expenditure .
In this context , I would also remind the House that , among arable crops , the durum wheat sector is the best equipped with budgetary resources .
In this case , I must endorse what Mr van Aartsen said when he drew attention to the financial consequences of trying to please everybody in this area .
Regarding Amendments Nos 2 , 7 and 10 on increasing the maximum guaranteed areas , especially for young farmers , the Commission does share the feelings of the Committee on Agriculture , but the change in the arrangements governing the entitlements of individual farms to maximum guaranteed areas already meets these concerns .
The introduction of a special arrangement for young farmers would not only further complicate the administration of the regulation but would also conflict with the principle that the maximum guaranteed areas are available to all farmers in general .
The amendments whereby the obligation to use certified seed would be phased in gradually are entirely in line with the Commission 's views as far as their content is concerned .
However , the Commission regards this as an administrative matter , to be settled within its own jurisdiction .
In conclusion , I should like to say something about the oral question regarding the set-aside rate for the 1998 harvest .
As far as this question is concerned , I am of course well aware that farmers want to have a clear picture before sowing - before the autumn , in other words - of the proportion of their land they are going to have to set aside for the 1998 harvest .
I admit that this year has been a particularly good one for exports , resulting in the introduction of export levies for wheat and wheat products at the end of the budgetary year .
The intervention stocks at the end of the budgetary year are likely to be no more than about 2 million tonnes , consisting mainly of rye and barley .
However , this is no reason to jump to conclusions , because there is no undertaking and no legal obligation to make a proposal or reach a decision before 30 June 1997 .
I would however remind the House that , in the absence of any Commission proposal or if the Council adopts no resolution on such a proposal , the all-in rate of 17.5 % would apply .
I will , therefore , naturally make a proposal . However , there are two questions which I regret I cannot answer at present : the question of what rate we are actually going to propose , and the question of timing .
The reasons is that I should prefer to act in full knowledge of the facts .
As soon as we have a reasonably clear picture here , I will submit a proposal as soon as possible .
Mr President , I should like to request a clarification .
I think the Commissioner was mistaken when he spoke about the proposals for sugar and said that he did not accept amendments No 12 to 15 since they would constitute a reintroduction of national aid .
That is mistaken , because for Portugal it is not a case of reintroduction - it is being introduced for the first time and we are only going to apply the quota now .
Mr President , this year 's agricultural price setting is like a Chinese box .
There is a packet inside a package .
The packet is minuscule .
It is the most absolute status quo ever seen in this Chamber in terms prices and related measures , and is examined in the report by Mr Sturdy .
But the package weighs a ton , it is about cutting aid for arable land by ECU 1.4 billion for 1998 , and is examined in the Funk report .
I shall begin with the packet .
Mr Sturdy has done solid , realistic , rigorous work , eschewing all demagoguery .
I have to say that we Socialists are going to go a bit further : we shall vote against any increases in expenditure , even those approved in the Committee on Agriculture .
The various outstanding problems in the agricultural sections are going to be dealt with by the reform under discussion , not in the price setting forum .
Here we are in agreement with you , Commissioner Fischler .
But let me make one exception - wine : because the proposal for reform you say is on the table , is no longer on the table in reality .
Since 1994 it has been shamefully left in the box , and Parliament can no longer close its eyes to that fact .
We now want to ask for the abolition , with no increase in costs , of obligatory distillation , as a sign that certain inadequate instruments which have been overtaken by circumstances will be cut by half once and for all , giving producers and the market an opportunity .
I now move on to the package .
Mr Funk has lost an opportunity by opposing every cut to arable land proposed by the Commission absolutely head on , pretending not to see the real problems and relying on his accountancy skills .
Payment in advance or in arrears for oil seeds is part of a vanishing act which lasts a morning . But then , at the heart of the budgeting , he gets there despite himself .
Mr Funk , I think it is a little convenient to put your trust in the chronic generosity of the Commission 's agricultural spending forecasts , which looks like turning up again in 1997 as well and in the end all the adjustments will be made painlessly in 1998 .
As a Parliament , are we or are we not a budgetary authority ?
Are we or are we not demanding a voice in the chapter on obligatory spending too ?
That is why , with a report this armour-plated and ultra-conservative , Mr Funk has lost an opportunity to make the European Parliament 's voice heard more strongly on the objective problems which exist in our agricultural budget .
I envy the Minister-in-office of the Council , he already knows how the vote will go on Thursday .
My only regret is that if he had listened to the debate and not just the opinion of the rapporteur , he would have understood that not everyone shares the opinion of the rapporteurs on these delicate reports , especially not the opinion of Mr Funk .
Our group wants to support the farmers , but the best way to do this is not by burying one 's head in the sand .
We know that the imbalances in the CAP are generating serious problems , including financial ones .
The cohesion report informs us about the redistributive problems of the CAP .
Nothing new was added in the estimates of overcompensation provided yesterday by the Commission .
The need for new rural development policies is there , staring us in the face , and the Commissioner 's announcements are no longer satisfactory .
And we are not convinced that the fate of the farmers and their future should only be decided by the Fifteen at the ECOFIN Council .
Parliament needs to give a signal and the Socialist Group has put forward some proposals : for example , starting to bring certain distortions in aid into the discussion , reducing compensation for voluntary set-aside , which carries an increasing risk of undermining the overall operation on obligatory set-aside , and no further postponement of the issue of reshaping aid , starting immediately by at least bringing the amount of the set-aside premium in line with income support .
I do not agree with the 7 per cent cut in income support , not because cuts are involved , but because they are linear cuts , piling injustice on injustice .
The Socialist Group 's amendments should save about ECU 500-600 million on the 1998 budget .
That is not everything , but it gives a first signal , takes a first step towards responsibility .
We shall see if the other groups follow us , but we shall put difficulties in the way of accepting the rigorous Sturdy report or the lax Funk report .
The right thing to do is come down hard on the little packet and send the package back to the sender .
As for the sender , Commissioner Fischler , I do not understand why you told the agriculture ministers there were no further budgetary reasons to cut arable land .
In my view that was not very wise .
We have here in front of us the preliminary draft of the 1998 budget adopted by your Commission .
The cut is there , if I am not mistaken , and it is there to ensure a balanced budget for 1998 . And after listening to the Minister-in-Office of the Council , I feel moved to say this : Commissioner Fischler , if this is all a smokescreen , be good enough to say so honestly .
If , on the other hand , you want to do battle on serious issues , you know that , even where there are justified differences , the Socialist Group is ready to discuss those issues seriously .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Sturdy for his report which is full of good sense and highly responsible in the view of this Parliament .
I should also like to thank Mr Baldarelli for the hard work he put in on durum wheat and , particularly for the understanding he showed for the specific problem affecting Portugal - rather a delicate one which he and the Committee on Agriculture have understood .
I hope also that the Commission and the Council will come to understand it .
In the first place I should like to go into greater detail as regards the Funk report .
We must agree , for the sake of intellectual honesty , that there is in fact a delicate matter facing us and that the Commission is right in saying that the cereals sector is receiving too much compensation .
To deny that would be tantamount to calling day night !
And above all we would have to agree that as regards the set-aside payments that there is no reason why they should not be equal to aid .
But other factors which are also important must equally be taken into account .
First because this cut in aid would be justified at this time and at this stage only if there were no margin for manoeuvre within the CAP budget ; and that is not the case .
The budgetary trends do not indicate that .
On the other hand , we know that as from 1992 the CAP has been approximately 5 % below the guideline and that money has been returned to the Member States .
I should now prefer to see that money remaining with the farmers , albeit badly distributed , rather than see it returned to the Member States for purposes other than farming .
In the second place we must say that the problems of Europe 's farmers will not be solved by this simple cut now which is detached from rather than linked to aid for arable crops .
The CAP is highly unbalanced and it is essential for the Commission , the Council and all of us to face up to that .
We are working on the assumption that the GATT will have the same impact on all European agriculture - and that is not true !
There are less-favoured regions which will suffer greatly !
Nevertheless , the next reform of the CAP will have to consider very carefully in its aid system the question of equity in incomes support .
I agree with the Commissioner .
It must be a system of aid which is not linked to production , quantities or productivity .
That is the only way we can respond to the real problems of Europe 's diverse agriculture , which is heterogenous and not homogenous .
Mr President , Mr Minister , Mr Commissioner , as we have already seen , the price package adopted by the Commission for the 1997 / 98 financial year makes no great innovations to the situation as it stood , and in that connection I would like to express appreciation for the effort made in the Sturdy report to try to revitalize a platform that has become so rigid and flat , with such crystallized positions .
And crystallized they remain , especially after the Commissioner 's announcement . As usual he has been pretty heavy-handed in cutting our amendments .
In fact , apart from certain exceptions , the proposals again take up the provisions on prices and the organization of markets in line with the stability policy applied the day after the 1992 reform .
As a partial excuse for this dearth of proposals , there is also the ongoing revision of the common organization of some important markets , such as tobacco , olive oil , meat , and soon - we hope - milk .
Alongside this immutable base there are some minor adjustments which it is fair to record .
First , the reduction in the monthly increments in intervention prices for cereals and rice and storage refunds for sugar to take account of the fall in interest rates .
Secondly , the level of aid planned for flax promotion , which should have been set at zero given that funds exist representing larger sums than the promotional actions warrant ; hence the total aid per hectare is reduced by the same amount .
Thirdly , aid per hectare for hemp is reduced by 7.5 per cent to prevent hemp becoming more advantageous than flax after the reduction in aid for that product .
The impact of the budget on all these proposals translates into a saving of ECU 82 million for 1998 , according to the Commission 's estimates .
It should also be recalled that this same Commission has already proposed reducing aid for arable crops , which should free up an amount of ECU 1.4 million , as others have mentioned .
This will naturally be used to relaunch beef .
The economic forecast for the 1997 financial year borrowing requirement , as established in February , amounts to ECU 41 , 050 million , which exceeds the budget credits by ECU 245 million and leaves a margin of ECU 755 million as compared with the guidelines .
This is a decrease - announced in the budget - which is very important to the credit needs of the sheep and goat meat sector , essentially due to market prices being higher than the budget forecast .
There is also an important reduction in the milk and milk products sector , particularly in the supplementary withdrawal rate which remains to be declared for 1995 / 1996 , and is estimated for the period 1996-1997 .
The reduction in the requirements for arable crops is principally due to oilseeds .
A reduction in requirements is also planned for other sectors , particularly sugar , dry forage , fruit and vegetables , tobacco , eggs and poultry , and also food aid .
As we have seen , this debate is a concoction of the traditional report on the agricultural price package and two other reports , one by Mr Funk and the other by Mr Baldarelli , which can be said to complete it , revitalize it and project it into the future .

I think the Funk report should be supported , especially on the stabilization of beef , the proposal not to postpone payments for oilseeds but to pay , as from 16 October , only that part of the advance for which there is no possibility of coverage in the 1997 budget .
The Baldarelli report is right to stress the proposal to increase the national areas earmarked for durum wheat cultivation to help young farmers and readjust out of date valuations .

On areas , I have an appeal to make on behalf of Mr Rosado Fernandes who is sorry not to be here today - he is in Portugal receiving a decoration from the President of the Republic - but he has left me this message : ' Today Portugal has a guaranteed area of 35 thousand hectares , the reality is 90 thousand and the potential , as a historical average , is over 100 thousand . ' That is an invitation to respect figures , proportions and truth a little , in the interests of all European farmers .

Mr President , the Sturdy , Funk and Baldarelli reports all share one feature - they are all limited by the same financial restraints .
It is worth noting that in recent years farming expenditure has fallen below the limits set by the budgetary guidelines .
If the aim is to achieve a financial margin for other political aims , then things should be made clear .
In the case of the Funk report , the situation is fairly complicated since , behind the problem , lies a very delicate circumstance , which has been the subject of a committee of inquiry and on whose funding recommendations have been issued .
I think that Mr Funk 's report has a long history and has the virtue of having concentrated from the beginning on a balanced way of dealing with an extremely difficult problem .
My Group therefore supports the Funk report .
As for the report on the prices package , I must say that in its original form , as presented to committee , my Group had many reservations .
I think that the final result has not been improved all that much by the committee 's debate .
I hope that the final outcome of the votes will enable my Group to consider that it has substantially improved certain aspects of the prices package : but I have considerable reservations right now .
Finally , I should like to congratulate Mr Baldarelli on his report which gains my Group 's full support .
Commissioner , I believe that budgetary problems are not the main issue as far as you are concerned .
That was the case six months ago .
But the arguments have changed .
Even if budgetary problems were your main concern , though , there are other ways of achieving savings .
I have already pointed out to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that a linear reduction is somewhat unimaginative .
It is also ecologically unsound .
And socially unsound .
You keep telling the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that you want the premiums to be both ecologically and socially beneficial .
So why not start with this proposal , if it 's cuts and savings you want ?
Incidentally , you displayed a very curious turn of logic today in saying that because we 've cut back on flax we must also cut back on hemp , otherwise hemp will have an advantage and the oilseeds have an advantage because we cut back on cereals .
The fact of the matter is that you always regard price cuts as the automatic line to follow .
Mr Funk , I must inform you that we , as a group , naturally support your report .
But you don 't make it easy for us .
After all , we tabled an amendment - it 's still on the table , and I can hardly wait to see how your group will view it and vote on it - to try to shoot down this idea , but with the proviso that we arrive at a reform of the compensatory payments in a way that takes account of social and ecological criteria , with a gradual reduction , a staggered reduction , and more of a shift towards ecological methods of farming .
You always flatly refused this in the Committee for Agriculture and Rural Development .
Similar amendments were tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
So you are making it difficult for us .
You as a group - not you personally , but you have to answer for the others - are just as contrary as the Commission : they say ' Cut it ! ' and you say ' No ! ' but there must be possibilities somewhere in between , at least for the future .
The same applies to set-aside .
There is one amendment , Commissioner , which you failed to discuss : the amendment that the set-aside areas that are under clover should be permitted to be used next year .
As you know , the European Parliament adopted that amendment by a majority last year , and although that doesn 't necessarily mean that the Commission must act on it , I should be most grateful if you would take a look at this problem .
Here again , I can hardly wait to see how your group will vote on our present application .
Who knows , we in my group may even make our voting decision conditional on yours .
If the socialists vote differently , you need us to secure a majority on this point .
That might be one way of coming to an arrangement .
Overall , though , Commissioner , I believe we are on the eve of reform - as you made clear - and the estimates would then have to be clear .
I believe we must make it clear that we want to move away from a world market orientation towards a single market orientation .
We must make it clear that we are not going to grant compensatory payments for all farmland .
We must make it clear that we want no more export subsidies , and we must make it clear that what were formerly flanking measures are becoming the focal point of agricultural development , where of course we need money .
I understand all that , but of course we can 't completely axe something somewhere else just so that we can finance it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have a strange feeling that in this debate we are swimming in a sea of incoherence .
Budgetary and economic considerations , the so-called operational needs of free trade , the so-called and inevitable globalization , all paralyse any deep thought on the definition of genuine political guidelines .
Since 1992 we have spoken about the reform of the CAP , the integration of requirements to protect the environment , rural development policy , the maintenance of communities and employment in country areas , etc .
But what is the use of these fine declarations of principle if they are followed up by no practical initiative to alter the machinery of the CAP ?
Commissioner , you have repeated to us your attachment to a more harmonious CAP , designed to become the real vehicle of rural development .
Yet , in reality , you only leave the choice between lowering prices or set-asides to guarantee the CAP 's future .
I am sorry but I think you lack a little imagination if you limit yourself to accounting solutions whereas the countries of central and eastern Europe are looking for tangible signs about the next CAP and the forthcoming negotiations on the COMs are looming .
Increasing pressures are being exerted on the European Union to accelerate the liberalization of its farm markets .
To deal with that , the CAP needs new founding principles .
The prices package seems acceptable in the current context of strict budgetary rigour .
We must all take part in those efforts and it is in that spirit that my Group agrees to accept the Commission 's proposals .
That said , the fact that this package contains no political guideline is unacceptable .
It is intended to be neutral , but its accounting neutrality reveals a lack of political thought to the basics of the matter .
Without spending more , it should have been possible to spend better , by redirecting Community aids at the political priorities that have so often been announced .
It is again this accounting spirit that leads the Commission to finance BSE related measures out of the producers of certain arable crops .
It is indeed urgent to strike a fresh balance between aids for different crops and it is true that the cereals sector has for a long time now been doing excessively well out of EAGGF .
But I must oppose the techniques used as they mix up types and risk the setting of a precedent that might be used to deal with budgetary emergencies .
Could not the same result be achieved by striking a better overall balance of general savings and in particular by resorting to unused credits ?
As for the set-asides , determined accounting is again lord of the day .
My Group has always opposed this system .
Every year we decide the overall number of hectares to remain unproductive .
That is what shocks me .
We now only reason in terms of the global regulation of the market , the only priority being to produce less .
What about producing better ?
It is possible to regulate production by turning to quality products or supporting exports , as it is not only a matter of quality .
Real fallow land is not unproductive .
Fallow has a function of ecological restoration , whereas set-asides are just an unimaginative form of production management .
It seems absurd to separate the question of prices from that of set-asides .
How can producers plan their activities in such conditions ?
To conclude , if we can go along with most of the Commission 's proposals on prices and other measures , we must deplore the fact that they are not part of a determined approach to retarget aids so as to meet the aims of a lasting CAP , the only way to ensure the survival and profitability of small farms and maintain a social fabric in the countryside .
Commissioner , if we do not want a productivity-based CAP , one day we will have to stop using its revenues .
Mr President , I should like to take the opportunity , first of all , of congratulating both rapporteurs on the reports they presented here tonight .
I agree with everything Mr Funk has said .
He put forward his arguments very clearly and succinctly and we could all understand them .
This is a roll-over budget and brings in very little change .
In fact this price package has little or no effect as far as the farmer is concerned at all .
The rapporteur told us that it is going to cost ECU 170m .
After listening to the Commissioner tonight I wonder how much of their reports are actually left because he seemed to be casting aside all the proposals .
What has been left ?
We can speak all we like in this Parliament but at the end of the day it is what is happening down on the farm that really counts .
I come from a region of Northern Ireland .
The Commissioner knows this only too well for he is tired of listening to me about it .
If you are a farmer there , especially a beef farmer or cereal farmer , you have very little hope or future left .
Beef prices , because of the BSE crisis , are at an all-time low .
That has nothing to do with Europe .
The European Commission has been very good in the support it has given through intervention .
But if you are a cereal farmer or a beef farmer involved in those areas , you have no chance at this moment in time of making a profit or surviving .
You have to take this on board and bear it in mind .
There is little hope at this stage , this year , of recovery .
I can see little hope for the future as far as our farmers in that area are concerned .
The farmers are now paying a terrible price for the BSE crisis .
It is now hurting , it is biting deep and hurting them in their pockets , where it hurts the most .
One of the other issues that is really affecting them at the moment is the strong pound against the ECU , against the green pound rates .
That is certainly the responsibility of the UK Government .
I hope my colleagues on the other side of the House will put pressure on the new Minister of Agriculture to make the request to get the support .
Mr President , we have the excellent report by Mr Baldarelli on durum wheat ; we have the equally excellent report by Mr Funk ; we are mostly in agreement with them .


As for Mr Sturdy , he poses a problem , because he is an Englishman , a nice Englishmen , which is not common , a warm , human Englishman .
Unfortunately , Mr Sturdy 's anti-farming positions are those of Anglo-Saxon bleeders of the land .
Technically , of course , he is proposing , as always , the great mass , the sixteen regulations on wine , pork , flax , etc , with price freezes at the centre and a reduction in compensatory amounts for major crops , i.e. 7 % less for cereals , 4 % less for oil seeds , 26 % for set-asides , proposals all made to make cereal farmers bear the costs of mistakes made by British industrialists .
Mr Sturdy has tried to make up for the reduction in monthly premiums , but always playing this game of tight-fisted rigour .
Then he came up against a better accountant than he is , Mr MacSharry , who rejected the whole package .
In reality , behind this technical arrangement , which is rather tight-fisted , hides the essence of the political choices and I would even say philosophical choices .
First of all , we are being subjected to Maastricht austerity , rationing - we cannot go above the maximum limit of 41 million ECU - and prices .
Mr Cunha explained to us last year that there were 5 % budgetary reserves .
Then we are preparing for enlargement eastward , to central Europe , which is why we must make savings .
We are sacrificing the agricultural budget , agricultural policy , to the structural funds .
For regional policy , we refer to November 's European Conference on Rural Development .
We are also preparing for the Delors III or Santer I package , i .. e in the persecutive of the 1999 multiannual budgetary programming we are cutting agricultural spending every year .
But , above all , the prices package is preparing for the package-deal for the year 2000 , in the trade negotiations with the United States and in the Geneva framework .
Older members will remember that , in 1990-91 , Mr MacSharry explained to us that stocks were too big , that that was expensive , that cereal farmers were getting rich and that the CAP would have to be overhauled .
Now , we are being told that the stocks are going to be big , that that is expensive , that cereal farmers are getting richer all the time and Mr Sturdy now says that we shall have to reform the reform .
That is tantamount to saying that all the measures taken from 1990 to 1992 only prepared the way for Blair House and that all current measures - Sturdy included , as it were - are for preparing the negotiations in the year 2000 , when the six year peace will be over .
We are beginning to give in to the United States even before they ask us .
Mr Sturdy , who is very intelligent and very subtle , tries to mask this problem .
He says : ' Yes , but for farmer security , we need a five-year multiannual programming ' .
Mr Sturdy forgets that Joseph told the pharaoh that there were climatic variations and that setting prices for five years is really very , very curious .
In reality , Mr Sturdy , and you know I like you a lot , we have a philosophical divergence over this .
There is the Anglo-saxon model with its well-known success : 160 000 cattle slaughtered .
This Anglo-Saxon model is a model of the invisible hand , but it is really the visible hand of capitalism .
Then there is the model of the family farm , the balanced farm , the human enterprise , which is not that of Adam Smith .
This is the divergence that separated Keynes from Adam Smith and Cambridge from Oxford .
That is the opposition that separates us , Mr Sturdy .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
Mr President , first of all , in this debate I go along with what Mr Fantuzzi said , as his words were fully in line with the Socialist Group 's way of thinking .
Secondly , I should like to point out that there is some confusion in this debate , especially over the Funk report , initially because the proposals to cut aids to cereals were linked with the need for funds to solve the meat problem - the reasons behind these Commission proposals .
However , at this moment , it seems that the Commissioner is presenting them separately , as if in the framework of a possible reform of the farming policy .
I seem to have heard that , given that there is excessive compensation in the cereals sector , aids have to be reduced , completely regardless of the beef question .
On this matter - accepting that this is the plan - I think that there should be more clarity as to whether this is a reform or whether we are dealing with the BSE crisis .
I say that because if at this moment in time the Commissioner 's ideas are separate from the beef problem , I think that we have to be far more realistic , as Mr Fantuzzi was saying .
I do not think that we can deal with the reform of the compensatory amounts for cereals by saying ' coffee all round ' , because that over-compensation to which you referred , has not occurred throughout the Community at an equal rate .
It is possible that some regions have seen an over-compensation . But that is not the general case throughout the European Union .
Therefore , I think that we should begin to introduce some elements of discrimination .
On those lines , the proposals made by the Socialist Group head in that direction .
We go along with the idea that certain rectifications are needed , but not in the same way for everyone , because that is the defect that we faced when the Council rejected the original proposals made by Commissioner MacSharry .
We do agree that some rigour is called for , but the various positions need to be distinguished if this reform is to have a real meaning .
Not only that : we should also enhance certain social aspects , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf recalled earlier , not forgetting the ecological aspects .
It seems to me that it would be a good framework for beginning to discuss some of these ideas .
To sum up , as Mr Fantuzzi said , I think that we should end our discussions and fine words and start taking practical action .
We agree with your aims , Commissioner , but start work so that in the coming months we can have some elements that will enable us to know where we are heading with your ideas on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I address the House on these three reports as the rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets for the 1998 budget .
First , the Funk report .
In view of the large sums in the 1997 budget that were left unused in the agricultural sector , the Committee on Budgets , in its opinion , agreed with the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Funk , on this , and Mr Funk very largely adopted the proposal contained in the Committee 's opinion , but unfortunately not the parts relating to the amendment to the Regulation .
With regard to the deferment of the oilseed payments to 1998-99 , or their suspension in 1997 , the Commission has expressly stated that it is not prepared to contemplate this , at least at present .
I believe we shall have to discuss this further in the course of the ad hoc procedure .
I am more inclined to favour the Commission 's proposal .
As regards Mr Sturdy 's report , I would at least like to congratulate the rapporteur .

He has , I think , taken the right line , even if Mr Martinez sees it differently ; his proposal really is budgetary-neutral .
With regard to the present motion for a resolution by the Committee on Agriculture , it should be noted that the Committee on Budgets gave its opinion on the Commission 's proposal and not on the proposal by the Committee on Agriculture in the present report , envisaging an increase by ECU 170 million .
From the procedural standpoint , therefore , it would be appropriate for Mr Sturdy 's report in its present form to be referred back to committee , so that the Committee on Budgets can give an opinion on the basis of the new situation .
The amendments proposing that this increase should be covered by savings elsewhere in the agriculture budget , as is proposed by the Committee on Agriculture , is a cosmetic solution , because it is not really budgetary-neutral and ultimately it still amounts to an increase .
There are two points I should like to single out from what the Council presidency said .
I hope that you will succeed in creating a flexible structure for the budget in the agricultural sector , and I wish you every success in your efforts to do so .
But something else you said did reawaken my feelings of pessimism , and that was when you referred indirectly to horizontal cuts .
Although such cuts would be effective , and would undoubtedly be the simplest solution , it would run counter to what Honourable Members have said : that we should look at the items and make cuts where over-compensation has already existed for many years .
I believe , though , that we can and must conduct lengthy further negotiations on this .
The simplest overall solution , both for us in this House and for the Council , would certainly have been to accept the Commission 's proposal .
That would have been the most logical course from the standpoint of budgetary policy .
Commissioner , you too cannot escape totally unscathed here - I have some criticisms of you as well .
It is somewhat comic , of course , that we should receive from your services , two weeks after the proposal for the draft budget , an oral correction saying that you have miscalculated by 329 million .
That , of course , will be another matter to be discussed during the ad hoc procedure .
That procedure will have begun by late autumn , and then it will be up to all of us to commit ourselves to the kind of budgetary stringency that we resolved upon in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Guidelines .
Mr President , first of all I should like to say that this debate shows , as the President of the Commission has said , that the powers of the Parliament on agricultural matters need to be strengthened and that we need co-decision .
As far as the agricultural prices are concerned , it is obvious that the budgetary discipline imposed on the Community expenditure must be upheld .
Nevertheless , we should recognize that the freeze at 1997 levels that the Commission is seeking is really pitched at 1992 levels , if account is not taken of average Community inflation and when there are no compensatory mechanisms for making up part of the income .
So the biggest income loss will be borne by the markets that have not been reformed since 1992 rather than by those , such as cereals market , that have been reformed .
Strangely enough these reformed markets for which compensatory mechanisms exist encompass only products of the north .
So one asks : should we perhaps not be attempting to freeze the prices for the main Mediterranean products ?
I can think , for example , of about 15 different fruits and vegetables for which the markets have been reformed but for which no compensatory mechanisms have been provided .
It is right that we should propose a small increase in the support prices for 1998 for these products , smaller , or at the most , equal to anticipated average Community inflation , because it is likewise not coincidental that agricultural in the south of the Community is coming to believe more and more that it is being persecuted .
Allow me to add , lastly , that when the support prices and the related measures are adopted consideration should given to devising a special policy to serve the Community 's interests with regard to the products which are greatly in deficit .
Freezing the prices of products which are in surplus makes sense , but it does not make sense to impose a freeze on products which are in deficit and in respect of which the Union has to import more than 50 % of its needs .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I congratulate the authors of the report .
If implemented , the Commission 's price package would cut the per hectare aid and set-aside support for cereals and oilseed plants .
The relative effects of these cuts , particularly on the viability of agricultural production , will be greater in the Union 's remote areas than in the better production areas .
For this reason , I cannot approve these cuts .
A cut of almost a third in set-aside support would be contrary to the objective of reducing surpluses in the cereals sector .
Market deveopment assessments show that over-production in the cereal sector will be a growing problem in future .
The cutting of set-aside compensation is a measure which will be poorly received given the current situation on the cereals market .
The CAP reform was implemented and it was relatively of most benefit to the farmers in the better production areas .
When the Commission proposes making cuts in support to bring about savings , these cuts should be targeted taking account of the relative effect of the cuts on the viability of production .
Within the European Union each country tries to produce as much as possible of its own food itself .
Consumers appreciate food produced near home , because over-long transport lowers the quality of food .
In the USA 's industrial-scale agricultural production system , where specialization has been taken to extremes , food has to be transported thousands of kilometres to the customers ' tables .
I warn against this type of development , particularly in the context of the forthcoming free trade negotiations .
Free trade does not necessarily suit us very well , because its risks are often greater than its benefits .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I have to be very frank . With its proposals for 1997-98 prices , the European Commission is not content with freezing price and aid levels , but is also preparing for new adaptations to the CAP with a view to the COM negotiations and enlargement of the European Union to the eastern European countries .
Pursuit of an alignment of Community with world prices is aimed at adapting the CAP to the American model , with further drops in income , an acceleration in the concentration of farms , and the implementation of over-intensive production methods .
This prices policy comes after the signature with non-Community countries of agreements doing harm to Community preference .
Farming plays the role of an exchange currency in relations with non-Community countries , as on the internal market , and priority is given to the principle of free competition .
Producers are made to compete which only profits major distribution companies and international business .
This is the case at present in the fruit and vegetable sector .
Apart from the acts of violence against goods and persons , which I wholeheartedly condemn , farmers ' demonstrations are sounding the alarm signal on the deterioration of their situation .
Other sectors - milk and beef - have not been spared .
It is not enough , as the Committee on Agriculture proposes - and even if it is fair - to oppose the reduction in premiums for cereals .
We must urgently commit ourselves to a process of renovating and improving the CAP .
The change of government in France might contribute to that in the framework of the reorientation of European construction proposed by the joint declaration by the socialist and communist parties .
That CAP reform should learn the lessons of the mad cow crisis , which revealed how harmful the policy is to the interests of producers and consumers alike .
It is thanks to the joint action of producers , consumers and workers that we count on showing the French Government and the Community institutions that we could impose other guidelines that would respond to the food needs of the population and to the needs of producers themselves .
Mr President , farmers need a stable and predictable working framework if we want to put a stop to the loss of jobs in the sector , where a further 230 000 jobs were shed in 1996 .
Our Group therefore regrets the fact that we still have no Commission proposal for set-asides for next year , even though farmers already have to prepare their land use plans .
I should point out that last year we had to impose an export tax for the first time in the Community 's history .
This year , since 14 May , the Commission has again had to impose that tax in order to guarantee internal European Union supplies .
It is therefore vital not to go beyond the current compulsory rate of 5 % and to abolish the extraordinary set-aside imposed after any excess .
As for the agricultural budget , we know that the EAGGF-Guarantees budget will only be increased by 0.5 % .
In relation to the compromise guidelines agreed on at Edinburgh , that is translated into a total loss from next year 's agricultural budget of some 2.4 billion ECU .
The real reason is the introduction of the single currency and its corollary , the respect of the Maastricht convergence criteria .
We all know that but the farmers do not .
Perhaps it is a good thing for a few of us here to speak out and say that .
As for durum wheat , I should like to draw your attention to Amendment No 5 , which we tabled and adopted in committee , for durum wheat areas to be set at an inter-regional level .
The management of a production needed for supplying a specific agro-foodstuff sector must be flexible .
I should also emphasize the vital nature of the obligation agreed on by the committee to use certified seeds for durum wheat .
This is especially important for the seed sector and I had to stress it .
We have tabled another amendment that was also adopted in committee , making things as flexible as possible for farmers .
I hope that the Council will agree to our proposal on that point as well .
Mr President , the EU agricultural policy has in many respects outlived its usefulness .
We now have a farming industry that uses unheard-of amounts of poison in order to achieve maximum possible yields .
The results are unfortunately major environmental problems and food of which consumers are becoming increasingly critical .
We are now on the brink of an enlargement of the EU to include the Eastern and Central European countries , which also have a large agricultural sector .
For many reasons - not least economic reasons - we have to face the fact that the price package proposals must be reformed before these countries become members .
In addition , there are the demands from the World Trade Organization for us to fall into line with world market prices .
We must therefore view this proposal from the Commission as a challenge that has both economic and environmental advantages .
In the same way , it is an advantage that many Member States wish to apply strict budgetary discipline in the future .
I think that the Commission proposal shows a realistic attitude to the problems of world market prices .
It would be nice if we could now get right away from lines of production that do not belong in the EU .
An example is tobacco production .
I support the proposal of the Environment Committee to cut the premiums in that sector by 10 % ; otherwise we have no consistency between agriculture , health and the environment .
Let us hope that in the future time and money will not be spent on price proposals in the EU .
Instead the support would be given a social focus by allocating money for landscape management and for environmentally friendly production .
Organic farming also urgently needs help .
All things considered , we must ensure sustainable agriculture with quality products in the EU .
That is the only way we can be sure of winning back consumer confidence in the common agricultural policy , and that is necessary if it is to survive at all .
Mr President , I shall say immediately that I am in agreement with the conclusions reached by the Committee on Agriculture , and I am therefore in favour of upholding the kind of solution we adopted there in this House .
But having said that I must immediately add - and I am speaking mostly to Members , but also to the Council and the Commission - that in my opinion we would be mistaken if , at the end of the debate this evening and in the voting tomorrow and the next day , we were to abandon the very important discussion that has been opened here this evening .
I refer to the dialogue difficulties existing between Parliament , the Commission and the Council of Ministers , and to the speech by my friend and colleague Mr Fantuzzi , who seemed to be trying to open a dispute inside Parliament itself between reformers and conservatives on the issue of agriculture .
In my view we made an error when we gave the price package a significance and a role it should not have .
Here I agree with Mr Mulder when he brings us back to reality .
I do not agree with Mr Sturdy 's attempts to redistribute expenditure between sectors through the ' price ' package , or with Mr Fantuzzi , who starts from a correct analytical assumption but then arrives at the wrong conclusion that , here , now , today , we can find the solution to a general approach to agriculture , although it must certainly come into being and we must try to make a contribution to it .
I do not know if the Commission has an idea in mind about general reform of agriculture , but I feel sure it is pursuing a design of its own through the COM , the price package and so on , and we in the European Parliament need a strategy , which has not been clearly defined yet .
I hope the lesson of sorts that we are learning in this debate will help Parliament find the right road in its relations with the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , from an agricultural perspective , farm prices are central to the viability of the industry .
Farming is about producing food but also about managing the rural environment of which farmers are the main custodians .
Unlike other professions , farmers do not have a guaranteed income and the industry has been bedevilled by fluctuations in both prices and production costs .
While it is true that the CAP and accompanying measures have made a significant contribution to market stability and to managing production to market requirements , direct payments have been of immense benefit in ensuring the economic survival of many farming families , in particular those with small and medium-sized farms .
Any review of farm prices or the CAP must take into account not only the economic viability of agriculture as a food producer but also the environmental and social significance of retaining the maximum number of farming families .
In his report Mr Sturdy understandably highlights the need for budget management , in particular in the context of EMU .
While acknowledging that the agricultural budget represents a significant proportion of the overall EU budget , it seems wrong that proposed restrictions are based more on what remains after we provide for the agreed 8 % annual increase in structural funds rather than the actual needs of European agriculture .
It should also be noted that the roll-over in farm prices represents in fact a reduction in farm prices when inflation is taken into account , not to mention the problems associated with currency revaluation .
Guarantee funds are a crucial element in the overall agricultural budget and the proposed restriction of 0.5 % increase will put considerable pressure on a sector already reeling from the impact of BSE .
European agriculture faces many challenges in the context of CAP reform and the world trade talks .
If the industry is to expand it can only do so in the context of competitiveness in the world market .
Serious decisions will have to be taken on the farming structures of the future .
Either we allow the pressures of the marketplace to push us in the direction of New Zealand-style ranches , with disastrous consequences for the human side of farming , or we introduce policies to build and develop Europe 's farm family tradition .
I understand the rapporteur 's view on farm price support at this time , in particular as we enter negotiations on a new world trade agreement , CAP reform and further enlargement to the east .
I repeat that the only way forward for European agriculture , and Irish agriculture which with other colleagues I represent in the broader European context , is through greater efficiency and competitiveness leading to an increased share of the world market .
In the context of planning for the future we must ensure that goals are achieved within the economic framework of the traditional family farm .
Mr President , first let me congratulate the rapporteurs on these reports .
I think they have conveyed the seriousness of the situation and recognized that the reform of the agricultural policy must continue .
I also think that the Commission proposal is correct as regards price stability .
But I have a few objections to the Commission 's arguments for the reduction of support per hectare for cereal crops .
I cannot accept the argument that compensation has been excessive in this area .
I merely refer to what Mr Funk said about the figures from part of Germany , which presumably apply to all countries with a strong currency .
At all events they have not noticed any overcompensation on the cereal market there .
That is one of my points .
The other question is whether it is politically right to continue applying cuts in payments per hectare for cereals in the future .
If we are to contribute to satisfying cereal demand on the world market , it does not help to pull the rug from under the cereal growers ' feet , so that it is no longer profitable to grow cereals .
So I do not think the Commission has got its sums right on this point .
Otherwise I think the Commission 's policy is correct in moving from price support to hectare support .
If we are to have an agricultural policy in the future , it will be necessary to abolish price support completely and apply hectare support exclusively .
That is the future for agriculture in Europe .
Mr President , a deluge of words and a dearth of meaning - that is what one could say about the debating of this whole matter .
Council proposals , Commission proposals , long-winded speeches by the President-in-Office and the Commissioner , three reports and an oral question .
I interpret them them not as they are , not in terms of their words , but in terms of their meaning .
All of them , in their own way , reaffirm the antifarmer , anti-social , anti-economic and inhumane character of the Community 's agricultural policy .
This is evidenced by the freeze in prices and the price cuts , the freeze or reductions in aid and other support measures and the freezing of production volumes even for the deficit products , in total disregard of inflation and of the fact that production costs are rising sharply every month and every year .
So one asks how this agricultural inflation in the Community is to be contained , in the south especially .
No one seems to be addressing that .
Let the budgetary god and the tight monetary policy take care of it .
So instead of the budget providing farmers with a decent human standard of living , the farmers are being asked to suffer and make sacrifices for the budget .
Mr President , the point is that the whole situation needs to be taken apart from top to bottom .
If the Community does not do it , the farmers themselves and the workers will , and you can see the beginnings of that now .
Do not let things come to that .
You still have time to adjust this inhuman policy to some degree if want to .
Mr President , according to the preliminary draft 1998 budget agricultural expenditure can only increase by up to 0.5 % .
Furthermore the 1.3 billion extra ECU earmarked for the BSE crisis also have to be financed from this tight framework .
But is this fair ?
This means that the bills for the EMU criteria and the BSE crisis have been sent to farmers .
I find it difficult to accept the controversial proposal to reduce income compensation for cereal growers .
It is not fair to reduce overall subsidies by targeting cereals because , in certain Member States , growers have been overcompensated .
We should not lose sight of the fact that is mainly due to a devaluation of the national currencies concerned .
In countries with a strong currency some growers have even been slightly under-compensated .
Like Mr Funk , the rapporteur , I think that as an alternative to reducing income subsidies the 1998 budget should be discharged using expenditure which was not used in 1997 for payments targeting oil-seed growers .
If that is not enough , then we should abandon the 0.9 % maximum .
I recall that promises were made during the 1992 reforms and I should point out that the agricultural directive allows for a supplementary increase of 2 billion ECU .
As far as the Sturdy report is concerned , I agree with the freeze on agricultural prices .
Given the inflation rate , that possibly means a decrease in real terms but market prices and farmers ' incomes depend more on management of the European market than the rate of intervention prices .
I also support the amendments opposing the proposed decrease in the cereals and sugars scales .
Current allowances barely suffice to offset storage costs and interest .
To conclude , thanks to the withdrawal of aid to flax fibre , considerable amounts have been saved to promote the sales of that product .
But this cannot lead to a reduction in promotional activities .
I should like the Commissioner to tell us whether he wants to use the millions of ECU which have been saved to promote sales .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is one point that must be clearly established in this debate : the contributions made to it , today and previously , by members of the Group of the European People 's Party on the Committee for Agriculture and Rural Development are notable for what they fail to say and so , basically , for the way they twist what they do say .
Because it was not the Commission that , at the start of these discussions , deleted massive savings running into billions ; it was the European Finance Ministers and the Council , using any arguments they could find to inflict deep wounds on the operators of small- and medium-sized farms .
That is a fact , and we need to acknowledge it .
And , Mr Funk , you ownr Finance Minister also supported this policy .
So you should have the courage and the resolution to write a letter to your own Finance Minister , even if he is a member of your own party , and tell him that his policy is basically unprincipled , posing an unacceptable burden on small farmers .
This has got to change .
Instead of that , you actually voted down any mention of this fact in the Committee on Agriculture and I think that shows that a policy is being put forward here that may well be acceptable in Germany , and perhaps in various other States too , but is basically a bad and un-European policy .
Yet again , you are trying to cast the Commission as the villain of the piece , a convenient all-purpose scapegoat to conceal your country 's responsibility .
I think that the underlying cause of this whole attitude is partly attributable to the fact that some - and I emphasize , some - sections of the PPE are fundamentally opposed to a radical , sensible reform of the agricultural policy , a reform that is not only overdue but has actually been planned for the near future . Their stubborn attitude is intended to create the impression , not only here but at home - in domestic politics , in other words - with a big lobby , that everything is going to stay the way it was .
This policy is basically directed against owners of small- and medium-sized farms , and the social democrats cannot support it .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the issue today is not to do with documents , nor is it to do with disagreements about the structure that is to take us into the next millennium - the issue is the very important one of farm prices and compensation rules , though these things are not as controversial as they were in the past .
But this third subject of the ' special arrangement for durum wheat ' is an important one for farmers in certain regions .
Sufficiently important , I think , to receive timely treatment .
Many thanks to the rapporteurs .
A little colour has now been brought into our debate .
I can only speak today about the durum wheat arrangement , and in this case the new proposal simplifies the changeover from individual premium entitlements to guaranteed maximum premium areas for each Member State .
This change is also welcome .
There was broad agreement on this among the Committee on Agriculture , as there also was on the particular proposals made by the rapporteur , Mr Baldarelli .
He has taken a great deal of trouble .
The 5 % reserve for young farmers and the increases in which it results receive our approval .
We do appreciate , however , that some countries - Austria and Germany , for example - do have justifiable claims for so-called non-traditional farming areas to be taken into consideration .
The cultivation of durum wheat has a long tradition in Germany .
Before the current premium rules came into force , Germany already had 25 , 000 hectares of land under cultivation , and this would remain necessary .
Mr President , this debate on farm prices has been very much eclipsed by the financial effects of BSE in which the repercussions of a disaster in one sector being imposed on another is only part of the scourge .
In my view , Europe is facing a fresh financial debacle , namely that of swine fever , a disease which regularly crops up here and there and has currently hit my country where costs , in the Netherlands alone , have already reached 150 million ECU .
I think that this situation is horrific and I am making an appeal to the Presidency and Commissioner Fischler to look for new methods to combat this disease so that vaccinations provisionally combined with preventive culling can be tested .
It is my opinion that the Council and the Commission , with or without the agreement of the Standing Veterinary Committee , must rapidly work out an action plan aimed at avoiding any further animal suffering , any further harm to trade and any increase in Euro-scepticism .
Of course , I also appreciate the work carried out by Mr Funk and Mr Sturdy , but this evening I felt that I had to talk about this particular problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , my colleague Mr Salvador Jové Perez has already expressed the view of our group on the Funk and Balderelli reports .
The resolutions on agricultural prices proposed by the Commission for the 1997-1998 marketing year are still incomprehensible to farmers in general , above all to those in less-favoured regions .
Although it is true that in some cases such reductions even pose a threat to what was envisaged in the 1992 reform , it certain that for over 80 % of farmers - for instance those in Portugal - and it should be remembered that Portugal is the only one of the four cohesion countries facing a net loss in agricultural terms - such proposals will surely annoy Portuguese farmers whose income has already been reduced so much .
In some cases the European Parliament , through the Sturdy report , made no changes .
In other cases it made proposals aimed at keeping prices at the levels for the previous year - which was moreover the method we used for this current marketing year .
These changes do not however mean that there will be no real reduction in incomes affecting everyone equally , whether large-scale or small , rich or poor , but it is clearly the poor whose survival will be threatened .
If we support the parliamentary amendments which seek the lesser of the evils that does not mean that we are in any way supporting the overall line of the Commission 's pricing policy ; it indicates that we might be in agreement with continuing agricultural forecasting which does not pay attention to the differences and specific aspects , or to the less-favoured regions , or to the size of the holdings or to the scantness of incomes .
Mr President , today 's debate gives us the opportunity to discuss farm prices for 1997 / 1998 and , at the same time , matters relating to the level and distribution of the agricultural expenditure appropriations .
The parameters of this joint debate extend far beyond the 1997 / 1998 prices package , the set-aside changes and the support system for certain arable products .
The new priorities of the Union , the stringent financial programmes and the proposed enlargement , for which the timetable remains unclear and the cost undetermined , are , essentially , at the heart of the problem .
This does not mean of course that there are no problems with the prices package itself .
I could describe the Commission proposal as a management exercise . It has no proper perspective and it will generate uncertainty among producers because they are being placed in an annual planning framework and forced to put up with an inadequate time horizon while waiting for the new arrangements .
The ECU 1.4 billion saving on arable crop support and the linear distribution of the support to all producers will have its worst effect on the small producers .
It is , of course , the solution that the Commission habitually opts for when looking for a way out of its problems .
Its proposal for generous funding to stabilize the beef sector is something that I , personally , oppose .
I am pleased that the President-in-Office is present because we can say , in all sincerity , that we do want to support the efforts to achieve budgetary discipline and , if you like , savings .
Mr Fantuzzi expressed that very well . But in order to win our support for this policy the Commission must abandon its prevailing reasoning about good products and bad products , with the bad products being generally those from the south .
To endow the cereals regime with generous funding while cutting all of the appropriations and getting the saving from products of the south is wrong .
Not all of us can support this policy .
Mr President , it seems important that we should also look to the future during the annual debate on agricultural prices .
The Sturdy report raises these issues .
He also suggests that we should simplify the system of intervention for cereal crops by setting one price and removing the monthly increments .
Apart from the fact that this proposal is required to balance the budget , it is also a small step towards adjusting to the conditions of the world market , an adjustment which I welcome .
It is a small step which corresponds to 0.5 % of the cereal sector 's turnover .
This cannot be considered a threat to the Common Agricultural Policy .
If we take a more long term view , I am convinced that European agriculture , if it is to play a part on the world market , must adjust itself to that market .
In the forthcoming trade negotiations we should aim , along with other countries , to abolish export subsidies and quota systems which restrict production .
It is only by doing this that we can develop a dynamic agricultural sector .
I would , in fact , be more concerned about the future of European agriculture if we continue with an unchanged agricultural policy than if we take the bull by the horns and really take the CAP reforms to their logical conclusion .
I sometimes think that Commissioner Fischler is also arguing along these lines , but he is doing so extremely cautiously .
If he is doing this , he deserves Parliament 's strong support .
A drop in prices ought , at least temporarily , to be compensated for through fixed subsidies but it ought to be possible to phase these out when price levels increase , which they will according to OECD estimates .
It will be dangerous for European agriculture to continue with an outdated regulation system .
European Agriculture deserves a better fate than this .
Mr President , the Funk reports are about actions to limit the production of beef and ways to pay for those actions .
Last September the Commission asked Parliament to give urgency to consideration of its proposals .
We gave urgency to the activities but we still have not agreed how to pay for them and that is what this report is about .
The activities include calf slaughter , more intervention etc . , but we must agree how we pay for this .
Some people are saying the projected underspend this year will pay for it .
We have to act here with some sort of morality and say : OK , maybe the underspend will pay for it but we actually have to find a way .
Let us hope we can .
Whatever we decide this evening will not change the fact that the activities have not cut beef production , so we have to think for next year and the years beyond of more effective ways of cutting beef production .
The drop in consumption Europe-wide has been between 10 % and 15 % , so we have to cut production or we have to promote the eating of beef .
An important part of the budget we have to consider later in the year is putting money into the promotion of beef-eating , to take it out of intervention .
For every ECU 50m we invest in this way we will make a saving of ECU 100m .
I hope we will decide this week and that we will not have the third and fourth Funk reports next year .
We British would like to know the United Kingdom 's real contribution to the common agricultural budget when considering the cost of BSE eradication in Britain and the cost of compensation to farmers because of the revaluation of the green pound in the light of the Thatcher-negotiated refund .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very glad to see that the President-in-Office is with us today .
In basic terms , Austria is a traditional durum wheat growing area , although that was not accepted or demonstrated in the accession negotiations .
So there is a tradition of durum wheat production in Austria , that can be traced back to the early 1960s and proved by planting entitlement certificates .
Furthermore , extensive exports confirm that Austrian durum wheat is also in demand on the international market because of its high quality .
I therefore particularly welcome the fact that the Committee on Agriculture has reassessed the situation and voted in favour of granting the durum wheat growing subsidy for 9 , 600 hectares of land in Austria .
The 1992 plan to reform the agricultural policy has already improved the Community 's agricultural situation .
The attractiveness of farming and rural areas , with all their varied functions , must be preserved .
The care and maintenance of natural resources , greater attention to environmental issues and the adaptation and continuing development of agriculture are important aspects of an integrated policy , in my view .
We must therefore offer farmers the certainty that the next WTO round will not be anticipated and that Europe will pursue a policy of stability .
The confidence of the farmers can be gained only by a policy planned on a relatively long-term basis .
I should mention in this connection that it is important that farmers are able to earn an income from their own original production , and that compensatory payments are only compensation .
The Common Agricultural Policy cannot be dictated by budgetary stringency alone if we want traditional farming to survive throughout Europe !
Mr President , I am tempted , having sat here for two-and-a-half hours to do my monetary speech again , that is , money does not grow on trees .
But since I have done it once I will not repeat it .
Seven years ago I was in the Parliament in Papua New Guinea having a far better time than I am here .
During the debate which was being conducted in pidgin English , one of the speakers who was talking about a great mess that the Government of Papua New Guinea had got themselves in used a beautiful word .
He said : ' You have made one big bugger-up ' .
That word ' bugger-up ' encompassed so much .
I am reminded of that word when I look at Mr Sturdy 's report which was actually going down the budgetary-neutral approach , doing everything OK and then the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development applied the principle of ' bugger-up ' and made a right bugger-up of Mr Sturdy 's report .
Commissioner , you , in effect , have said the same thing but in a more eloquent way .
What you have said , in fact , is that we really should ignore all the amendments and support the Sturdy report .
At least that way we would get a budgetary-neutral position .
One of our problems in this Parliament is that not many people will take notice of you , especially on that side of the House . That is where the monetary speech comes in .
The one thing they have to learn is that you cannot defy the laws of mathematics .
The money has to be found somewhere .
We do not conjure it out of mid-air .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for being here .
I support him in saying that the ECU 170m should be removed and so do a lot of my colleagues , as Mr Fantuzzi said .
You also said that Parliament has a responsibility in supporting the reduction of ECU 1.4b.
I agree with you .
Mr Fantuzzi made that point .
On this side of the House we are as one .
We try to live in the real world .
That is what we are trying to do with the amendments that have been put forward from our side .
If Parliament does not act responsibly , it will not be taken seriously .
That is the point that we have to remember time and time again when it comes to agricultural matters .
Mr President , the question about set-aside prompts me to mention two or three things .
First , the debate regarding the set-aside rate for the end of 1998 is still merely speculative , although farmers are supposed to know where they stand as soon as possible .
For example , France is calling for a zero set-aside rate .
The Commissioner talks about a maximum of 17.5 % .
From the German standpoint , I am bound to say that we cannot share these views .
Why ?
We must expect the cereal harvest to reach a similar level to that of 1996 , but there are already indications that the enormous increase in the use of cereal feeds last year is being reversed , while export projections are , as you know , anything but a reliable guide .
Whatever happens , then - and I particularly emphasize this for the benefit of members of the Socialist Group , though Mr Rehder has unfortunately left - we must adhere to the instrument of cyclical and , especially , voluntary set-aside .
Any reduction in voluntary set-aside , especially , would be impossible to explain to our farmers at home .
As you know , we can offset 85 % of any voluntary set-aside against overcultivation of the major crop .
That brings me to my second point .
In the autumn of 1995 , Commissioner , you told the Council of Agriculture Ministers that a national offsetting option for the basic land area would be in existence by as early as the end of 1996 . You then deferred your latest proposal on this problem until after the 1996 harvest , and it was the subject of proposed amendments by the Member States concerned , including Germany and France , which the Commission has not yet accepted .
I ask that you finally put into practice the political promises you made in autumn 1995 , and that you do so in time for the 1997 balance .
And a final word on your over-compensation , which I have mentioned before .
Create the same situation as for the oilseed subsidy , and then take all the money left over for improvements in livestock production .
Then you 'll find we 're on your side !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , Mr President of the Council , the current CAP is severely out of line with the different political , economic and social realities of the European Community and lacks integrity in its thinking .
It gives priority to financing all production which costs jobs , with one scandalous exception - the tiny tobacco-growing area .
It allocates 47 % of the whole Community budget to a highly privileged minority of 20 % of European farmers who receive approximately 80 % of all aid .
This encourages rampaging production which threatens the environment , the health and welfare of animals and public health .
The CAP is today a political aberration which needs to be radically changed .
All production aid should be stopped and transferred to holdings under specifically determined rules .
Such aid should be made conditional upon the use of production techniques which are compatible with environmental protection , the health and well-being of animals and public health .
It is essential in social terms to tailor production aid in inverse proportion to the size of the holding ; for the sake of cohesion allocation should be on a regional basis with amounts increasing as a function of the underdevelopment of the region ; there should also be an increase for each stable job existing within each holding and some practical application of the Community priority to combat unemployment .
A top quality rigorous campaign should be mounted and open to consumers to take part and take stock of matters financed by the EAGGF-Guarantee Section .
The implementation of this rigorous control should become a commercial emblem which is highly prized by the Community 's internal and external markets .
The report by Mr Funk takes the opposite line from what is wanted . Its sole objective is to increase the unfair aspects of the CAP and to channel further financial resources into production which is already swallowing up 45 % of all aid which is losing more jobs and leading to more desertification in the Community .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for their work , in spite of the criticism .
The collapse of the market and the collapse of consumer confidence due to BSE has caused a huge income drop for farmers .
In Ireland this drop is somewhere around 19 % with livestock farmers suffering even greater reductions in income .
In spite of what Mr Wynn has just said , this is a very human problem and one which needs to be addressed .
I fully acknowledge the work of Commissioner Fischler in softening the market blow and I thank him for the help he has provided .
I hope his support will continue until the industry recovers .
Turning briefly to the reports , the proposal from the Commission to allocate an extra ECU 1.4 billion to the beef sector is very welcome but I cannot accept the method of funding proposed , namely to reduce aid to cereal farmers by the same amount .
I reject this method of paying for BSE , a crisis which cereal farmers had nothing to do with and for which they should not be asked to pay .
I believe the necessary funding can be found elsewhere , perhaps from savings and some delay in payments .
I note what the Commissioner told us earlier .
I support the proposal that set-aside be fixed at 5 % for the 1998 harvest but without reducing payments for land taken out of production .
As rapporteur on an earlier set-aside report I asked that the rates be set each year in July at the latest to enable farmers to plan properly .
There is general agreement on this .
I am now asking the Council and the Commission to make an immediate decision at 5 % set-aside with the current level of area aid maintained .
Finally , an important element of this debate should be the future of EU production .
We need to start work on the longer term position of agriculture , vis-à-vis the present CAP reform end in 1999 and also the next WTO round .
We must explore the possibility of additional farm production to manufacture products separately for the growing world market without export refund or other cost to the EU budget .
I think this is worthwhile .
Mr President , I thank Mr Sturdy for his report .
I disagree with his basic proposal which is that because the Member States have to exercise strenuous restraint in budgetary matters , we in the European Union must do the same .
The Maastricht criteria is the business of the Member States .
It is not the business of the common agricultural policy .
The farmers of Europe and their incomes are our responsibility .
Over the years it was the Member States who over-borrowed .
It was they who over-spent and ignored their budgetary guidelines .
We did not .
We lived within our budgetary guidelines all through the years .
We not only did that , we stayed within the 75 % of growth that Mrs Thatcher insisted on .
We not only did that but we sent back money every year which we saved with good budgetary policy .
Mrs Thatcher would be proud of the way we have carried on and she would be particularly proud of Terry Wynn this evening if she recognized the way he is defending what she fought so long for in relation to the European Union budget .
This year , of the money which is available to us , we are sending back ECU 2.27 billion .
And this at a time when European farmers ' incomes are dropping .
Never mind the 20 % spoken about by the previous speaker , we are sending back ECU 2.27 billion which we could apply to the needs of the 80 % , the 5 million European farmers , whose income is only half the average industrial wage .
I agree with Mr Kofoed .
I accept that we ought not to increase prices indefinitely and we should relate it to area aid or the number of people on the land who protect the environment and maintain the rural fabric .
Therefore , I believe we have set out in the wrong direction and I so not support the basic proposal that because there is stringency at national level , it should be applied here .
, President-in-Office of the Council . ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to make a very brief comment because I have not been asked any more questions in this debate , but I should like to tell you that it has been a great pleasure for me to follow it .
I also think that , in July , the Council will be able to take advantage of this debate and I would like to tell Mr Fantuzzi that I have not only listened to what has been said by the rapporteurs and paid attention to their reports , but I have also followed tonight 's debate in the European Parliament in full .
If possible I should like to ask you , Mr President , and the European Parliament through you , to issue an opinion on the prices package .
I think that it is obviously necessary for the decision-making process in the Council for it to receive an opinion from the European Parliament because , without it , the Council cannot do its work and I think that it would be in the interest of farmers and farms throughout Europe for a decision to be taken at the end of June on next year 's prices package .
As for us , we shall do everything we can to conclude the prices package procedure , but without the opinion of your Parliament that will be impossible and therefore I am waiting for it with bated breath .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to begin by thanking the House for this debate .
I think the price package has been discussed in a very constructive spirit .
This is not the time or place to go into details , but there are a few general principles to which I should like to return .
The reason the price package actually exists is in order to define the appropriate production conditions for the next financial year , to the extent that those conditions are within the jurisdiction of the Council and Parliament .
So , by definition , it is asking too much of a price package that it should at the same time be a reform package .
But I have already promised you , and I stand by what I said , that the Commission will also be presenting appropriate reform packages and proposals to Parliament before the end of this year .
As you all know , the Commission 's services published analyses a few weeks ago clearly showing where , and to what extent , reform is needed .
In addition , the question of the budget and the question of reducing the arable crop premiums have played an important part in this discussion .
I admit that our proposals , in the form presented , may have overemphasized the budgetary argument on the basis of the budget situation at that time .
But we did call attention from the start to the fact that cases of over-compensation exist , and these cases have also been quantified in the interim .
In any case , the Commission has no need to apologize for its economical conduct of the budget , which indeed has been very much in line with Parliament 's wishes .
There is one thing I must say to you , Mr Funk : if , as you suggested , there is absolutely no willingness for something to happen , it cannot happen .
The body representing the farmers , the COPA , is now showing greater flexibility with regard to the future development of the compensatory payments .
Regarding the argument advanced by the hard-currency countries , our calculations have certainly shown that cases of over-compensation have occurred in hard-currency countries , too , not just in countries that have seen devaluations in recent years .
The proposals made in connection with modulation are , in some cases , very interesting and worthy of discussion , but in my opinion they should more properly be discussed in connection with plans for the reform of the sector .
Mr Fantuzzi , I freely acknowledge that your idea whereby the first step should be to equate the set-aside premiums with the standard cereal premiums does imply a degree of modulation .
On the other hand , though , I feel I should draw your attention to the fact - as has already been mentioned here - that we should take due account of the fact that any such measure should also be accompanied by precautions to safeguard , in particular , the future production of energy-generated crops .
As for Mr Goepel 's proposal regarding the striking of a balance , that is certainly something that can be discussed .
The critical point for me , though , is that we should actually get round to what the Regulation intended from the beginning : the adjustment of the compensatory payments to the existing economic conditions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Thursday .
Novel foods
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :


( B4-0175 / 97 ) by Mrs Breyer , Mr Lannoye and Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Green Group , on the implementation of Regulation ( EC ) 258 / 97 on novel foods ; - ( B4-0176 / 97 ) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the application of provisions on the labelling of products covered by Regulation 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients ; - ( B4-0177 / 97 ) by Mrs Schleicher , Mr Pimenta , Mr Liese and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the application of provisions on the labelling of products covered by Regulation 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients ; - ( B-0178 / 97 ) by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the application of provisions on the labelling of products covered by Regulation 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients ; - ( B-0179 / 97 ) by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the application of provisions on the labelling of products covered by Regulation 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients ; - ( B-0180 / 97 ) by Mr Weber , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the application of provisions on the labelling of products covered by Regulation 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients .


Mr President , we are once again meeting here to discuss the regulation on novel foods .
As almost everyone now knows , the novel foods regulation has failed .
It has created a confusing situation .
There are at least four different labelling practices in use for genetically altered foodstuffs and more are being planned .
The authorities in the Member States do not know how to deal with this regulation which has just entered into force .
The consumers are worried , they are uninformed .
Retailers , too , are calling for clear guidelines to ensure that they will not need to be ashamed of their customers .
Has the Commission ascertained whether the WTO has anything against the EU creating a new stricter packaging labelling practice than had been planned ?
Has the Commission received any reply from the WTO ?
I should also like to know whether the Commission 's cardinals have met yet to decide who is to be elected Pope .
What I mean is that the many Commissioners , as is well known , have made their own proposals as to who should really coordinate labelling practice and who should be elected ' Pope ' in the Commission on this matter .
How many more days will the Commission still need to appoint this Pope and does it intend to create any uniform labelling practice for these genetically altered foodstuffs ?
Mr President , it is of course a pleasure once again to be discussing novel foods with my fellow Members and with Commissioner Bangemann .
Mr Bangemann , we have had many opportunities to fence with each other in the past , and indeed we have assured each other , more or less indirectly , of our mutual esteem .
What I do find a little disappointing is that in the supplement on novel food and on novel food legislation I have the impression that you , all of a sudden , as the representative of the Commission , might be a bad loser .
One reason I find that disappointing is that I have made a mistake in my own judgement of human nature - I took you for a pragmatist , a stubborn one certainly but still a pragmatist .
The things I have heard the Commission say in the past , and my own experiences too , suggest to me just this : you , Mr Bangemann , know as well as I do , as a properly trained lawyer , that a Regulation must be implemented .
In the text of the Regulation adopted by the mediation committee - and nothing could be more democratic than that in the European Union nowadays - it says that it is possible for the Commission to issue implementing provisions .
It is also perfectly within its rights if it chooses not to .
But if it exercised that option , then its duty would be to ensure that this legislation is applied in the Union .
You can 't have this both ways .
Either the Member States do it for themselves , in which case the Commission issues an instruction , and says what it wants to some extent , or the Commission does it , and that is why I hope to hear you say this evening that the Commission is indeed working on implementing provisions .
In that case , though , just to be difficult , I shall ask you why you didn 't do that work back in early May , since the regulation came into force on 15 May , and I shall moan and groan a bit more and say you could have known , it 's nothing new after all .
But I shall be satisfied if I hear you say that you feel certain that , in the light of the conclusions of the mediation committee , consumers now have the right to receive comprehensive information on genetically modified foods when they differ from conventional foods , and not just in the accumulation of all the things they will find in the regulation , when nutritional value , nutritive characteristics and many other things are taken together .
That is not cumulative , otherwise it is an alternative , and the text of the law says that quite clearly .
I am also perfectly willing to have it checked by the Court of Justice .
Even though I , as a politician and a lawyer , certainly do not take the view that the Court of Justice should be making policy .
I should like to hear you say today , Mr Bangemann , that you are working on implementing provisions .
If you can 't tell me that , then I should like you to tell me how the Member States are supposed to label these foods clearly , and I should also like to hear - and I must admit that I still have a deep and unshaken confidence in your good intentions - that no labelling will be allowed that can mislead the consumer .
I am far from being the sort of person who declaims against genetic engineering - quite the reverse .
I believe that genetic engineering offers huge possibilities , but I also believe that if food is genetically modified it must not be labelled ' produced by modern biotechnological methods ' .
I know that there are some Member States that want that .
But I hope that you will support the European Parliament in preventing anything of the kind , and I confess that even this late in the day I should be glad to hear something to that effect from you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the PPE Group I would like to give the reasons for the questions we put .
The Novel Food Regulation has created legal certainty for consumers , retailers and manufacturers regarding the licensing , in particular , but also the labelling of novel food products , including genetically modified products .
That was and is a major achievement by all the European institutions .
But an EU regulation becomes directly applicable law in every Member State on the day on which it enters into force - 15 May , in this case .
Every regulation which becomes applicable from a certain date in 15 Member States of the European Union inevitably causes problems of interpretation and implementation in the early stages , especially with such a difficult subject as this .
Even if the implementation and application of a regulation , in particular , were to be handled uniformly in every Member State , we do see difficulties with practical application in a matter as complex as this .
I think those problems relate to three points : how , and especially in what wording , products are to be labelled ; which products are covered by the regulation ; and , finally , what happens to those maize and soya products that were approved even before this regulation came into force .
There is evident uncertainty here , caused by differences in interpretation , and so we regard it as urgently necessary for agreement to be reached at Community level on a uniform interpretation .
As I see it , these problems are certainly solvable , but the issues must be addressed in an objective discussion with the experts at European level , as a matter of urgency .
I say urgency because foods produced from approved genetically modified soya and maize are already to be found on supermarket shelves , but now , according to the provisions of the regulation on novel foods , they have to be labelled .
This of course makes it especially clear that a review of Directive 220 on labelling is more than overdue .
However , these problems cannot be solved in the manner favoured by certain Members of this House , who create the impression that media impact and the prevention of genetic engineering are more important to them than effective consumer protection .
A good example of what I mean is the questions put by Mrs Breyer and the Greens , because that group is saying that the whole regulation has got to be amended or even replaced .
This view is not only nonsensical but contrary to the wishes of the majority in the European Parliament .
The issue here is not scaremongering but resolving perfectly ordinary difficulties , and we hope our questions will encourage the Commission to do so .
Mr President , I should like to insist that we must be particularly circumspect concerning subjects such as new food products in Europe .
After swine fever and BSE , consumers want more than ever to be informed about what they are eating .
Although a regulation came into force on 15 May of this year , we absolutely do not know how this regulation is to be interpreted by the Member States in certain areas .
I should like to ask Mr Bangemann why the Commission did not adopt a directive in good time to deal with this problem so that there can be a uniform and clear regulation concerning labelling ?
How , Mr Bangemann , is the labelling of genetically modified food products currently regulated ?
Who takes responsibility for this labelling if the Commission has not issued a regulation on it ?
Is it up to manufacturers ?
In short , there is a great deal of uncertainty and we feel that the Commission has been very negligent over this and this has seriously affected consumer confidence and we now would like to know how the Commission intends to deal with this problem because it is becoming a very urgent one .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , we are naturally delighted at the entry into force , on 15 March last , of Regulation No 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients introducing new provisions covering appropriate labelling .
This is an important step forward in a sector which is not yet familiar to the consumer and is a source of great confusion and bewilderment .
This is precisely why there is a need for guidelines that are clearer and more transparent than the text of the regulation .
In fact it is unclear whether the regulation has retroactive effect .
Indeed , what is its actual field of application ?
For example , is labelling of genetically modified maize and soya , which were authorized entry to the Community market back in December , obligatory or not ?
And if it is , must the provisions of the regulation be respected or not ?
And how should countries which already have national standards in this sector act ?
How strictly should the rules be applied ?
Is it too much to ask for clear and precise guidelines on the implementation of this regulation , on its scope and on labelling ?
Have the different national standards , for example Italy 's , been taken into account ?
And finally , has there been any consideration of the confusion experienced by the majority of consumers who , for the most part , are still too ill-informed to be able to interpret the words on the labels about genetically modified organisms correctly and therefore harbour understandable and fundamental misgivings .
In conclusion , it seems appropriate to stress that , even if we are looking at a regulation which is the fruit of a compromise between the conflicting interests of Member States , organizations and interest groups , and corrects the total lack of control in the sector , this does not mean we should be content with incomplete and unsatisfactory provisions , which lend themselves to various interpretations and may actually be generating bewilderment and confusion .
Mr President , before I deal with the individual comments that have been made I should first like to make a general observation that may clear up a few misapprehensions .
We have all accepted the result of the conciliation procedure , except for Mrs Breyer and a few others who pointed out at the time that it was not enough to provide the consumer with appropriate information .
So no one here - not Mrs Roth-Berendt nor Mrs Schleicher and especially not Mr Eisma , who as far as I know did not participate in the debate , in which the Liberal Group did not particularly distinguish itself - should now suddenly hold the Commission responsible for something which you brought about yourselves in the course of the conciliation procedure with the Council .
Mr Eisma , I object to the way you are now simply turning the tables and saying that the Commission failed to do such and such .
This legislation dates from May this year .
It is true that the discussion produced what is somewhat pompously referred to as a paradigm shift , and indeed I called attention to it at the time , a shift away from the traditional principles of labelling , for which I argued at the time .
If a change takes place which is significant to the consumer , then labelling is necessary .
If a change takes place which is not significant then labelling is not obligatory , and in my view that change should not be shown on the label , because if we label absolutely everything the consumer is in the position of the emperor with the new clothes , confronted by a whole mass of labels that amount to absolutely nothing .
And that , Mrs RothBerendt , is the basis of the achievement you were so proud of .
You were proud of it , Mrs Breyer was not .
Nor was I. You said at the time - I can still produce the Minutes - this resolution is a slap in the face for Mr Bangemann .
And now you 're trying to make me responsible for it .
I am more inclined to agree with Mrs Breyer - if any breast-beating is called for , you do it !
No , I want to start by getting this clear , so that the dividing lines are not blurred and so that the wrong impression is not created that the Commission is responsible for something which you , at the time , celebrated as a great victory for Parliament .
I can still remember your appearance on German television !
( Heckling ) My dear madam , if Mr Eisma and Mrs Roth-Berendt and other speakers behave as if the Commission were responsible for everything under the sun , then you are going to have to accept - it 's called democracy - the fact that a Commissioner who has been involved in these discussions and suffered these discussions from the start is allowed to say what actually happened at the time .
Anyone here who wants to debate honestly and frankly must admit , ' I accepted the result of the debate at the time . '
It essentially corresponded to the principles , because it was in fact based on three substantive criteria .
I never said , Mrs Roth-Berendt , that they all had to be present at the same time !
The Commission never said that .
I don 't know where you got that idea .
If the composition of a food changes , if the nutritional value changes or if its intended use changes - and if one of those things happens in an individual case , which we have never contested and never viewed differently - then it has to be labelled .
That is the first point , and that is crystal clear .
But these three criteria mean , Mrs Schleicher , that there is an objective basis : whenever a change is significant to the consumer then the product must be labelled .
Well , Mrs Roth-Berendt - and this is the background to this whole debate - a completely different debate on soya and maize has been launched , not just in Parliament but also within the Commission , on the question , irrespective of the three substantive criteria : Is labelling not generally necessary .
No , don 't shake your head at me !
There are many people in this House - as is apparent from the questions - saying , for example , we want labelling for maize or for soya or for some other food that is not even covered by the Regulation ; because , after all , the regulation applies only to foods which are sold to the end consumer , which maize and soya meal generally are not .
But if you now insist that these things have to be labelled , irrespective of whether one of the three criteria has been met , then it is absolutely clear to me that you are abandoning the principles which we all defended at the time by saying that , never mind what the effect is , we must say on the label if a particular technology has been used , even if the effects disappear completely somewhere along the chain .
Everyone knows that genetically produced soya beans or maize , when they are processed , do not have the effects described in the Novel Food Regulation , and need not have those effects , so from that point of view this is a paradigm shift .
Now , I am perfectly happy about this - I said so before , I am democratic here - and if Parliament and the Commission adopt that by a majority then of course it will be done .
I will be in a minority of one , and bow to the majority .
But I am going to take the liberty of saying again , this evening , that I regard it as fateful for the consumer .
Because virtually anything and everything is going to labelled , and ultimately that means that labelling will become totally meaningless to the consumer .
Again , I think Mrs Breyer is right - we can all pat each other on the back , but the consumer derives no benefit whatever .
So that is the situation .
The Commission is working on it .
We have set up a group of Commissioners to review this fundamental change .
I am against it .
I think the three criteria are absolutely essential - or , in more general terms , that the principle of a substantive change affecting the consumer is essential .
I am not acting as a spokesman for the industry , because the industry favours the same thing as you .
I do not !
I believe the consumer will derive more benefit if he is given relevant , clear information about things that are significant to him .
But if the majority wants it and if it helps us to ascertain the truth , then we 'll do it , which in practical terms would mean that we would have to amend the Novel Food Regulation because it would no longer make any sense .
The idea of having stricter rules for the labelling of animal feeds - granted for the sake of argument that maize and soya beans are feeds - than for novel foods is something that would be beyond me to explain .
Because , for heaven 's sake , in that case we will change novel food itself , drop the three substantive criteria , and whenever a genetically modified constituent turns up somewhere in the chain we put a label on !
That is the real problem .
Mrs Roth-Berendt was kind enough to say that I stand up for my views in issues like these , and that is what I am doing now .
If a majority of you want to change it , then , as I said , there is nothing I can do to stop you , nor would I want to .
I just want to make sure you understand what the result will be , and that result is not good for the consumer .
Now let me deal with the individual questions , and I shall be very brief .
The Regulation has been in force since May .
We defined the exceptions from the scope of this directive very clearly in Article 2 , so that no guidelines are needed on that .
The same applies to Article 1 , even though under Article 1 ( 3 ) there are a good many questions that need to be cleared up in the committee procedure , but after all that was why we set up that procedure - we did not want to introduce guidelines to do something that should be done by the committees .
As far as Article 8 is concerned , we are going to have to review the situation as I said earlier , in other words reconsider the form this fundamental decision is to take .
But irrespective of that decision by the Commission , and later by Parliament , the absence of guidelines does not imply carte blanche for the Member States ; they can 't just interpret the provisions as they see fit .
In any decision on approval , the provisions of Article 8 are applied to the specific case and the labelling arrangements and forms are defined .
So there is no scope for unilateral action by Member States , or of course for the individual .
He does have a certain freedom of choice , but ultimately we shall make the appropriate decision .
We also want an ad hoc measure covering soya and maize products .
As I said before , this will have consequences of its own , because in principle it has nothing to do with the applicability of the Regulation on food and food additives .
So a certain amount of logic would have to be applied in that case .
Those , essentially , were the questions asked in this House .
We are quite willing to continue debating with Parliament on what we are doing .
But , Mr Eisma , there is one thing I would like to make completely clear : I am not going to take the kind of charges you made this evening lying down !
Like Mrs Roth-Berendt and many others involved in the conciliation , I was of the opinion that the result was an acceptable one .
It did not violate our principles .
It introduced changes in matters of detail .
Mrs Roth-Berendt was very pleased and proud of that .
Parliament celebrated it as a major victory over the Commission .
And now everything is being turned back to front and you are holding us responsible for that result , and even this late in the evening I must say that I am not particularly pleased about it !
Mr President , Mr Bangemann has explained to us at great length why things that should have happened long ago have still not happened .
Today , Mr Bangemann , we are discussing implementing provisions for the Novel Food Regulation and , if I may quote from the Green Paper for Food Law , Regulations are always to be used to increase the transparency of Community law and facilitate the application of its provisions within the single market so that implementing regulations by individual states are unnecessary .
What that means is that there must be implementing regulations at Community level , so that every Member State , when approving products , must do precisely what the other Member States are also required to do .
If we want a single market , then we need to construct that single market very carefully for products which are viewed by consumers with some mistrust as something new , something strange , we can 't just say , ' We 've had the legislation since 15 May and it 's only 15 June now so there 's still plenty of time . '
Mr Bangemann , you have had plenty of time for your services to prepare this , and I should think that the DG III administration would probably also be capable of it .
Mr Bangemann , basically , I cannot fully understand what you are saying .
There are things I do understand , but in April 1997 you wrote in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung that ' labelling contributes absolutely nothing ' , and that of course rouses our curiosity .
We believe that labelling definitely does contribute something .
It contributes something to the consumer and it contributes something to the industry , and that is the opportunity we want to take .
After the grim experiences of BSE , we should take the opportunity offered by the Novel Food Regulation and put it to good use .
I think it has become clear here tonight that we are talking not about the content of the directive but about what we have made of that content .
You say that it only came into force in May , and in legal terms that is correct .
I am no lawyer , as you know , but you knew as long ago as January that this business was coming and what form it took .
We would have liked to see you making some effort to make it clear to the 15 Member States of this Union in which direction they were supposed to be heading .
All right , there can be no definitive documents for us to examine at that stage , even we understand that , but I think we really should consider it beneath us to grind out the kind of superficial campaign of accusation we have heard on this occasion from the Greens , who can be unimaginative themselves sometimes .
I believe in all seriousness , Mr Bangemann , that the Novel Food Regulation is a good first move in this new direction .
So buckle down to it , and then we can tell the Member States where things are heading !
Mr President , I believe Mr Bangemann has been honest with us this evening , and we should be honest too .
The Novel Food Regulation was indeed a joint creation of Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
I pointed out the absence of any implementing provisions , not only in January but also in the conciliation committee .
Among those Honourable Members here who are now complaining about it , everything was crystal clear at the time , the Novel Food Regulation was the best of all possible regulations and it covered everything .
Well , I want to look not backwards but forwards .
I am grateful to Mr Bangemann for the fact that , despite the wording of Article 8 , where it does say that the Commission may issue rules for implementation - Parliament didn 't want it to say that the Commission must issue rules for implementation - he has nevertheless declared his willingness to arrange implementing provisions on labelling .
I believe those are important , because there is criticism here not just from environmental groups and consumer associations but even from the industry itself .
What we need now , therefore , is a form of words to label those products which are covered by the regulation .
I would once again strongly urge the choice of the wording ' produced using gene technology ' , because ' modern biotechnology optimized by food physiologists ' would mislead consumers and offer them little in the way of clear information .
Also , we would lay ourselves open to the charge that the Novel Food Regulation is a labelling swindle .
If the industry uses the method , then the industry should also have the courage to say so on the label , so that eventually genetic engineering becomes a hallmark of quality in the food industry context .
Which brings me to the subject of the ' quality mark ' .
The positive aspect of the Novel Food Regulation is that we make provision , in Recital 10 , for positive labelling .
Mr Bangemann , particularly in view of the fact that the industry is planning to declare everything not covered by the Novel Food Regulation as being free of genetic engineering , I would have liked to hear from you whether you are prepared to do as we did with organic farming , and now with animal products too , and to work out criteria to enable us to have positive labelling .
Because one thing has to be clear : we must not shake consumer confidence .
What we should be doing , at last , is ensuring clarity .
Mr President , I want to put a scenario to Commissioner Bangemann .
If a consumer in a Member State suffers as a result of inadequate labelling , in normal circumstances when the law is clear , that consumer may well have a remedy under the Francovitch judgement against the Member State concerned for its failure to implement European law .
The Commissioner knows that and I know that .
This new law , as we have all regarded it , has received widespread publicity .
Most European Union citizens who take an interest in this matter will have assumed that there is a new law providing protection from 15 May .
Surely a Member State Government in circumstances such as now arise can say to any disgruntled consumer in a court case : ' But we do not know what the position is .
The Commission has failed to inform us ' .
So there is a responsibility on the Commission .
The Commissioner dealt well with the argument this evening in terms of Parliament 's responsibility and , as a member of the conciliation team , I take part of that burden of responsibility .
But I would point out to the Commissioner that there are three readings under co-decision .
The Commission is involved in the proposal when it first comes to us .
It is involved in the second reading .
It is only when we are not able to agree with the Commission that we move on to conciliation .
Therefore , there is a responsibility on the Commission now , as there was at the beginning of this legislation , to ensure there is adequate protection for consumers .
In my submission , and that of most of the people in this Chamber , that has still to be provided .
Mr White , this regulation came into force on 15 May .
Today is 10 June , so less than a month has passed .
We have not had a single case so far , and as far as labelling is concerned we laid down detailed labelling requirements in the regulation that apply immediately and mandatorily in the Member States .
Because that , Mr Florenz , is the purpose of a regulation .
You referred to a directive .
But this is a regulation , which applies immediately in the Member States , and if there are any disputes as to whether the labelling is correct the Food Committee can decide - that is stated in the regulation .
Apart from that , as I have already said , we are currently reconsidering matters in general - yourselves and the Commission , jointly .
Once we have arrived at a result the Commission will , obviously , present the new ideas to you , and perhaps you will then say : ' We are going to abandon the criteria of the Novel Food Regulation , because we want to say on the label whenever genetic engineering is involved , even if it does subsequently vanish somewhere along the food chain , because that is the existing situation with soya and maize . '
But that goes without saying !
The requirement is that anyone who uses those two substances in the processing chain should indicate that they have been genetically modified , irrespective of whether or not the three criteria apply .
Mrs Schleicher , the reason I have been so involved in this issue of the Novel Food Regulation is that I believe that we shall be doing the consumer a disservice if we abandon these labelling principles .
But if that is what you want , then we must at least be logical .
It is out of the question to apply stricter labelling rules for soya and maize than we do for a novel food which is going direct to the end consumer , and that is why we are going to have to reconsider this matter .
You know me . If I make a mistake , I accept it .
Anyone can make an occasional mistake , but when you come to me after three weeks have passed without a single case arising and say , as Mr Eisma says , that I have forgotten it all and I have failed to meet my obligations , I am not going to stand for that !
Especially not when I have had to listen to Mrs Roth-Berendt saying on a news broadcast , ' Well , Commissioner Bangemann has had his ears boxed . '
OK , if that was what happened , maybe you should be wondering whether you might not have boxed your own ears .
Because that is the real problem !
The joint debate is closed .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Thursday .
The sitting closed at 00.20 a.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , yesterday , in one of his rare speeches , Mr Tomlinson referred to the sovereignty of the House in coming to decisions .
Early this year , when voting on the transit inquiry report , the House decided that the follow-up should go to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In yesterday 's Minutes , apparently , we approved a report on telematics in transport - which is all part of the transit system - going to the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
However in a document circulated by Distribution yesterday called ' Activities ' , it says that the Commission 's action plan for the new transit in Europe customs policy should go to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Is the House sovereign or not ?
We will check it and take the necessary measures .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor on a point of personal explanation .
Last Monday , when the session opened , Mr Ford spoke on a very serious matter , the fact that , since the last session here in Strasbourg , someone had torn down a poster he had put up on his office door commemorating the resistance of the German people against Hitler .
But Mr Ford then made comments which I consider decidedly unfortunate and out of place : he said he was not surprised that such acts of political vandalism could occur in this Parliament since it includes people like Roberta Angelilli , that is myself , whom he blames for alleged neo-Nazi activities , organizations and initiatives in Italy .
Frankly I have no idea what inspired those accusations , insinuations and associations of ideas .
Perhaps Mr Ford , a leading light of this Parliament , is actually prepared to use the methods of the basest and most defamatory political demagoguery , born of the worst intolerance , to gain more applause from the House .
Well , I just want to say one thing : at least in Italy , making unfounded insinuations is in fact a criminal act , and it is called defamation .
I therefore invite Mr Ford to inform himself better before making unfounded insinuations , and in any case I invite the President , or whoever is responsible , to investigate the incident fully .
Personally I intend to take some kind of action , possibly even legal action , to shed light on this event .
Mrs Angelilli , I must point out a couple of things to you .
First of all , you must reply to any personal remarks or comments immediately following the remarks or on the same day .
Secondly , all Members are free to speak in plenary session and neither the President nor any other authority can stop them .
That , as you know , is what is meant by parliamentary immunity for words used within the Chamber .
Nobody can censure another Member nor can they take legal action either in Italy or any other country over something said in this Chamber .
That is why , if someone says something that is erroneous you must reply at once , in order to clear up a misunderstanding or put the facts right , as you are trying to do today .
Mr Ford , you have the floor .
However , this is not the time to continue a debate on this .
But you referred to Mr Ford .
Please could I ask you to be brief as we have far more important issues on the agenda .
Mr President , Mrs Angelilli made comments on what I said on Monday .
It was on the basis of a press report in the United Kingdom .
I will provide her with a copy of the press report on what she was alleged to have done .
Obviously I expect her to take legal action and , if she does not , one can only draw the appropriate conclusions .
Mr President , I should also like to speak on a personal remark .
I was not there on Monday but I cannot allow Mr Ford to get away with what he said .
He is always provocative and he once again confused issues and scandalously accused me of racism .
I should like to tell Mr Ford that I know France and the racism that my assistant has been victim of .
Mr Stéphane Durbeck , my assistant , is a black West Indian and he has been beaten up and called a ' genetic freak ' , just because he does me the honour of accompanying me in all my activities .
The Vietnamese godchildren whom I am bringing up have been attacked and hurt just because they are my godchildren , and I treat them like my other children .
I have also helped out some three thousand Lebanese orphans over the years and they too have been attacked and the victims of vendettas , just because they are Christians .
If there is any racism here , it is Mr Ford 's , whose thought-masters have murdered 200 million people in the world , because they were peasants , middle class or Christians .
We are not impressed by Mr Ford 's Stalinist accusations !
Mr Ford , you are a provocateur !
( Mixed reactions )
Mr Antony , please allow me to remind you of the rules on personal matters .
Speakers can only express their views on the basis of the debate .
They may only refute remarks made during the debate concerning them personally , e.g. opinions attributed to them and / or rectify their , own declarations .
You rectified the remarks concerning you , but it is not the time to open a debate that has nothing to do with them , or to start attacking someone else .
I can no longer accept speeches like that .
( The Minutes were adopted )
Thank you Mrs Green , you are quite right because people have worked very hard all night and again from 8 o 'clock this morning to make the vote possible .
I think everyone will be understanding about any possible errors and I ask for everyone 's cooperation so that we can have a smooth vote on this crucial issue .
We understand that it is absolutely exceptional , we cannot do this every session .
This is just for one occasion and only one occasion .
Preparation for the European Council of 16 / 17 June 1997
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparatory work for the meeting of the European Council on 16 / 17 June 1997 in Amsterdam , including the Commission 's action plan for the internal market .
You have the floor , Mr Mierlo , President-in-Office of the Council .
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr Santer , President of the European Commission , you have the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in less than a week 's time , the Amsterdam European Council will have to overcome the final obstacles to the reform of the treaty .
We shall then see whether the IGC has met its triple challenge : to narrow the gap between the European project and the citizens , find the resources to exist in the international arena and review the institutions in order to bring about enlargement in good conditions .
Four successive presidencies have worked on this project in turn .
The time has come to conclude .
Further waiting at best would change nothing and at worst would lead to a move backwards .
The current text drafted by the Dutch Presidency is a point of balance and , I hope , a meeting-point too .
I would have preferred more boldness here and there but I do gauge the difficulty of marrying ambition and realism and I think that the Dutch Presidency team has largely succeeded in meeting the challenge .
If I remain concerned today , it is because there are too many attempts to undo , at the last minute , such patiently completed work .
I would like to tell all of those who , concerned at the gap between politics and ordinary people , are tempted to take a thousand precautions : ' Be daring ! Because in Europe there are more people dissatisfied with our slowness than hostile to our progress towards integration ' .
I also call on the heads of State and Government to resist the temptation to take advantage of the final home sprint to settle , through protocols and various amendments , problems that are ill-suited to constitutional improvisations .
I would rather expect them to take advantage of the final negotiations to constitute a coherent and ambitious institutional package .
It is on that score that the shape of a final solution is still vague , even though a good outcome is vital .
I repeat what I have often said : an ill-prepared enlargement would turn into a nightmare what I think in reality is a historic chance for Europe .
Mr President , a few remarks about the key points of the negotiation and the ' Union for citizens ' .
The new treaty offers the chance to create a genuine area of freedom , security and justice .
In this area , the accomplished work is remarkable and the text of this Presidency ambitious .
The citizens expect no less , tired at seeing how the current system is deficient and that no convention - yes , no convention - has come into effect .
We can only welcome the broad communitarization envisaged for the third pillar .
After a three-year transitional period , we should now switch to qualified majority voting and the Commission 's exclusive right of initiative .
But we should go to the conclusion of Community logic , i.e. introduce the codecision procedure .
( Applause ) As for criminal and police cooperation , it is legitimate at this stage to stay at intergovernmental level , provided that the effectiveness and democratic nature of that cooperation is increased .
Integration into the treaty of the Schengen ' acquis ' is a good thing .
The share-out between the pillars must be clear if the Union 's action is to be as coherent as possible in areas linked to the free movement of persons .
Certain Member States have specific difficulties over this , I recognize .
Let us find specific solutions for them , but not at the cost of blocking real progress as a whole .
It is now a fact that the treaty will include a chapter on employment .
Of course , it cannot be expected that this measure would directly reduce unemployment - I shall come back to the broader problem of employment later - but this chapter is vital for at least two reasons .
Firstly , because it shows that the endemic nature of unemployment has brought some of the concerns to the heart of the European project , along with the hopes of Europeans .
Secondly , because the provisions included in that chapter are useful ones .
Once our States have set as an aim a broad convergence of their economic policies , they also need a coherent and coordinated employment strategy .
For that we must set up consultative arrangements and the possibility to take incentive measures .
That is what the Dutch Presidency 's draft text proposes .
Integration of the social protocol into the treaty will make it possible to restore unity and coherence to social policy .
But we must seize the opportunity offered to us to improve it and strengthen its provisions , or we shall run the risk of replacing an already difficult action for fourteen countries with an impossible one for fifteen .
We must also strengthen consumer health production to allay people 's concerns .
Unlike 1992 , nobody now contests the Commission 's proposals .
They will rightly make it possible to involve the European Parliament fully in the adoption of measures aimed at by Article 129 , extended to the veterinary and plant health areas .
( Applause ) We , i.e. the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission must then show that we can act in the interest of consumers , on the basis of the arrangements we have had made available .
Mr President , the second main aim of the IGC can be summed up in five words : existing in the international arena .
There is a time to regret our collective powerlessness , but there is also a time to react and I should like Amsterdam to be the opportunity for a quantum leap in political will .
First of all concerning CFSP proper .
The arrangements proposed by the Presidency are an important step forward .
They provide for qualified majority voting for implementing strategic decisions taken at European Council level .
The restrictive possibility of referring to national interest ( in exceptional cases ) - I prefer to speak of security interests , as it happens - is a price to pay for this advance .
The new troika , comprising the Presidency , the Commission and the Secretary General of CFSP , is a promising tool in that it brings together all aspects of external policy and combines periodic renewal with continuity .
In my view , it should play a coordinating rule and act as an agent of coherence throughout the process , by relying on the analysis cell .
I also welcome the agreement on the funding of CFSP .
But apart from the instruments , we must also have genuine political will and use it effectively to develop a common policy .
One final word on CFSP , ladies and gentlemen , I do not see how Europe can claim to become a major actor without a military role .
That means that it should set a deadline for integrating the WEU into the European Union , as six of the Member States have proposed in a joint position .
( Applause ) In modern life , the economic , financial and monetary factors are playing a growing role in external relations .
It is clear that the arrival of the euro will change the situation and lead to a new balance of international financial and monetary relations .
Commercially speaking , the Commission is asking for the adaptation of the treaty to current realities .
It is a simple position of common sense , common sense that sometimes disappears in the diplomatic jousting and bureaucratic reactions .
I say this clearly : refusing to make progress on services and intellectual property , the defence of the Union 's interests , the Member States and companies run an acute risk of going backwards .
( Applause ) Everyone must take their responsibilities .
The text proposed by the Dutch Presidency is a progress , since it provides for an extension , albeit limited , of Article 113 to services .
But there are delegations which want to water it down or add to it , even in other articles , supplementary conditions , at the risk of emptying this progress of all substance , even ending up in a step backwards compared with the current situation .
I shall oppose that .
I now come to the institutional questions , which are vital as they condition not only the support of Europeans but also the future of the Union itself , just before its enlargement .
The Presidency 's text provides , as the Commission has always demanded , for a strengthening of the European Parliament 's role as co-legislator .
It is a sign of confidence that corresponds to the development of your institution .
Only the European Parliament can ensure the democratic controls that the European Union needs at the stage of development that it has reached .
We only need to recall the recommendations of the Karlsruhe Constitutional Court to realize that and the Presidency 's approach is a real progress since it aims to cover most areas of a mostly legislative character .
Furthermore , simplification of the codecision procedure , and the abolition of third reading , will put the two legislative branches on an equal footing .
We should resist any last minute attempts to reverse that decision .
( Applause ) In that context , I think that the time has also come to define an electoral system that brings representatives closer to the voters and a European parliamentarian status .
I think that this is a vital factor for strengthening the legitimacy of the Community institutional system .
( Applause ) As for the functioning of the Council , the vital point is that of extending voting by qualified majority .
The Presidency has dealt with this question with the necessary openness , which means inroads into the second and current thirds pillars and a consolidation in Community areas .
A further effort could be made to foresee adoption of qualified majority voting on social provisions and some measures in taxation areas , but it has to be said that the Member States ' attitudes leave little room for hope over that .
It is a shame , because unanimity in a European Union of more than fifteen Member States will only lead to hold-ups and even paralysis .
As for the reweighting of votes , the Commission is open to alternative proposals by the Presidency , provided that the final solution does not make decision-taking more difficult and that it opens the way to more qualified majority voting .
I finally come to the membership of the Commission .
The solution that will be found will probably be not that far removed from the one we proposed for preparing our institution for enlargement .
The appointed President will have to be approved by the European Parliament .
His or her role will be strengthened , I hope , especially over the appointment of the other Commissioners .
As for the number , that has not yet been decided , I think .
The Commission continues to believe that a maximum number of Commissioners should be set .
As far as we are concerned , we are going to do what we announced for internal reforms and that includes the regrouping of tasks .
Mr President , allow me to conclude on the IGC .
I told you at the outset that the draft treaty that we are debating today meets , on many points , the expectations set out by the Commission in its opinion of February 1996 .
Everyone will judge the final outcome by his or her own yardstick .
It is the fruit of a lengthy labour .
If we can improve it , let us do so , but let us not call into question the level of the project by making last-minute demands that would change the balance already struck .
It is not easy to achieve a quality treaty with fifteen Member States .
It will be even harder after enlargement .
Mr President , if there is a question that concerns all European , it is that of employment .
The people of Europe expect the Union to offer answers to their main concern .
The inclusion of an ' employment chapter ' in the new treaty will help .
But this is urgent .
Why not anticipate the implementation of this arrangement ?
It is not tomorrow that we should learn from each other or work out a coordinated strategy on jobs .
It is today .
It is today that we must translate the best practices into recommendations .
In less than a year , we shall be taking the decision on the entry into the third stage of EMU .
The setting up of a stable macro-economic framework has progressed a lot in recent times .
Inflation and interest rates are at very low levels , and public deficits have considerably shrunk .
At the Amsterdam summit , we shall have to complete the final preparations for the euro , the new exchange rate mechanism , the euro 's legal status and the stability and growth pact .
The latter is important for guaranteeing sustainable growth .
That growth must still be rich in jobs .
I welcome the fact that the ECOFIN Council , the day before yesterday , recognized the need for EMU to walk on two legs , monetary and economic .
If the monetary aspect is clearly defined , we still need to make an effort to use all the potential of the procedures provided for in Article 103 of the Treaty and aimed at coordinating economic policies .
An ambitious monetary policy only makes sense if it goes hand in hand with a policy for higher employment that everyone can understand .
( Applause ) I should once again like to emphasize that the stability pact , as its new name implies , is also a growth pact , therefore a job-creating pact .
All the Member States wanted that .
Without calling into question the stability pact 's substance and arrangements , it is therefore perfectly possible to highlight employment still further and thereby overcome a concern expressed by one Member State at the latest ECOFIN Council .
That concern is and always has been ours .
I therefore very much hope that the contacts under way will make it possible to reach full success at Amsterdam , including an agreement on the stability and growth pact .
I also hope that the European Council will send a strong signal on the completion of the internal market by the end of the century .
The potential of the internal market for competitiveness , growth and employment , is huge .
The action plan proposed by the Commission defines four main areas for maximizing that potential : strengthening the effectiveness of the rules , ending distortions to competition or fiscal distortions , ending sectoral obstacles and putting the single market to the service of all citizens .
Practical commitments will have to be made and clear deadlines set .
Reforming and modernizing labour markets is the third axis of a coherent and integrated strategy for jobs .
The role of the social partners is especially important here .
I therefore welcome the agreement signed at the end of the last social dialogue summit , last Friday in The Hague , on part-time work .
This is an encouraging sign that shows that flexibility and the defence of workers ' legitimate aspirations are far from being mutually exclusive .
The very positive reaction of the Member States , all the Member States , to the idea of territorial pacts for jobs is another reason for satisfaction .
A new form of partnership is being forged on the ground and will be turned into a practicality by the launch of some 90 pacts , which will be hotbeds for job creation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Amsterdam European Council will mark the future of the European Union .
It will , I hope , be a historic meeting and proof of the desire of the fifteen Member States to advance towards unification , while respecting their different identities .
A good agreement on the IGC will give Europe a new boost and enable it to meet the EMU deadlines and handle enlargement in good conditions .
Let us not miss the opportunity .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Santer .
You have the floor , Mrs Green .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the President-in-Office and the President of the Commission for their frank contributions here this morning .
We have been in this process now for over two years and when we began , for my group the essence of it was that we should try and do our best in this Treaty process to reconnect the European Union with its citizens and , secondly , that we should prepare the Union for enlargement .
Those were the two fundamental prerequisites of this round of the Intergovernmental Conference .
My group believes that the Treaty changes had to be based on four concepts : openness , democracy , clarity and effectiveness , and those were the goals which we believe we have set ourselves for this Treaty round .
Many of my colleagues will report in detail on some of the issues Mr Van Mierlo and Mr Santer raised .
I want , and was mandated by my group , to give a short political message within days of the Amsterdam Summit so that my group 's position is absolutely clear .
I delivered this message with great clarity to the congress of my political party , the Party of European Socialists , last week meeting in Malmö and , in particular , to the nine prime ministers within the Council who are from our political family and who were all present in Malmö .
The message is that we recognize all the intricacies of the Treaty , but now in a few days ' time there are three major areas where my group feels we will be looking to see that more progress should be made . In saying that , we recognize and have been quite clear about the progress that has been made in the Treaty .
We are not overly cynical and we see that some changes have been made that are positive and respond to our demands .
But we want more and we will be looking to see how much more can even be gained in the final few hours of Amsterdam .
Our three priorities are as follows : firstly , we want to see the strengthening of the draft employment title in the Treaty on European Union .
It is not good enough and is just pious rhetoric .
It must encompass the coordination of economic and employment policies .
Secondly , we want to see included in the Treaty fundamental social rights and the strengthening of the social chapter , not just the incorporation of social policy into the Treaty .
Thirdly , we believe the enhancement of democracy in Europe is crucial and we are looking at the extension of QMV and codecision across the legislative field in the first pillar .
Mr Van Mierlo mentioned the anti-discrimination clause .
We welcome that but it is not good enough that it is based on unanimity .
It must be based on qualified majority voting and co-decision with this House .
Finally , we made clear in our group that what we want to see is that those issues to be transferred , as we hope they will be , from the third to the first pillar must also be subject to QMV and co-decision as Mr Santer has already made clear for the Commission .
It cannot be that those issues are transferred without proper parliamentary scrutiny .
Only progress in those areas will make sure that the Union is ready to enlarge and will have something serious to say to its people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , both of you have offered us a serious and remarkable introduction and I should like to thank you sincerely for that as well as for the work that has been completed .
The intergovernmental conference has been working for more than 18 months now .
The European Single Act needed only five months of preparation and the Maastricht Treaty one year .
We have always adopted a positive attitude .
You mentioned , Minister , the troubled circumstances and we are not hiding our heads in the sand for we will have to deal in Amsterdam with a political problem which I shall be tackling as a priority , despite the meeting of six heads of government from the European Popular Party , which took place yesterday in Strasbourg .
The French government is insisting that we set up an assessment period for the stability pact and is calling into question the time allowed after the signature in Amsterdam .
What is our position ?
' Pacta sunt servanda ' , the Dublin commitment to the stability pact must be stuck to .
We cannot accept any changes to this Pact which is also a pact for economic growth .
Furthermore , the criteria and the deadline set in the framework of monetary union must be applied as they were agreed upon and we want the Amsterdam IGC to be a success .
We are nonetheless of the opinion that the stability pact must be complemented .
Yesterday , Mr Lamfalussy described the fundamental revolution carried out by monetary union in Europe .
The reduction in inflation below the 2 % level , reduction in budgetary deficits .
This is an essential base , especially for creating jobs and for economic prosperity , but we have lost ten years .
I might perhaps add that , when I was President-in-Office of the European Council in 1987 I tried , in conjunction with Jacques Delors , to create a common social base and to establish dialogue between the social partners in Europe and conclude collective bargaining agreements at European level .
We did not succeed .
We have wasted ten years and at the Maastricht Summit we failed to integrate the social chapter into the Treaty , something which will now take place .
Now we must reinforce it . We all agree on this .
But it is also of vital importance that employment should become an objective of the European Community . We therefore approve the Dutch proposal to include a six-point title - the number is irrelevant - on cooperation between the Member States , which it encouraged , supported and possibly complemented .
The Dutch Presidency has pointed out that the setting up of an employment committee has been accepted and that is something we welcome .
We also still bank on the implementation of Jacques Santer 's confidence-building pact .
According to us the stability pact cannot be withdrawn but it should be strengthened .
It must be complemented and Jacques Delors recently emphasized that Article 103 of the Treaty authorizes this .
We would therefore insist on this point and we hope that , in these circumstances , the stability pact will be signed in Amsterdam just as the PPE heads of government decided to do yesterday .
That at least is our position .
I now come to the IGC .
The Dutch Presidency 's proposals make up a remarkable document in our view .
I would say that it is a valid minimum , Mr President-in-Office .
However , we cannot accept that , as we have been told , and as the European Commission 's President emphasized , the big countries should take various initiatives , including diplomatic ones , in order to undermine it .
This project represents for us a valid minimum provided that it is not reduced .
You have emphasized certain points : the communitarization of major elements of the third pillar with the Community pillar .
In our view , integration of the Schengen acquis into the Treaty and implementation of Europol are essential elements for an area of freedom , security and justice .
As far as the second pillar is concerned , we recommend integration of WEU as has been proposed by six Member States . We also support your attempt to introduce a system of majority decisions for this pillar , for common actions and positions and on the basis of a common strategy as you have stated .
The third main point : integration of an ' employment ' title into the treaty .
Fourth point : amending Article 113 of the Treaty , on services and intellectual property ; then the institutions .
I am fully behind what the President of the Commission has just said : I understand the enormous difficulties which you have to deal with but I also note a strong political will in that the head of the Dutch Presidency is determined not to allow the European Union to collapse but is set on seizing the challenge - historic challenge - of enlargement to 20 or even perhaps 25 members .
That is why it is so important for the institutions to be reformed .
Mr Van Mierlo , in order to have a good car you need a good garage .
How the garage is organized is of no interest to me but what is of interest to me is to know that it is a good garage , and that I will therefore have a good car which will be properly repaired , because at the moment it is jolting along .
That means , in our view , that majority decision taking in the Council and the codecision of the European Parliament in this area are capital .
We also feel that we should adopt a strengthening of majority cooperation rather than unanimity .
Dear colleagues , I shall end with these comments : we shall never approve - and we never have - of Mrs Thatcher 's intention which was to reduce Europe to a free trade area , mere intergovernmental cooperation .
For 12 years I opposed this with many others in the European Council .
We cannot tolerate the opportunist decision by the Swedish government which did not ask for opting out in the framework of the monetary union and which for opportunistic reasons , because the single currency is unpopular in Sweden , has decided not to take part in it .
This really is an opportunist decision which does not help us to progress .
I hope that the great statesmen , the late Mr Mitterrand , Mr Delors , as well as Mrs Guigou and all of the others alongside what we have defended for Europe for the last ten years , will enable it to pursue its course .
But they must also take advantage of their considerable influence in the French government to turn the Amsterdam Summit into a success and to achieve the signature of the stability pact , especially so that Europe can let the ordinary people have a say . So that it can become a social Europe with a human dimension .
I hope that , by reuniting our forces , we shall achieve that aim .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the next Amsterdam Summit will be the first of a series of meetings that will fashion the architecture of 21st century Europe .
We hope that it will be followed by the setting up , on the scheduled date , of economic and monetary union , enlargements to the south and the east , that will draw the boundaries of a finally reunited Europe and assert the identity of our continent in the international arena , the only prospect enabling European citizens to face up to the challenges of globalization that , quite rightly , worries them .
It must therefore be seen as one step in a long journey and not as an end in itself .
It is in the light of these challenges that its outcome should be assessed .
Europe first of all needs effective institutions , i.e. able to take the decisions that have to be taken , at the right moment , and democratic and transparent procedures involving national parliaments and the European Parliament as the co-holders of democratic legitimacy .
Those who rightly refuse a bureaucratic and undemocratic Europe must give it the means to acquire its political legitimacy .
The acquis communautaire must be strengthened , be it the single market , external trade policy - as Mr Santer proposed - which must be more offensive , common agriculture and fisheries policies which must be made more efficient but also fairer .
Social cohesion must also be strongly reinforced , e.g. by inclusion in the treaty of an improved social protocol , as the French Government demanded in March 1996 in a memorandum on the European social model and by the inclusion of a chapter or a new title making employment of all one of the main aims of European construction , along with the guarantee of our internal and external security , without which there cannot be a genuine democracy .
Europe is often criticized , ladies and gentlemen , less for what it does , which is often little known , than for what it does not do , and should do .
It would be seriously incoherent to denounce the paralysis due to maintenance of the rule of unanimity that certain States legitimately want to retain when they think that superior national interests are at stake and at the same time to refuse to develop stronger cooperation between those States that want to go further ahead .
Ladies and gentlemen , we should also beware of restricting the exercise of that flexibility or stronger cooperation with such tight rules that they would make it practically inoperative .
If we want European construction to continue to make progress , let us retain the pragmatism and flexibility that have enabled it , so far , to develop and which will be all the more necessary in a Europe extended across the continent .
We expect the heads of State and Government to show the political will to go full steam ahead so that the European Union can finally acquire the political identity that matches its economic weight and its cultural influence .
If Europe now arouses fears among a growing number of our fellow citizens , it is because its institutions have not sufficiently borne in mind their worries about a seemingly uncertain and menacing future .
Amsterdam , Mr President-in-Office , should not just be the title of a Brel song , but it should be a hit .
The outcome must give Europeans fresh hope as they are expecting practical responses to their worries , mainly about employment and security .
That is the signal we are waiting for and let us hope these expectations will not be disappointed .
To conclude , I should tell you , Mr President-in-Office , that I particularly appreciated your introductory speech , which was full of realism and pragmatism .
I think that you have tried to fill the plate - to take up your own culinary metaphor - and I hope that your colleagues in the Council will not prove to be fans of nouvelle cuisine .
Thank you for your results so far and good luck !
Mr President , rather than continuing with the fairly down-to-earth comparison of the garage and garage-mechanic , I should like to remind you of Robert Schuman 's definition of Community rules back in 1950 . He said that Europe would not be achieved in one go or in the construction of a whole , but by practical achievements creating de facto solidarity .
It is in that spirit that strong institutions and rules were created to enable the States to live together , to acquire a common spirit and guarantee effectiveness .
That is what is more prosaically known as the step by step approach .
Referring to those principles , which are still fundamental for the Union 's progress , I should like to speak about the draft treaty in three areas .
As far as employment and social affairs are concerned , the draft text prepared by the Dutch Presidency takes into account the demand of European citizens by introducing into the treaty the fight against unemployment , the creation of new jobs , the maintenance of a system of social security that is in keeping with the European model .
Even if some think that these commitments are not enough , the door is now open to further developments : the step by step method .
The result on a common foreign and security policy is quite different - something else seen by citizens as a manifestation of Europe 's existence .
On this there are neither tiny steps nor any real progress . The tools that have been created - I am sorry , Mr President-in-Office - are intergovernmental .
Unanimity , i.e. the right of veto is going to control all decisions .
The Council 's authority is strengthened to the detriment of the Commission 's .
Constructive abstention is made fragile by the right of veto , possible even bad tempered veto , of one of the Member States . And that is with only fifteen Member States !
As for strengthened cooperation , it is obvious that the conditions of its implementation will be vital for the overall assessment of the Conference 's outcome , i.e. the future of European construction .
The condition of unanimity for CFSP is a real nonsense and cannot be justified by any argument .
Faced with these predictably modest results of the IGC , respect of the EMU deadline and the stability pact seem an absolute imperative .
Any delays or calling into question of the conditions and timetable would return us to the darkest hours of the Union 's history .
We have reached times of considerable challenge and dangers .
We therefore welcome the courage of the Dutch Presidency .
Madam President , the IGC ought to win the citizens of Europe over by meeting three challenges : restoring meaning to European construction , democratizing the institutions , clearly sharing responsibilities .
Just before the Amsterdam Summit , we are far from achieving those aims .
I am pragmatic and am not asking for the moon , but I think that we could do better and that we should try to do so , before the single currency and enlargement both of which are necessary in my personal view .
It is not enough to have such a weak institutional framework .
If we do not make enough progress in another week , let us work another two or three months over the summer so that three or four vital questions can be resolved ; a more serious treaty could then be signed .
With my Group , I ask that the conclusion be delayed until the autumn , unless a few vital improvements are made by the time of the Amsterdam summit .
What needs to be improved ?
First of all , we should clarify the mandate to be respected by the States and the Union on employment .
Too many doubts are blocking the implementation of clear-cut actions .
The French initiative for setting new conditions of growth and employment , without of course refusing the challenges of competitiveness and stability , is timely and courageous .
But how can it be put into practice ?
A protocol of further intentions added to the stability pact is not enough .
It is the Treaty that must include clear commitments and operational tools so that the coordination of economic policies really does take on board the requirement of cooperation over jobs .
To that end , the decision on certain fiscal , financial or industrial questions must no longer be blocked by unanimous voting ; if each State can veto decisions , there will never be a common growth and employment policy .
Let us not be satisfied with a cosmetic agreement when things are actually being blocked .
Secondly , the democratization of the institutions calls for more efforts and on this point I approve of the European Parliament 's proposals on codecision , controls over the executive authority and transparency in particular .
Thirdly , concerning the fair share-out of responsibilities and the strengthening of the Union prior to enlargement , the draft Treaty shows very serious deficiencies .
Each State is sticking to its prerogatives .
It is the intergovernmental Europe that is advancing and not the Community .
The legitimacy and efficiency of codecision will not be boosted .
The States have the necessary means but are balking at committing themselves and are rejecting democratic controls .
We cannot expect the IGC to remove all these obstacles and it would therefore be wise at least to see this Treaty as a precursor to the institutional reforms of the year 2000 .
We then will need a constituent procedure .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to congratulate the Committee on Institutional Affairs on its work under the leadership of Mr Biagio de Giovanni .
But there is some hesitation over the political conclusion .
Let us overcome that and ask the governments to continue their efforts .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that there is much that can be learnt from history , so here is today 's history lesson .
Prince Grigor Potemkin , the favourite of Catherine the Great , had conquered the Crimea .
When the Empress visited her new territory , Potemkin deceived her regarding its actual state with hastily built villages , false fronts and military charades .
That was in 1787 .
Today , 210 years later , Prince Potemkin and the Russian Empire are long gone , but Potemkin-style villages are still being built .
The biggest ever is to be inaugurated next week in Amsterdam with the Maastricht II Treaty !
The false front is attractive and welcoming - freedom , security , the rule of law , the Union and the citizens . Mr van Mierlo paints all this in the most glowing colours , and I really do wonder whether he actually believes what he is saying !
Because what is hidden behind the false front ?
A masterpiece of empty paragraphs , as in the case of the non-discrimination article , escape routes as in the case of transparency , lip service as in the case of the so-called employment chapter , a verbose vacuum .
Maastricht II needs to make the necessary corrections to make the European Union viable for a pan-European future , for democracy and social ecology .
What we have now is not just inadequate but actually at variance with all the hopes , requirements and justified expectations we have expressed !
Maastricht II completes the first step towards the abolition of democracy in favour of the extension of executive power .
There is no other way to describe the pseudo-communitization of parts of the third pillar , the incipient erosion of basic rights and rule-of-law principles such as the individual right to asylum or data protection !
Instead of finally establishing the Union on a foundation of civil law , where security means legal certainty and not law and order !
The preamble talks about sustainability , but then the rest of the text becomes bogged down in the allpervading logic of growth which , as we know , is the very opposite of a responsible blend of ecology and economy .
A start is made on the militarization of the EU , instead of promoting the demilitarization of foreign policy .
Our task must be to push aside this false front .
We are very much given to talking about transparency and credibility .
But in that case we must not let ourselves be exploited , we must not describe something as success and progress when it is nothing of the kind !
We are not the star witnesses of the latter-day Prince Potemkin , whether his name be Helmut Kohl or Jacques or Hans van Mierlo or whatever .
Our job is to make it clear to the national governments that democracy is an essential for European integration , not an inconvenient obstacle !
We need to make it clear that there are new expectations of a change of direction in economic , social , environmental and ecological policy .
The citizens , Mr van Mierlo , want more than just bread and circuses - they want to know what 's cooking , and who is cooking it , and how , and what with .
They want to help the cook .
That is called participation , and it 's called democracy , in Europe too !
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office - I congratulate you on your frankness - Mr President of the Commission , the variety of political changes in Europe and the short time between now and the Amsterdam Summit make the exercise especially difficult to achieve .
For our Group , it is clear that nothing should thwart the process of European integration and the need to take into account social demands and employment should not be a brake on that integration but on the contrary a further argument in favour of strengthening the Union .
As for the issues on the Summit agenda , apart from the reform of the institutions proper , our Group supports the compromise resolution to be voted on later , be it for economic and monetary union , social issues or employment , the single market , the action plan proposed by the Commission , or other issues .
A word on the stability pact , now the subject of discussion for several days .
We feel that this pact is the corollary of the creation of the single currency and that its adoption should not be delayed , otherwise we would run the risk of delaying the introduction of the euro , which would be a serious political error .
However , we understand the need to add to this pact economic and social provisions , with jobs as the target .
We hope that by the time of the Amsterdam summit , a compromise will be found so that nothing can hold up introduction of the euro .
For that , it is perhaps not vital for these economic and social provisions to be included in the pact .
They could be placed in another supplementary document .
As for the institutions themselves , we regret that a few days before the Summit there are still doubts on important points .
The President-in-Office confirmed that .
We are therefore forced to give an opinion on a proposals made by our Committee on Institutional Affairs .
The first version of that proposal , drafted by Mr De Giovanni , was demanding and rather strict .
The second version presented by the Commission itself is more optimistic and less demanding .
For our part , we regret this development since we want the Summit to go as far as possible in the reform of the institutions and on the road to integration , be it the voting arrangements in the Council , the membership , role and strengthening of the Commission , the European Parliament 's prerogatives , such as generalization of codecision , the piloting of a genuine CFSP , or the elaboration and implementation of the Union 's economic and social policy , what some call the Union 's economic government , alongside the future Central Bank .
The European Parliament has been saying this for two years .
Unless our wishes are met , there will have to be another IGC , as the President-in-Office himself said .
Madam President , the preparation of the Amsterdam European Council is being dominated by an artificial polemic about the stability pact , which will end up masking the meeting 's real challenges .
It is an artificial polemic because , as we know well , the employment aspect , demanded by the French socialists to re-balance the pact , is already found in the draft treaty prepared by the IGC and it will not be possible to do much better .
It is also an artificial polemic because the single currency , since there is no optimum monetary zone in Europe , can only work against employment and , alongside that great reality , all the rest is nothing but political hot-air or window-dressing .
And it is also artificial polemic because the first and real employment policy at European level was the common trade policy , which Europe buried when it launched itself into all-out free trading .
But this artificial polemic on the stability pact is distracting attention away from what is really at stake at Amsterdam .
First of all , the very strong progress towards federalism in the draft treaty , which is going to subordinate nations still further and worsen the democratic deficit .
Then there is the more immediate hijacking of the debate on the single currency , which concerns radical constitutional changes that would have to be decided for it to function properly , but that nobody dares to deal with frankly out of fear of raising problems that cannot be dealt with .
When we see these cares and cautions , which are rather ridiculous , it has to be said , about the draft treaty , in order to skirt around the basic question of the viability of the single currency , we cannot help thinking of JeanJacques Rousseau 's words : ' It is the weapon that must be left in the wound , in case the victim expires when it is taken out ' .
Mr President , unfortunately we will not be able to hail the definitive shape of the European Union at Amsterdam .
In fact , the work of the IGC has not yet led to the consolidation of political union , and it could hardly be otherwise , as the Union still lacks an institutional , democratic and operational base capable of supporting the destiny of an enlarged Europe .
How can we expect to have political union , a common foreign policy , a common defence policy to guarantee peace , a policy pursued inside the Union , and outside with the partner countries , or a policy of respect for and defence of human rights , in the absence of a solid and efficient institutional base ?
What authority will there be to receive a part of their sovereignty from the Member States , so that all these problems can be convincingly resolved ?
The absence of political union means that economic and monetary union is causing our countries immense and innumerable difficulties because , just as a new house is built from its foundations , so economic union should be completed by monetary union as the direct result of political union , and not vice versa .
For these reasons the Alleanza Nazionale believes it is important that the work of the IGC does not end with Amsterdam , but continues until a consolidated and institutionally well-constructed political goal has been achieved .
The question of the enlargement also needs to be viewed from this perspective .
The gap between the candidate countries and the 15 Union countries is vast , and in some sectors it seems downright unbridgeable .
For this reason , as well as justifiable concern about the operational effectiveness of the future Union , it seems absolutely indispensable to have a transitional period for serious discussions within the scope of the negotiations .
From this point of view it seems clear that delaying the decisions of the IGC for several months would not constitute a grave danger for the future of the enlarged Europe , indeed it is the only way to achieve an enlargement which will have profitable results , and through which political Europe will finally be created .
Madam President , I welcome the progress in drawing up the new European Treaty and the agreement that has been reached , which is roughly along the lines suggested .
That will be a modest but significant step forward for the European Union .
But even at this relatively late stage I would urge the Dutch Presidency to do everything possible to strengthen the text , particularly with regard to the employment chapter and selective areas of qualified majority voting .
At the moment , the text is rather vague ; we need greater precision and emphasis .
But the Amsterdam Summit will also consider other issues , particularly the moves towards economic and monetary union , the stability pact and the single market programme from the Commission .
The point I wish to make this morning is that job creation should be the central priority .
There are 18 million people unemployed in Europe today , 21 % youth unemployment .
That is a disgrace and we need coordinated action to tackle the problem .
We need a growth and stability pact .
When we talk about support for industry we should do everything we can to stimulate small and medium-sized enterprises .
We need to put the Essen proposals into effect , complete the single market and make Europe truly competitive .
All these are important issues which need to be considered at the Amsterdam Summit alongside the institutional changes .
I believe that if this is done , the Amsterdam Summit will be seen as an historic landmark in the development of Europe , not only because of the new European Treaty but also because it puts jobs at the top of Europe 's agenda .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , thank you very much for your words .
I think that they augur well for the outcome of the Amsterdam European Council .
I think that at this time the European Parliament 's work should be to make sure that you and the governments actually achieve those results .
I can concentrate on some practical aspects thanks to the brilliant speech by the leader of our Group , Mr Martens .
The first one , which we set out in the motion for the resolution that is going to be voted on by the European Parliament later this morning , refers to something quite vital : preservation of the Community approach .
What characterizes this rare and complex thing , as Mr Van Mierlo said , is that the Community or the European Union do things together through a supranational body which at all times decides what is in the Community 's interest .
I therefore think it is extremely important that the Commission 's work should be preserved because , without the Commission , we would have created an organisation of intergovernmental cooperation which would lack the necessary integration .
I also think it important to maintain the Court of Justice 's jurisdictional powers , as it has done such important work and is an efficient democratic guarantee .
I think that we should also find an appropriate role for the European Parliament .
I think , Mr Van Mierlo , that if you look at the motion for a resolution that we are going to vote on , you will see that it changes the role of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament has for many years been an inciting agent because it has not had its own powers .
Since the Treaty on European Union the European Parliament has taken on deciding powers in certain fields .
I think that the motion we are to vote on today demonstrates this new role for the European Parliament : a parliament that decides , a parliament that looks , at all times , for the direction in which the Community should head .
This motion , which looks backwards , as you can see , differs from our motions passed in the last decade and has highlighted a positive aspect of the Dutch draft treaty which is considerable , and we wish to support you because it seems that , like the previous Presidencies , the Dutch Presidency seems to be going in the right direction .
We also wish to point out some areas where a last minute effort could be made . I think that , if we make an effort , we can achieve a good result .
I think that this effort must focus on two points :
First of all , the third pillar .
There are some colleagues here , of course , who think we must go much further , and I think that the Dutch Presidency 's proposal to integrate the third pillar in the first in relation to certain matters heads in the right direction , even in the longer term , and we can support you on that .
As for the social chapter , I think that we must act .
Undoubtedly , the best social policy , the best employment policy , is a good national economic policy - I am happy to say that and I think that my Government in Spain is in a splendid situation - but I think that we must also send a clear signal to our fellow citizens that the European Union does deal with those matters too .
That clear signal should be sent in the new Treaty .
I should also like to point out that in the final straight before the Amsterdam European Council , if we can achieve those aims , if we are daring - I think daring is necessary - if we stick to our ambitions , I think that we will create a good Treaty that will serve for enlargement .
It should not be forgotten that if we fail to produce a good treaty it will be impossible to implement .
Madam President , I wish to express my thanks to the President-in-Office and to the Commission President for their contributions to this debate here this morning .
The current negotiations on a revision of the European Treaties are taking place in parallel with the preparation of the creation of a single currency .
It is perhaps understandable that the preparations for the single currency have received considerably more public attention than the IGC in view of the direct and obvious impact which the Euro will have on our daily lives .
Nevertheless , the IGC and the new Treaty which will emerge from these negotiations could have an even more significant impact on the lives of our citizens , provided that the Member State governments keep those negotiations firmly focused on tackling issues which are of most concern to the general public .
The elections which have recently been held in a number of Member States should ensure this is the case .
The issue of most widespread concern is employment , both the provision of employment opportunities for those without work and the improvement of job security for those currently at work .
The unemployment rate in the European Union is twice the level of the United States and three times that of Japan .
This is unacceptably high , and governments must focus their attention on job-creation measures , particularly for our young people .
Security of employment in the future for those who are fortunate to have employment at present is an equally important issue .
The Union must ensure that European companies remain competitive in the international marketplace and that our countries remain attractive destinations for mobile investment and job-creation projects by overseas companies .
The best available method of ensuring job security for workers is by maintaining and , in many cases , improving the competitive advantages enjoyed by European-based industries .
We must guard against the tendency to introduce new legislation , particularly at European level , which increases the overall costs of production in our industry and threatens the job security of everybody ultimately employed in the industry .
The Union should aim to minimize the bureaucratic and administrative burden placed on our industry , particularly by Union directives and regulations .
It should assist in improving competitiveness through investment and in improving skills training for our workers and for the temporary unemployed .
Finally , we must aggressively defend our interests on the international marketplace by basing our trading policy on the premise that overseas companies will only have access to our markets provided that we have equally good access to their home markets .
There is little or no point in the European Union developing a trade policy based on liberal , free-market principles if our competitors continue to operate restrictive practices in their domestic markets .
The Intergovernmental Conference should address the job-creation and job-security issues by ensuring that the proposals for revising the Treaty include specific commitments to give increased priority to measures to improve the competitive position of EU industry in the international market .
Madam President , the Intergovernmental Conference which is now in its final stages is of particular interest to the new Member States .
It is now that we will be able to see whether membership of the EU is what it was made out to be and what it was promised to be by those who recommended it .
I would like to say that there are big differences between what is now being proposed and what was promised to the Swedish people , for example , before the referendum .
Before the referendum , one of the principle arguments concerned the extent to which we would be able to influence the Union .
We can now see that we will probably have fewer votes in the Council of Ministers and that the veto will be abolished in a number of areas .
Another argument was that Swedish border controls would remain in place .
In the new proposal for the Treaty this will be effectively forbidden .
In addition there will be a comprehensive harmonisation of legal matters and asylum policies .
A further argument was that the Swedish nonaligned status would remain in place .
But now a number of steps have been taken towards a common defence system .
In view of the extensive changes which are now being proposed , my party will be voting against the Treaty amendments and will also propose that a referendum on them take place in Sweden .
Madam President , after what we have heard from the Commission and the Council I am not exactly tempted to conjure up visions of the unity of Europe .
Their speeches , with their blind , small-minded pragmatism , their timidity and their technocratic thinking , are far removed indeed from the historic challenge of unifying Europe .
Even so , I believe that this Intergovernmental Conference will have to be measured in terms of that historic aspect .
And I believe that we , too , in this House will also have to be measured against it .
If we are agreed that we want to build Europe as a house founded on democracy and civil rights , then we must recognize that this Intergovernmental Conference has done nothing to strengthen the foundations of that house . The foundations become more fragile : starting with the rights of Europol and then with the lack of codecision , the lack of basic rights and the lack of any democratic structure for this technocratic assemblage .
If we are agreed that the engineering principles by which the house must be built are social cohesion in society and fair shares in prosperity for all , then this Intergovernmental Conference has done nothing to improve that engineering .
In the face of mass unemployment , rising poverty and a deepening divide between rich and poor , the instruments that this Intergovernmental Conference has offered us are incapable of strengthening this engineering .
If we are agreed that the central pillar of this European house should be peace throughout Europe , not a military pact , then the thinking that the President of the Commission has put forward here is misguided .
To hear the way you have spoken here , President Santer , I feel you may be unable to imagine that Europe can play a leading role in the world without a military presence .
But this Europe has already built on that very idea in the case of coal and steel , the idea of unity without military force and unity through peace .
And if we are agreed that this European house is being built not for a political elite but for Europe 's own citizens , then I ask you this : where are the citizens to find any spark of enthusiasm for Europe when they consider the results of this Intergovernmental Conference ?
If Parliament is to represent the citizens for whom this European house is being built , then it must act energetically today to counter the timidity and pragmatism of this conference .
Madam President , I have listened this morning with great interest , in the hope that a realistic response to the concerns of the citizens of Europe would come forward .
Sadly I found none .
Both the Council and the Commission seem determined to drive forward in a belief that only they know best .
There are clearly many concerns sincerely held by millions of our citizens on the future of the EMU .
They are concerned with the pace and speed with which we are moving and they observe the manipulation and massaging of national reserves by national governments to meet the Maastricht criteria .
The citizens of Europe are paying the ultimate price in terms of high unemployment and very little hope of improvement in the near future .
If we were to put the same energy into creating new jobs , new security , then I believe our citizens would be more confident .
The area of national interest and majority voting must be resolved with clarity .
I fear we are on our way to creating a new fudge by having even further grey areas .
The role of the national parliaments must be increased , not decreased .
I do not believe we can move forward to any enlargement until we are clearer about what we want for ourselves .
If we do not have structures firmly established before enlargement , well-tested and tried , there will be no chance of enlargement succeeding .
You must be careful at Amsterdam that you do not destroy what we have achieved and what has been created to the present time .
Madam President , the draft of an amended Treaty must be assessed in the light of the European Parliament 's positions .
First , priority for active employment schemes and social justice ; secondly , a workable foreign and security policy ; thirdly , joint measures in the fields of internal affairs and justice ; fourthly , democratization of our structures with a new institutional equilibrium ; and fifthly , doing everything possible to make the European Union really capable of expansion .
The proposals made by the Dutch presidency are , as a whole , important steps in the direction the European Parliament wants to follow .
But further progress in that direction is needed in Amsterdam , because we want and need this Intergovernmental Conference to be a success .
The European Parliament has a very special part to play here .
May I remind you that the Spinelli draft constitution was the essential precursor of the Single European Act of 1986 , that the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 was itself influenced by important proposals made by this House , and that two Members of the European Parliament are now involved in the present discussions .
Even today , there is no denying the fact that many of the proposals on the negotiating table were born in the European Parliament .
We have been a driving force behind this conference , and the European Parliament must also be a full party to the negotiation and ratification of all the further stages of reform that will follow the turn of the millennium .
The responsibility now lies with the Heads of State and Government .
They are all deeply committed to the further development of the EU in their speeches ; but now the time has come for them to make real decisions that will help to improve the reality of life for all our citizens !
Madam President , giving the European Union the ability to act , and hence the ability to expand , was one of the primary tasks of this Intergovernmental Conference , and the Dutch presidency - like its predecessors - did its very best to make progress in those areas .
But , more 's the pity , the distrust between the governments of our Member States is so great in many areas that only limited progress is possible , and I should like to thank President Santer for his reference to Article 113 .
If in the services sector - to take just one sector among many - we provide for three pages of exceptions in a protocol on copyright and direct investment , we are ultimately not so much reforming the article as reversing it .
I can only encourage the Dutch presidency to use this example to make it clear that a breakthrough must , after all , be achieved in Amsterdam , so that we are not worse off than we were before , with governments defending positions which mature reflection would show are against their own interests , as in the case of negotiations in the WTO round .
The same applies to policy on legal and internal affairs .
I think it is urgently necessary that the areas proposed by the Dutch presidency that are to be transferred from the third to the first pillar really do make that transition , to give us the ability to act .
And that ability to act must be underlined by an automatic transition from unanimous voting to majority voting , to enable us to take a genuine step forward .
I am tired of hearing political leaders say that Europe wants to combat international organized crime and then refuses Europe the instruments to do so , which is what has happened !
It can only be done by this automatic procedure , which must be integrated into the first pillar .
That this also involves the rights of Parliament is something I need only mention in passing .
The same applies to the foreign and security policy .
Some marvellous ideas have come to light here - I am not sure whether they will really give us more ability to act in practice , but I am sure that the possibility will be examined .
The second point was concerned with more democracy , and with bringing Europe closer to the citizen .
I believe , Mr President-in-Office , that you will last the course , with the support of this Parliament , and achieve progress in the field of codecision .
I hope that we shall be able to thank you next Wednesday for ensuring that this has happened .
There are a few adjustments needed , such as with the antidiscrimination clause and in one or two other areas .
Maybe there will be a moment of generosity on Monday or Tuesday that will enable one or two of these questions to be improved even now .
That could also include the right of Parliament to make changes to treaties , as Mr Schäfer mentioned a few moments ago .
I think that the great pressure brought to bear by the European Parliament in recent years has achieved something with regard to the third point , and we are arriving at a better social equilibrium .
The employment and social protocol is being incorporated .
I hope that we will also obtain improved decision mechanisms in this area and greater cooperation , than has been the case in the past , including codecision procedures for example , if the previous strategy can be sustained .
I also believe that we need an employment chapter offering genuine co-ordination of national employment policies .
We do not need any new European powers - just co-ordination , because differing or even conflicting employment policies cancel each other out because of our interdependence in the Common Market .
This is in everyone 's interest .
What matters here is not the new finance programmes - they are completely unimportant here , we might just as well use the Structural Funds .
What matters is getting the mechanisms moving and getting employment moving .
That is the starting point .
Employment is a macroeconomic objective , together with others .
This will also enable us to overcome the problems associated with the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the Netherlands have adopted a logical position , a pragmatic , realistic and slightly idealistic one .
Mr Van Mierlo speaks of a more dynamic , more effective Europe closer to the ordinary people , as well as a kitchen in which it is possible to prepare better dishes .
But what is the interest of a well-equipped kitchen in which delicious dishes are prepared if the latter are served in a location which is in ruins .
The Council continues to hold secret meetings behind closed doors in this inadequate building .
No open doors , no democratic openness , Commissioners rushing about in confined spaces , while the President prepares his little dishes in the kitchen .
Ordinary people want facts , work and security .
According to the President , employment cannot be guaranteed by the Treaty .
We shall probably see more anti-European feelings unless the dream of employment which you are inserting into the Treaty becomes a reality .
As for security , the action taken in order to promote it is not clear .
The Netherlands are taking measures which actually hamper security . Let us take the example of Prosecutor Van Der Voort who had all the proof on cocaine traffic from Surinam passing through the Netherlands .
This is not a very encouraging case , Mr President .
We should also mention the cases of drunken drivers or drivers who have committed speeding offences and who have escaped criminal proceedings because they forgot to convey to Brussels the technical provisions relating to this matter .
Where is the security which the ordinary people have been promised ?
The Dutch representatives in the European Union do not want bread and circuses or window-dressing but facts .
Nevertheless Amsterdam is not lost and I am banking on a good Treaty .
Madam President , I think that it is very clear that the separation of economic and monetary union from the intergovernmental conference cannot continue .
Economic and monetary union must go ahead of course . But the IGC must restore the balances .
It must restore the role of economic union , and also the role of some form of economic government vis-à-vis economic and monetary union .
And therefore it must restore conditions of political democracy .
No one is going to cede major decision-making rights to organizations without being sure that social , employment and environmental policies can be implemented in the Union .
This will depend , of course , on the political complexion of our future leadership .
But in all circumstances the politicians and citizens must regain their role and their say in things .
We cannot surrender these things to an organization like the Central Bank and allow it to operate in a vacuum and carry out experiments free of responsibility .
Madam President , the grand speeches which were made before the text of the proposal was written , that the Treaty would include a programme of reform as the basis of a new Europe , of the future , and that this would help people overcome their scepticism of the EU , were , in my view , totally wrong .
It is clear from the proposal that the emphasis definitely has not been placed where it was said it would be placed , on democracy , openness , social security and sustainable development .
Furthermore - and this is the most important point - preparations for admitting the new members have been postponed to a later date I think that the proposal will serve rather to complicate enlargement and in so doing will create a permanent division in Europe , which is a great disappointment .
We have also heard Mr Van Mierlo commend the IGC for achieving democracy and openness and meeting the demands of the people through the chapter on employment but unfortunately this is just a cosmetic solution .
The people themselves will soon realise that the soup which they are being served from the EU soup kitchen is very , very thin .
Let me give some examples : The achievements with regard to the demands for openness , transparency and the principle of publication are unacceptable .
First , people are given the right of access to all documents but then this right is withdrawn because the Council of Ministers has the right to restrict such access .
Each institution is also able to determine their own rules on openness .
What does this mean ?
If you add to this the EU 's Archive Regulation , it is easy to see that there will be nothing left of this openness .
It will be just fine words and faint hopes .
The same applies to the environmental guarantee which , having been defined in more detail , appears to have been improved .
But a Member State wishing to maintain or introduce tighter environmental requirements must notify their reasons to the Commission who can then reject these on the grounds that they form a barrier to trade .
We might just as well delete the issues of sustainable development and environmental improvements .
I am , above all , obliged to the President-in-Office of the Council for having succeeded in a very difficult period in finding the time to justify himself because I think that this is the only place where he could do so .
Several points .
Concerning the IGC , kitchens and a citizens ' Europe .
Perhaps ordinary people are not interested in the building of the kitchen but nonetheless would like to know whether the new Europe is going to become closer to them .
It can also be asked how that kitchen functions and if there are head cooks to make it work , a particularly relevant question .
No doubt the process has been started but we still want to know the outcome .
Perhaps , therefore , we should not make immediate judgment .
Secondly .
I think we all agree that the IGC must make enlargement possible .
We must avoid Ioannina-type situations - which then was relatively simple - and we must make sure that enlargement will enable us to progress rather than retreat .
I think that we can still give our approval to the German Secretary of State , Mr Hoyer , who declared here , in the institutional committee , that the draft Treaty will not enable us to have enlargement , for the time being .
I am also of the opinion that we must not expect the situation to be simplified during the negotiations on enlargement .
There is , therefore , a major problem which might not be resolved in Amsterdam and that is why , despite the declarations made by Mr Van Mierlo , I am still wondering about the way in which to react to this situation .
Thirdly : democratization .
I admit that , in terms of the European Parliament , considerable progress has been made in the texts .
But there are still risks of regression .
However , I am particularly interested in the overall situation of parliamentary democracy in respect of the draft Treaty .
In my view , there are still considerable risks that national parliaments will lose ground and that this will not be compensated by any ground gained at European level .
Finally , I should like to talk about the IGC system .
I think that this long-term negotiation has shown that this system could not function within this great Community , which is increasingly resembling a sort of Von Münchhausen strategy aimed at getting the Community out of a tight squeeze .
Is it not possible to think up a new system ?
Mr President , the draft treaty that we have before us has aroused in many of us mixed feelings of hope and fear .
Hope because the limited progress which has been made in the meantime will somewhat improve the former Treaty .
But also fear because some aspects are doomed to failure and we are probably going to end up with a failed Treaty , just before opening up negotiations with future Member States in central and eastern Europe .
As far as the limited progress is concerned I will be brief .
This progress is not negligible but nor is it really significant .
However , we welcome the fact that employment and the environment have been taken into consideration to a greater extent and that progress has also been made in the fight against international crime , that decision-making procedures have been simplified and that the European Parliament will have more clout in terms of legislation .
But we are especially concerned about what has not been achieved .
I am particularly referring to the openness of administration , the democratic nature of the European Union , foreign policy and the weighting of votes .
As far as opening up administration is concerned it would be positive if , in the future , documents on Union legislation were made available earlier .
That is important for the public , for national parliaments and for us .
What is regrettable is the absence of any prospects of opening up the Council of Ministers .
It also means that , when the Council acts as legislator , it continues to make laws in camera .
In fact , this behaviour is an attack on parliamentary democracy and I think it is inadmissible - the Council of Ministers should put an end to this practice .
We must also note that , in other areas too , some points of which Mr Dankert has just mentioned , this parliamentary democracy is ailing .
When I see , in the file on internal security and the file on foreign policy , that national parliaments are losing powers which are not being transferred to the European Parliament , I ask myself if we are not actually going backwards .
If we cannot manage the budget problem or the budget as a whole - it is not always the case for 50 billion ECU - we still cannot say that we have filled in the democratic vacuum .
This is one of my main concerns and I know that Mr Van Mierlo has good intentions on this .
What I would ask you is to fight in order to achieve this aim .
We really cannot undermine parliamentary democracy at European level !
I would just like a few more moments in order to look at the problem of the weighting of votes .
I have noted in the proposals that the sum total of the points for big countries is larger than that of small countries .
I think that it should be emphasized that the Netherlands do not do too badly .
However , I wonder whether this might not be a weak spot if referendums are held and when the new Treaty comes to be debated by the national parliaments .
I think that the compromise adopted in the days of Ioannina was an excellent one and I wonder whether it might not be wise to retain the same ratio in the framework of the new weighting of votes .
In other words , we have made progress on a certain number of points but not all of them .
I wish the Dutch Presidency a great deal of strength , wisdom and a dose of good luck .
Madam President , the new draft treaty , despite its imperfections , contains many novelties .
I think that the negotiations have taken new demands into account .
What can we therefore do at this stage of the debate ?
At most , we could give it a few little boosts in the closing days of the negotiations , because they would make it easier for the public to accept the new provisions .
I give three examples .
The first , is the chapter on employment .
That is the subject that concerns everyone .
People are ready to demonstrate in the street .
It is therefore a good thing for employment policy to be mentioned in the treaty .
However , if we do not specify the practical means , in terms of economic policy , that Europe is to give itself to contribute to an employment policy , the chapter will be more disappointing than rewarding .
We should therefore welcome the Commission 's insistence , under President Santer , and that of the French and other Governments , to ensure that this aspect of the growth and stability pact goes through .
Second example : public service .
The new Article 7D is still fairly vague .
There too , the expectations not only of public service workers but also their users are great .
We should not go on dismantling the public service while spouting fine words about their social value .
It should be made more specific , as the European Parliament demands .
Third example : the serious crisis due to the mad cow disease still worries us .
I have just left a meeting - that is why I was not here before and I apologize - with Commissioner Oreja , on the institutional provisions concerning the veterinary field and public health .
This crisis could , unless the Commission and the Council take stiff action , lead to a major institutional crisis .
There too we want more precise and more practical proposals .
Madam President , Mr van Mierlo has given us the picture that is emerging as the IGC nears the end of its life , five days before the summit in Amsterdam , and he has mentioned the endeavours of the Dutch Presidency .
It would be amiss of us not to acknowledge them .
However , we are not engaged in a race , for which endeavour alone can suffice .
We are engaged in politics in which the thing that counts most is the outcome , and the best scenario of the Amsterdam outcome is a modest common denominator if some compromise can be reached in advance with the French Socialists who promised much before the election and are now having to face up to the reality of their pledges .
That is yet another reason why we ourselves should measure our words carefully .
As the citizens of Europe struggle for employment , security and peace the challenges are truly historic .
Unfortunately , Mr President-in-Office , there is a severe lack of political will to rise to those challenges , and as we hasten to prepare Europe for the twenty-first century we are just running on the spot with new and half-complete compromises .
There is a very good case now for the new title on employment .
It will certainly be useful .
However , we should not engender in our fellow citizens the false belief that provisions of that sort suffice for combating the scourge of unemployment .
Big policies are required for that , and we seem incapable of getting to grips with and implementing such policies .
We should be careful in particular about the question of institutional balance . It must not be thrown overboard at the last minute to the disadvantage of the smaller countries .
The European Union is made up of equal Member States . If that equality is not retained at Amsterdam our peoples will be very disillusioned .
We look forward to economic and monetary union , which is a truly revolutionary development .
Its path must not be blocked at Amsterdam .
As Chairman Martens has said , we have already lost 10 years .
Let us make sure , Madam President , that we do not lose any more .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , surely there is still a rather serious void in the draft treaty of 30 May .
All the European balances which are being drawn up will be no use , and a new equilibrium between monetary union and economic and social union cannot be established , without that profound institutional transformation which is needed and which was , moreover , in the mandate of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I would like to underline two points .
The first has already been stressed by others : it is the enlargement , the core of the Intergovernmental Conference 's mandate .
The President of the Santer Commission has said that if we do not prepare properly for the enlargement we may be heading for a rather negative situation .
Well , I ask the President-in-Office this : what has actually been done about it , and what hope is there that something can still be done ?
I noticed that the subject of qualified majority was not even mentioned in the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council , except for the CFSP where it is substantially an illusory issue .
We all know that the decision about the Commission has been put off , but it is obviously essential to move forward on these matters with a view to the enlargement .
The other point is the issue of democracy , Mr Dankert has already spoken on this .
We appreciate more co-decision , but we also wonder whether this will be co-decision on the new policies .
The whole question of the third pillar and the move from the third to the first pillar simply must not take concrete form in a weakening of the Community pillar , because this would definitely be regression rather than progress .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I would like to make a final point about article 113 .
It is true that article 113 has increased the powers of the Community , but at the same time it has reduced the powers of Parliament , and reducing the powers of Parliament in this respect strikes us as rather dangerous .
Madam President , three years ago almost to the day , on 12 June 1994 , we held a referendum in Austria on our country 's accession to the European Union .
Not all our citizens were satisfied with all the details at the time , and indeed not all our citizens were even told about all the details of that accession .
Even so , the citizens voted ' yes ' in principle to the European project , and did so in the awareness that no ready-made , communal Europe exists as yet and that we would all have to continue working to advance the progress of deeper and wider European union .
Today , new and important decisions about the future are being made .
They are a challenge to us all .
For some time now , and indeed for some time to come , our whole political system , our citizens and politicians , have been and will be confronted with the challenge of taking another important step towards Europe by the introduction of the single European currency .
So let us ensure that our economic policy , too , is in line with this stability pact !
Today , it is up to the European Parliament to make its contribution to the Intergovernmental Conference .
After the weekend , the Heads of State and Government will be called upon to put the successful finishing touches to the work they have done so far .
The results achieved hitherto are far from valueless .
Some things have been achieved .
Some things remain to be done .
Let us all rise to this challenge !
Let us bring greater depth and breadth to Europe , to enable us to meet our citizens ' expectations .
The question which Elmar Brok wanted to put to the President-in-Office was as follows : if Amsterdam really is not sufficient to allow full expansion by another eleven States , will there at least be a new Article N as a result of this Intergovernmental Conference ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the Netherlands Presidency on its constructive work .
I note , however , that Intergovernmental Conferences are taking ever longer to decide ever less , proving that a long time spent cooking does not guarantee a good meal .
That is perhaps one of the reasons why , in the course of this IGC three governments have already fallen , even though they were achieving good results in the economic field .
It might be symptomatic that this is the first time that Europe and the single currency have been the main issue in national elections .
Such facts demonstrate that the first responsibility of today 's leaders is to find a way out for this new European question facing new historical challenges which cannot be solved with the methods of yesteryear .
In particular , making enlargement a viable proposition , setting the single currency on a legal and stable basis , negotiating about globalization on an equal footing with the major powers such as America .
The progress already made in the Intergovernmental Conference meets these objectives .
Perhaps we are moving in the right direction but it falls short of the historic feeling that there would be political and pan-European union on the eve of the turn of the century .
It is even feared that the draft treaty already presented by the Netherlands Presidency will make things even more complicated instead of strengthening fresh coherence .
Finally , we cannot have a Europe which is united monetarily and economically yet divided in all other spheres , in particular on internal and external security , on which economic confidence itself depends in the first place .
It is interesting to note that the greater the insistence on unanimity the greater the openness to flexibility either in fact or directly .
The more we refuse to democratize the institutions the greater the threat to social and political cohesion .
A lot of time spent cooking again , but a lousy meal .
It does not seem to be far from Maastricht to Amsterdam .
I hope , however , it will be understood that this road spans a century and a new chapter of history .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make two requests for the Council and the Commission to take with them as they leave for Amsterdam .
The present draft Treaty provides for a step backward in terms of freedom of movement .
It no longer refers to freedom of movement but only to free movement of individuals , and that in turn is further differentiated into free movement of individuals for Union citizens and for third country nationals - in other words , people who are living among us permanently but do not have naturalized status .
If what we fear does come to pass , and a distinction is made between Union citizens who enjoy freedom of movement and third country nationals who are legally resident here but have restricted freedom of movement , then we shall be in danger of re-creating a two-class structure within the European Union in the area of civil rights , which is a dangerous business .
I therefore ask that the Conference should not lose sight of the approach adopted in the previous treaty and should ensure the implementation of that freedom of movement which was , in fact , guaranteed in the previous Treaty of 1 January 1993 .
My second point is this : visa policy , customs policy , customs co-operation , asylum policy and immigration are to be communitized without full powers being given to the European Parliament , but if powers are withdrawn from the national parliaments the result is a democracy-free zone in central areas of civil rights within the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , please do prevent this , because it really would be a tragedy .
Madam President , I would never venture to criticize your handling of these proceedings , but I would like to make one comment .
This Parliament , too , has to undergo reform in connection with the revision of the Maastricht Treaty and the debate on revision .
If , as I hope , this Parliament is really to acquire additional powers , then this Parliament must change its way of working .
It cannot be right that men like Mr Brok , who represented this Parliament at the Intergovernmental Conference for more than two years , and Mr Dankert as a former president of Parliament are not allowed to finish what they have to say and are cut off on the pretext that we have to begin our midday voting orgy at 12 noon .
I simply cannot accept that .
We should be able to conduct a debate like this flexibly !
Thank you , Mr Schulz , for giving me the opportunity to explain myself .
I cannot do any colleague a favour on this .
There were 42 speakers on the list and if each speaker spoke only for an extra thirty seconds , the debate would not finish until 12.30 .
Work it out for yourselves .
The Chair could not take that responsibility .
You all know me and whenever we have the time I let you have as much time as you need to speak . In this case it was not possible and to make an exception even for Mr Brok would not have been justified , to be frank .

We would have liked to have more time for this debate - starting with myself .
I now give the floor to Mr Bourlanges .
I think you have understood that you have two minutes and no more .
That is how it is .
Madam President , I want to address the section on the CFSP .
The presidency will be surprised to hear me say that I recognize the difficulties it has in this most sensitive area of national sovereignty .
It is caught between those like me who believe we should learn to walk before we run and those who believe that we should be thrown in the deep end and either sink or swim .
I , therefore , wish to pay tribute to the efforts of the Dutch presidency to try to get agreement in this section .
Let me come straight to my most important point : my Group attaches great importance to the interinstitutional agreement on financing the CFSP .
We want to see that cemented in the Treaty at Amsterdam .
If it is not , I suspect that my Group will find it very difficult to support the conclusions of the Amsterdam Summit .
I hope the presidency can take that message to any Member States which have doubts about that area .
On the other aspects , there are many positive areas in the CFSP : the Petersberg tasks , the new arrangements for the Troika , the policy and planning unit - all provide us with an opportunity for greater coherence .
Positive abstention and the greatest scope for qualified majority voting will lead the way to the development of the CFSP , although , of course , the section on qualified majority voting is really no more than a slightly more ambitious version of what we already have in the Maastricht Treaty and , ultimately , will depend on political will to see it carried out .
Reservations are clearly that Parliament has almost no role in CFSP .
There is no provision for the Council to respond formally to our recommendations and , while the Commission can make recommendations to the policy and planning unit , Parliament cannot .
I would like to see Parliament be able to engage more fully .
On the WEU : clearly , we still have to work on that relationship .
I would ask the Council if Article 7 ( 3 ) , means that non-EU members can participate in EU activities and decision-making .
We do not have a single Treaty , we are cooking a pig 's ear .
Let us hope that afterwards we can turn the pig 's ear into a silk purse .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at this stage of European Union , I think the institutional question can be summarised as the mother of all questions .
Perhaps the more complex points and sophisticated details of this may escape the grasp of public opinion , but like the governments , which must guide the people towards ever higher and more ordered development , we too , who are elected to represent those people , understand it very well and we cannot pretend that we do not .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , certainly the product counts and there is no doubt that how the European Union functions does not matter so much to people as seeing their own lives improve with the progress of the European Union , in terms of own welfare , personal and collective security , the opportunity to work , social security , the extension of freedom , of expression , of movement , of initiative and so on .
Here I too find it positive that there is unanimous consensus about including the social protocol and new provisions on employment in the treaty .
Perhaps this will make it possible to relaunch , in a different institutional context and with a different perspective , the stability pact which President Santer proposed in Florence , but without finding the consensus he was hoping for .
But in a Europe where overall growth is slower than forecast and than was hoped , and which is not yet succeeding in fighting unemployment effectively , even at national level , this is an important turning point .
Yet we know that without real European democracy , without transparent and simplified decision-making processes , without an improvement in the procedures and methods of the Community institutions to put them in a position to neutralize what has been very effectively defined as the renationalization of minds , the Europe we want will not come into being .
Madam President , two matters that are of central importance and great sensitivity for Europe 's citizens have been dealt with completely inadequately in the present draft Treaty . One is the new so-called nondiscrimination article , and the other is the future legal procedure on asylum , foreigners and immigration .
The non-discrimination article is worded in such a way that it only takes effect if the Council unanimously takes the appropriate precautions .
The European Parliament has only a right to be consulted .
That means this article is virtually ineffective .
But the democratic process does appear to have been abandoned in other areas , too - those areas which are now being transposed from the third pillar to the first .
The national parliaments are being cut out , but they are not being replaced by the European Parliament .
This is a denial of democracy , and we will alert our colleagues in the national parliaments to that fact .
It is important , though , for minimum standards to be safeguarded not only in respect of democracy but also in respect of the rule of law , and that includes ensuring that the European Court of Justice has full jurisdiction in the areas in question .
However , there is one positive point I should make : the new provisions , especially in Article 119 on equality for women , are much better regulated in the present draft Treaty than they were in the Dutch presidency 's first draft .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if I may I should like to comment on two essential points : the stability pact and Professor Monti 's action programme .
First , the stability pact .
You will recall that the stability pact was the subject of very intensive negotiations between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
I must say to President Santer and the President-in-Office that we had an exceptionally fruitful dialogue on this matter .
Parliament has proposed a few amendments , and I would like to recall the most important points that were made by Parliament .
The first is that we believe that the so-called golden rule whereby investment must be higher than new net indebtedness should be taken into account in the structuring of the stability pact .
This rule is already enshrined in the constitutions of some Member States , whereas in others that is not yet the case .
Those Member States whose constitutions include this rule are currently experiencing certain difficulties with it , which shows that it is a strict rule .
I believe that it will be valuable for this rule to be incorporated into the stability pact .
I should also welcome it if this rule were to be phased in to the constitutions of the Member States , because this would not only comply with the principle of subsidiarity but also offer an additional guarantee that all Member States would pursue a course geared to stability .
That is my first point , one demand made by Parliament , and I must say that the President-in-Office , Mr Zalm , basically took a very positive attitude to it .
I should be very pleased if it were to be proved possible to achieve a result here .
The second point , on which we are negotiating , is that we believe that money from fines that are paid must be treated in accordance with general principles of budgetary law , in other words it must go into the budget of the European Community .
I know that the Finance Ministers are looking for some arrangement outside the budget .
But , gentlemen , I have the impression that no legal basis has yet been found for this .
I do not know whether the Council , in its search for the legal basis , has yet succeeded in finding a solution outside the European budget .
We in this House are of the opinion that the solution must lie within the European Budget .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets has again confirmed that very emphatically .
As to how these monies are distributed , we can worry about that in due course .
This is a question we can talk about .
The European Parliament is ready to play its part in a process of creative thinking .
People like Mr Christodoulou have been involved in the negotiations , and he has already distinguished himself as the inventor of the negative reserve .
There is a need for creative thinking here .
I should be very pleased if we could achieve a result .
Madame Chairman , in the IGC document , employment is once again reduced to mere rhetoric , the social sector lacks method and democracy is hindered by bureaucracy .
Under these conditions , the Union will not gain the confidence of the citizens .
Enlargement on this basis will not be possible .
The euro will not become a stable currency if it is built on mass unemployment and inequality .
It is quite essential to obtain socio-economic supervision over the structurally inward-looking European Central Bank .
The European institutions are important when each nation of the Union feels that it is represented .
The Parliament , which unfortunately has little power , is for ordinary citizens the only representative body whose activities they can pubicly follow and identify with .
This should be the case in the Commission too .
If the small Member States are deprived of the opportunity to have their own Commissioner , the credibility of the EU will fall in the citizens ' eyes . The Euro-icon will be removed .
Tightening cooperation between the WEU and the EU is appropriate when seeking to improve the efficiency of the common foreign and security policy .
However , the rapid unification of the WEU and NATO is not to the liking of the Finnish social democrats .
Military neutrality and credible defence have a longer and from Finland 's viewpoint just as successful history as military alliances .
Now the attempt is being made to adapt the alliance to Nordic geopolitics , which under the current circumstances would create uncertainty in the latter .
Madam President , on principle and for the sake of sexual equality , I shall make no reference to kitchen equipment , cooking utensils or meals - I leave that to the men .
All thirty or so speakers so far have said much the same thing .
Since we have no ratification power , you could say that after all you will not take it into account .
I would say there are two reasons for taking it into account .
The first is that we are very often in touch with the citizens and I think that what has been said here reflects what they want .
They have had enough of a Europe that gives them the impression that their every day problems are not taken into account .
The second reason is that , while we have no ratification powers for the IGC , we have to deliver our opinion on enlargement .
Furthermore , national parliaments will also have to ratify the enlargements .
Quite frankly , if the enlargements are not prepared in the right conditions , I am not sure that our public opinions will adhere to them .
For these two reasons , I think that this final European Parliament should be very useful for you .
We are profoundly attached to democracy and the powers of the European Parliament .
If forty-two speakers are taking part in this debate , there is a good reason . I should like to say that we do not have enough legitimacy .
Quiet frankly if , when I stand for reelection , the voters had the impression that I had a real legislative power and genuine influence on European decisions , I would not have asked to speak here today .
I would be able to say that the European Parliament does represent something of importance for ordinary people .
Madam President , the proposal is insufficient and does not meet the slightest expectations .
We cannot keep on condemning to the hold-up of unanimity the fight against discrimination suffered by European women .
As for the treatment of asylum among the Member States , in Spain it was said that Aznar had already achieved everything : that kind of bragging is soon cut down to size when we see the proposals and the texts .
Now we can see the substance of the new French socialist government - good French cooking - which is a macho stew , yes it is macho , Mr President-in-Office .
What hypocrisy to say that European women are being defended !
This is unacceptable : the texts condemn all these subjects to unanimity .
This is disappointing and we can only hope that next week this text will be improved because otherwise the citizens of Europe are going to be extremely disappointed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of this debate I should like to make it clear , on behalf of the French socialists , that we are attached to European construction , we want to see Amsterdam give it a new lease of life , and we hope that all of our efforts will make it possible to stick to the original timetables .
It is absolutely vital to send a loud and clear signal to the people of Europe , indispensable to include a social chapter in the Treaty , indispensable to set an immediate priority for employment and against unemployment .
It is also indispensable to strike a balance between monetary stability and economic growth .
The Dutch Presidency - whom I thank - is making every effort and I hope that by the 16-17 June , we shall be able to overcome the final difficulties in order to be able to meet our people 's expectations .
I know and can tell you that the French Government will do all it can .
One last word . I welcome inclusion of the public services in the Treaty while regretting nevertheless , at this stage , that they remain under the competition heading .
A change there would be most welcome .
I just hope that Amsterdam will succeed and replace in Europeans ' hearts and minds the tarnished image of Maastricht .
Madam President , allow me to use an expression from history : ' a spectre is rising over Europe ' - the spectre of changing economic policy .
In the new European era which began after the British and French elections what should the new economic policy be ?
We say that it should have the following characteristics : it must retain the positive achievements of the policy that has been pursued up until now - because there have been achievements - , such as control of inflation and restoration of business profitability . Those gains must be held on to .
At the same time , however , it must throw off the one-sidedness which has led us to the present levels of unemployment , poverty and social exclusion .
For that to happen we need to abandon our idolatry of market omnipotence and to restore a balance between the market and state intervention .
In the new era that is beginning state intervention cannot have as its objective the achievement of full employment via wasteful consumption or via the packing of the public sector with pointless jobs .
We do not wish to make civil servants of the whole population ; that is not our thinking .
What we want to see is a new flowering of productivity , and that can only come through concern for the needs of working people and greater justice in the distribution of wealth .
Madam President , it is clear that there will be a need to negotiate another treaty in the next five years .
In fact , the text we have before us is just a pitiful cover for some of the inconsistencies and weaknesses in the Maastricht Treaty .
The major problems still remain unsolved .
There is not yet a political structure capable of controlling and directing the power of the future central bank : to say the European Council will take on that role is , in my opinion , the wrong answer .
There is no real complementarity at Community level between economic policy and monetary policy , and one more declaration and one more protocol will not make the present construction any less lame .
Despite statements to the contrary , we still do not have a real common foreign policy .
The idea of entrusting power in this field to the Secretary General of the Council is not only an anti-democratic solution - at least the Secretary General of the United Nations answers to the General Assembly - but it is also unlikely to be effective .
There is no real intention of reviewing the Union 's powers .
The protocol on subsidiarity looks like a fine catalogue of principles but , despite the commitments made , the Member States have not reviewed the rules on commitology , which means they will continue to be submerged every year by thousands of minute and detailed decisions .
Could a solution be found to these problems ?
Theoretically , yes , in reality the national diplomatic services , and even this Parliament , have never really believed it .
I would like to close on a note of optimism : good news seems to be coming from social Europe , to judge from the demonstrations in progress in the last few days .
Madam President , I would like to propose inviting the Managing Director of Renault to Amsterdam because , unlike this Parliament , he succeeded in getting the provisions of the social agreement into the treaty .
Madam President , it would be helpful if the President of the Commission could listen to what I have to say .
This is an extremely important time for the European Union .
In the last couple of years the citizens of the European Union ...
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like everyone to listen to the last speaker , Mr Alan John Donnelly , in the dignity of our Assembly , followed by the Council and Commission 's answers .
I would also suggest to the Conference of Presidents that they look into the possibility of allowing more time in future for debates of such importance .
I know how unpleasant it has been for you to be cut off and it has been no less unpleasant for the Chair to do so .
( Applause ) Please return to your seats and listen to Mr Donnelly , the Council and the Commission without talking among yourselves .
Madam President , we all welcome that statement and hopefully the Conference of Presidents will address this matter .
The citizens of the European Union clearly feel that Europe has moved away from them in recent years .
Therefore the IGC in Amsterdam is absolutely crucial so that we can return to the sort of agenda that people understand .
That is why I say to the Council that the chapter in the Treaty that deals with employment policy must not be a cosmetic chapter .
It must deal in detail with the sort of instruments the Commission and the Council will use to tackle the unacceptable levels of unemployment in the European Union .
Linked to that we have to ensure that if there is to be a pact for growth and stability , like Mr Caudron said , it must be a balanced pact containing elements for stability but , more important , elements for growth .
Having passed through the Amsterdam summit meeting we then need to have the Council instruct the Commission to come forward with measures that activate the policies that would be available to bring down the levels of unemployment .
This House is desperately disappointed that nothing has happened since the Essen Summit meeting to tackle the problems of unemployment and while Mr Santer said we should do less better , the one thing we cannot renege upon are measures that will bring down the levels of unemployment .
I would urge the Council to instruct the Commission at Amsterdam , once we have the chapter on employment and once we have a pact that balances stability with growth , to come forward with a new model of development that ensures that we can tackle the unemployment problem and social exclusion and to try to help make this a Europe worthy of our citizens .
Madam President , thank you for the generosity with which you are directing this meeting and the place that you have granted me in it .
Nonetheless , I am aware of my duty of discretion after this debate .
I also know what your agenda is .
I am very grateful for the European Parliament 's support for two reasons .
First of all , because the statements by one member of your Parliament , Mrs Dury , I think , are quite right : the European Parliament is close to the ordinary people .
It could grow even closer to the ordinary people but its members are still often far closer to them than members of the Council of Ministers .
That is why I paid particular attention to what has been said here .
Unfortunately , it is not possible for me to give everyone a reply because of the time that we have available .
But it is not really necessary .
I have told you what I wanted to tell you and you have told me what was on your mind .
I now come to the second reason for my gratefulness : the Presidency must say that we feel very much comforted by the European Parliament over various essential points such as extending codecision , extending the majority decisionmaking process , transferring the third pillar to the first , strengthening the role of the Court of Justice , the attention paid to fundamental rights , to employment and the environment , to mention just a few . You have mentioned them all .
Of course , the European Parliament wants more .
I myself have been a member of parliament for 30 years and it is precisely the role of the European Parliament to demonstrate a certain professional dissatisfaction vis-à-vis the progress made in the process of forming Europe .
Thank God , you have the magnanimity to recognize that progress has been made but you must also be dissatisfied because we are in a process of integration and we need the European Parliament 's pressure in order to bring down the difficult frontiers which separate the Member States , of which today I have the honour of being President - but I am sometimes fenced in by existing frontiers .
Communitarization has to be achieved gradually by challenging the history of our states and that is a task in which the European Parliament plays a vital role , not only today .
I must also mention the role of your President and your two delegates who have followed the process almost constantly and who have been of precious help to us during the debates .
I shall therefore just make a few general remarks .
If we reach an agreement in Amsterdam - and once again the situation does not seem so bad - it is possible that the results will not match our expectations as someone has already emphasized .
But I would say , at once , that it will be more than expected .
Less than hoped for but more than expected .
When we met six months ago the European Parliament 's tone was far more negative in terms of the expectations . I listened to you with humility as becomes an interim director , but nonetheless it was a relatively negative image that I was presented with .
Now hearing you today I felt relieved at hearing such encouraging attitudes and seeing that you support so many aspects of the proposals that are being made .
You have all tackled a number of points .
I am going to refer to the EMU situation .
I can perhaps once again repeat that the emphasis of EMU has really been placed on the monetary aspect but it is obvious - and I should like once again to recall this - that , when we opened the debate on employment , two years ago , more than half the Member States thought it was ridiculous that Europe should even consider pursuing a genuine employment policy .
That is how we started out . We have made considerable progress even though we have not yet reached a consensus ; this is also , of course , explained by the terrible unemployment statistics in Europe which now show us that we have no alternative .
The question is obviously one of determining the degree of feasibility of a European employment policy .
It would be a serious mistake to think that the European Community is responsible for the high level of unemployment in Europe .
Let us not forget that it is , above all , the duty of the States to tackle the problem of employment but that the Community can help .
I should again like to add that , if we are disappointed by Europe , we should remember that the current European crisis is in many respects the sum total of all of the crises in the Member States themselves .
Here the term ' crisis ' means the ability to resolve one 's own problems and I am not referring to all of the problems which cross our frontiers .
Because western European democracies have a problem of authority .
The process of forming Europe based on ' give and take ' requires a great authority within nations . This authority is rightly controversial in all our countries and is not wielded in a very obvious way but it is has to be conquered from the public .
That is the problem that we are currently facing in preparing the Summit and we are trying to make progress on this .
The French elections placed EMU on the agenda .
Again I would like to emphasize that the French are not the only ones asking for measures to be taken in terms of employment but I think that this demand is now being made on all sides .
In recent days , during my tour of Europe together with Prime Minister Wim Kok I noticed that many other Member States thought it would be good to put more emphasis on employment aspects .
That is why yesterday we agreed with the French government and the President of France that EMU measures , and in particular the stability pact , should not be withdrawn - otherwise we would just be messing around and lead to a very confused situation .
But , even if France did not do so , other countries would ask for the same .
Nonetheless we have to add a counterweight to employment in the measures which means that it should not be regarded as an isolated fact but as a measure which is linked to the stability pact .
Everyone agrees with this , as far as intentions are concerned , and I hope that this is going to make it possible to complete all of the regulations , even if they do not have to be defined in Amsterdam - we have another six months to do this .
If the process is successful that will be very important psychologically .
If it is not , then we still cannot say that the Summit is a disaster because we still have six months to play with .
But it is worth fighting and so far I have noticed that everyone is ready to do just that .
I should also like to mention transparency which is a major point for all of you .
Everyone will have access to the documents in accordance with the rules worked out by the Council and the European Parliament . The European Parliament plays a key role in the application of transparency .
We would have appreciated more openness in Council meetings . But we were unable to reach a consensus on this subject .
Nonetheless the outcome of the votes , the reasons for votes and other declarations will be made public . Mentioning these two points I note that a certain progress has been made in terms of transparency .
From time to time , the debate has had a culinary flavour because I used the image of kitchens .
Using images is not inoffensive : images plague us sometimes or come back to haunt us , so that we can even end up wondering why on earth we said this or that .
Mrs Roth declares that all citizens want to cook .
That may be a profound desire but I do not think that the food will be any the better for it .
I understand what Mrs Roth wanted to say and I agree when she said that the citizens want to understand how the Community in which they live actually works .
I hope that we are going to be able to make a contribution to that which perhaps does not meet all of their expectations but nonetheless we are making progress towards that .
A final remark on democracy , which has often been mentioned here .
I have already said that I think a certain amount of progress has been made and a good many of you recognized that in your speeches .
This is a process that can only make gradual progress .
It is a fact that , in terms of strengthening the Union 's powers , the general thrust has been one of codecision , which is more democratic .
When the European Parliament 's powers are not genuinely strengthened , there is nevertheless a relationship with national parliaments - I aim my remarks at Mr Dankert .
Then a lady said that the second pillar and the majority decision process do not come before the European Parliament .
But in the second pillar there is still the possibility of using the right of veto both in the European Council and the General Council , and failure to use the vote of veto may be submitted to Parliamentary criticism and debate .
In other words , there really is Parliamentary control over this .
Whereas the third pillar is inclining towards the first , with asylum , immigration and visas , a transitional situation provides initially for national parliaments and consensus - and then a drift towards the European Parliament , in the second period , during which decisions are taken on the subject by means of a majority decision process .
In my view , it is more of a transfer of control than a reduction of it .
Mr President , I could go on for another half an hour if you wanted me to , but I know that you have other interests .
I therefore propose stopping here .
Thank you very much , Mr van Mierlo .
You have well interpreted our interest .
I give the floor to Mr Santer .
Thank you very much , Mr Santer .
I have received nine motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTES
Amendment 47 is listed both in our voting list and in the Swedish translation as an amendment proposal to point 4 c and not to point 1 which we are now discussing .
I apologise , and I ask the President to repeat the vote on this point or to check where the PPE group thinks that the proposal is to be found .
Mrs Thors , there was indeed a mistake in the heading of the amendment , but the vote did take place in accordance with the corresponding text .
Once the vote has taken place , the result cannot be changed .
Mr President , please excuse me , but I do think it would be better if we followed the order of the amendments .
Amendment No 47 that you have just called a vote on refers not to Recital C but to Paragraph 4 ( c ) , if I have seen the texts properly .
Nobody seems to be following and it does not even seem to be of any importance to our colleagues .
Since the vote has taken place , but obviously not at the right time , perhaps you could have another vote ?
Mr fabre-Aubrespy , I am sorry but it was very carefully checked that this amendment did not refer to the paragraph in the heading but another amendment .
That is why we voted on the text to which that amendment referred .

Mr President , as the author of this amendment , along with Mr Anastassopoulos and Mr Lucas Pires , I believe that there has been some confusion in the Chamber due to the fact that , in principle , our services had us vote on this amendment in respect of Paragraph 4 ( c ) .
Although the mistake was rectified , it seems that various Groups were not informed .
In my opinion we should therefore vote again on this subject .
I think that is pure common sense .
Mr President , there was confusion .
I accept that because I had it out of order in my voting list , but we did find it and we did vote according to the way certainly my group wanted to vote .
I do not think we need another vote .
We found it in time thanks to you just giving us a few seconds to do that .
As Mrs Green has just declared , this was no confusion .
The vote was held on the amendment in question without the authors expressing the slightest objection at the time . Once the vote has taken place , the result cannot be changed .
On amendment No 50
Mr President , we now come to paragraph 8 .
It contains an important demand of the European Parliament , i.e. the demand to have a common electoral system in time for the European elections .
Amendment No 50 by the Socialist Group seeks to weaken our call for a common electoral system .
I would point out to the House that yesterday , in the House of Commons , the new British Foreign Secretary , Mr Cook , had this to say : ' It is our wish and intention to introduce a new electoral system based on lists and proportional representation for the next European elections . ' .
( Applause ) In view of this important change on the part of the British Government , will the Socialist Group agree to withdraw Amendment No 50 so that we can adopt paragraph 8 undiluted ?
( Loud Applause )
Mr President , I think Mr de Vries ought to understand exactly why the Socialist Group has tabled this amendment .
Every member of the British Labour Party in this House is aware of the policy of the Labour Party .
That is not a problem for us .
It may be a problem for the British Conservatives but not for us .
We are very happy with that position .
I have to tell you that the reason we tabled this proposal is because the word ' essential ' , in the view of the whole group , means that if these items are not covered in the Treaty , we should not be supporting the Treaty .
We wish to be a little more equivocal about that and it is the position Mr de Vries has always accepted , not to threaten .
Mr President , in the House of Commons the day before Mr Jack Straw , the Home Secretary , and therefore responsible for electoral rules , said that there was no manifesto commitment to introduce PR or the regional list system by the 1999 European elections .
So , with Labour you can take your pick .
Good .
Now you all know what goes on in the House of Commons .
But this is the European Parliament and we must now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I am concerned that the leader of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party in this House sought to misrepresent the position of the British Government during that debate .
The Foreign Secretary did not say that we will be having proportional representation in time for the 1999 elections , he said : ' It is our wish and intention to introduce a new electoral system , based on the list and proportional representation for the next European elections . '
However , he said : ' I said at the time that the timetable is very tight and we will be examining whether this is possible .
We have certainly not ruled it out . '
So you ought to be clear about what the Foreign Secretary said .
Mr Titley , that is not a point of order : it is a point of order inside your political group and not a point of order for the House .
The European Parliament must give its opinion , today , at second reading , on the common position on the eighth directive on summer-time .
It is an important act for our fellow citizens , proof of practical construction of a Europe of citizens .
For my part , two points must be tackled : application of the subsidiarity principle and the implication of changing the clocks .
The declared aim of this eighth directive is to harmonize the period of the application of summer-time . I subscribe to that .
But it is also to assess time differences between the Member States . That is where the subsidiarity principle comes into its own .
The Council and the Commission must abide by it and let the Member States decide whether they should change the clocks in their countries .
I come to the second point : the implication of changing the clocks .
As elected representatives of European Parliament citizens , we are sent petitions , remarks , comments and suggestions on whether it is wise to change the clocks .
To assess the wisdom of this measure , in particular in the perspective of enlargement of the European Union eastward , to be accompanied by an enlargement of time zones , it is urgent to draft a detailed report , in consultation with all the interested parties .
All aspects must be fully analysed in the light of experience .
I think that before we impose any obligation , we ought to listen , we ought to look into the pros and cons .
Until then , let us just harmonize the dates of the beginning and end of summer-time .
We are examining the Belleré report on summer-time at second reading .
I wish to recall some of essential elements : until now the Commission has always presented application of summer-time as the free choice of each Member State , a perfect application of the subsidiarity principle .
Yet the latest developments of the debate on summer-time , launched recently by the last French Government , seem to indicate that the Commission is no longer content with indicating the dates and times for the switch to summer-time , but also is judging whether or not it should be applied to the whole of the Union .
The Commission advances as an argument the difficulty of envisaging a single market where time would vary from State to State .
Yet Britain , Ireland and Portugal would not accept that argument .
Since today the Commission tell us that the European Union must have a single time and that numerous expert reports have shown that the advantages of the switch to summer-time are marginal and the disadvantages substantial , I call on the Commission and the Council to think about simply abolishing summer-time in the European Union completely .
Read report ( A4-0171 / 97 )
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of the Read report today .
Securing access for citizens to high-quality telecommunications services at reasonable prices is of crucial importance to us .
We are , however , concerned over how Article 7 ( 2 ) of the Directive , the wording of which is not unambiguous , will be interpreted .
If established telecommunications providers can be said to have ' significant market power ' , according to Article 7 ( 2 ) , they are subject to a number of restrictions and obligations which will create easier access to the market for potential operators .
In Denmark a number of established telecommunications companies can be said to have ' significant market power ' , if we regard the fixed network and the mobile network as separate markets .
If , on the other hand , we regard the networks as a combined market , the companies cannot be said to have ' significant market power ' and will therefore not be subject to these restrictions and obligations , which might have helped to break up monopoly positions on the telecommunications market .
It is thus important that Article 7 ( 2 ) be interpreted in such a way that fixed networks and mobile networks are regarded as separate markets .
I am happy to support my British Labour colleague Mel Read 's call to approve this conciliation agreement with the Council of Ministers .
Whilst we should all look forward to the personal and business benefits which a more liberal telecommunications market will bring , we must be careful to guarantee consumers ' interests .
Ensuring that a universal service is available to all our citizens and giving them the chance to take their number with them to a new address are practical benefits to the public .
After all , the potentially great profits to be made by telecoms companies will be financed by consumers paying their bills .
Similarly , the idea that large telecoms firms should not be able to abuse a monopoly position is crucial .
In return for allowing firms to compete in the new market , it is right that they should meet their responsibilities to their paying customers .
It is nice to see the new British Labour Government 's approach to markets and consumers gaining acceptance at EU level , another sign of the potential for constructive British involvement in the EU .
European Council
Point 4 c of the Amsterdam resolution was passed relatively quickly .
It was fortunate that it was passed , but we must gain a broader understanding of what is involved , both here in Parliament and elsewhere .
The most important thing that the Union can do to create a solid , durable policy for more new jobs is to introduce measures which will increase competitiveness .
We are talking about deregulation and increased flexibility on the labour market .
Measures which harm the investment climate in the Member States would be devastating .
Europe must prove itself strong at a global level and must do away with out of date and obsolete policies .
There has recently been an election in Great Britain based on this issue .
Flexible regulations for the labour market were discussed at the time .
Now it is up to us to fulfil them at a European level .
There is a need for strong , joint measures , increased competitiveness and deregulation along with national measures to increase flexibility on the labour market .
The Intergovernmental Conference has demonstrated that the EU majority is not interested in real every day issues - the EU ideologues are more interested in turning the EU into an instrument of power politics .
There may , of course , be some elegant words on equality , employment , sustainable development and openness .
But elegant words are all there is , nothing more .
There are to be no legally effective employment targets as a balance against EMU 's financially restrictive requirements .
The text of the environmental guarantee is insufficiently clear to be of use to a Member State wishing to impose tighter environmental standards than those established at EU level .
The Commission will continue to be able to prevent those countries who wish to impose tougher standards from proceeding .
Europol is to become an ' operational co-operation between police forces ' - not just an administrative co-operation between police authorities .
Police from Europol will also be able to operate on ' another Member State 's territory ' ( and in so doing enjoy diplomatic immunity ) .
So , a big step has been taken towards a federal EU police force , an ' EU-FBI ' .
The Schengen Agreement will be foisted on the EU , and the whole of this area of legal co-operation will be moved from the inter-state level to the supranational level .
It will be the EU which will be making the decisions on everything connected with immigration , asylum , borders , passports and visas .
At the request of Spain , a protocol has been incorporated which dictates that asylum cannot be granted to a citizen from another EU State .
But is it not possible for a democracy to oppress certain groups ?
Is it reasonable , and in accordance with the 1951 Geneva Convention , that all EU States undertake never to grant asylum to Basque , Irish or Corsican freedom fighters ?
Is this regulation not the same as saying that the EU is a State ?
The EU will ' strengthen and develop its mutual political solidarity ' , in other words , it will speak with a common voice on matters of foreign policy .
The EU will have a Foreign Minister who will be called the General Secretary and a Foreign Office which will be known as ' the unit for political planning and for early warning ' .
It will definitely be no longer possible for the small states to speak out loudly in world politics in defence of human rights above the noise of the super powers and their commercial politics .
The objective of the EU is now being fine tuned to a ' gradual development of a common defence policy with a view to the development of a common defence system ' .
The Military alliance the ' WEU ' shall ' gradually be integrated into the Union ' , and EU States ' shall support the gradual development of a common defence policy through co-operation in the armament 's sector ' .
How is it possible for a country wishing to maintain a credible policy of neutrality to go along with this ?
For a Swede this is unacceptable !
It is claimed that openness will increase with the new Treaty as all citizens will have the right to view all documents .
But this right is then withdrawn because it will be up to each EU institution to determine which documents shall be available and to whom .
As a log is not kept on incoming post it will be impossible to request a document - no one knows which documents exist .
In respect of the above we wonder where the principle of subsidiarity and regard for the people of Europe have disappeared to .
So , we will vote against the resolution as a whole and will urge the Swedish people not to ratify the results of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The resolution contains a number of proposals which increase the power of the EU to the detriment of national parliaments .
There is EMU which will greatly centralise economic policy in the European Central Bank in Frankfurt under weak democratic control .
There is the strengthened Common Foreign and Security Policy with its majority decision making and the integration of the WEU into the EU Treaty .
There is the integration of the Schengen Agreement into the EU Treaty and the transfer of decisions concerning asylum , refugees and visa issues etc. from the Third to the First Pillar .
Instead , more emphasis should have been placed on enlargement and the democratic process towards an all European co-operation , towards employment , a better environment and long term sustainable development .
The relationship with our people would have been greatly eased if the changes had been directed more towards these areas .
In view of this , I have voted against the resolution .
Is this the last possible moment to persuade the European Council to be sensitive to the needs of Europe 's citizens , or has that last possible moment already come and gone ?
At a period when there are 18.5 million people unemployed in the European Union , the Member States must accept a common European responsibility to create more employment .
We Christian Democrats , in particular , as supporters of the social market economy , cannot allow social progress to be impeded , any more than sustainable economic progress .
One of the most essential elements of the Maastricht II Treaty , then , will be the employment chapter .
It will only deserve that name if it consists neither of non-binding declarations nor of job creation programmes that would cost millions and are impossible to finance .
It must point the way out of the Community-wide employment crisis , without changing the principle that the Member States retain the primary responsibility for combating unemployment and changing structures in the regions .
The European Union provides a synergistic effect by co-ordinating measures by the Member States , allowing a regular and intensive exchange of experience and supporting the implementation of model projects .
An essential requirement for success is that the Member States should agree to secure a high level of employment and be willing to undertake regular evaluations of progress towards this common objective .
A progress report is to enable an annual public debate to be held - in the European Parliament and elsewhere - on what has been achieved and what has not .
The European Council itself has laid the foundations for the joint approach to combating unemployment .
At the Essen summit it adopted a comprehensive strategy for co-operation between the Member States on labour market policy .
The concentration of schemes on employment-intensive sectors - from investment in vocational training through the advancement of problem target groups to an increase in employment intensity - is to be continued .
This specific policy holds out hope for the citizens of the European Union .
It comprises a political commitment by all Member States to a long-term investment in Europe 's most important resource - its human resources .
This could and should be the turning point needed to bring the past of the European Union closer to the will of the people and to the real needs of today .
We think that the fight against unemployment should be adopted unequivocally as the foremost priority .
We need to fight against the most radical causes of unemployment , not merely to express some vague intentions , even if they are written in the Treaty .
It is therefore essential to finally turn away from the monetarist and neo-liberal lines currently being followed , in particular the nominal convergence criteria , and to replace them with guidelines centred on economic growth , job creation and social dialogue ; on giving form to cohesion ; on preventing speculative movements of capital ; on preserving public services and environmental conservation .
We are aware however of the indisputable importance of enlargement and the commitments made in this field , in particular in terms of the opening of negotiations .
But that must not present any threat to the essential adjustments referred to above , which for their part need to be thought through thoroughly .
We roundly condemn the introduction into the Treaty of amendments in the institutional field which are harmful to the interests of the smaller countries under the pretext of giving specific form to that policy ; similarly we demand that due account be taken of the economic indicators which that might produce in those very countries .
The elections held in some countries recently , particularly the recent elections in France , leave no room for doubt about the deep longing for change in the different peoples of Europe .
The time has come to respond to that longing .
Since the joint resolution does not take that line we cannot support it .
The Amsterdam summit will be a low point in the recent history of European integration .
None of the major tasks confronting the EU is even being addressed , much less solved : compliance with the Rio commitments , defeating mass unemployment , preparation for the promised eastward and southward expansion , democratization of the EU , the socio-ecological regulation of the internal market - nothing can be done about any of them at their current state of preparation .
In this situation , our Parliament is trying to whitewash the increasingly critical situation into which the EU has manoeuvred itself under its neo-liberal leaders - instead of taking the historic opportunity to change course that has been offered by the elections in the United Kingdom and France .
Once again , this House is undermining its own foundations !
Draft Treaty
Mr President , the Maastricht II Treaty , in the form to be adopted here on the 17th , at least if things go according to plan , is not a constitution for a new state , but it is close to that .
Maastricht II is not a supranational structure for independent countries , it is a structure in its own right .
An autonomous structure founded on democratic principles , which can punish countries that are not democratic .
There will be human rights and freedoms , there will be non-discrimination on the grounds of sex , age , sexuality ; these are things normally found in a constitution .
There will be blanket authority for it to create new powers for itself .
The individual countries will be authorized to regulate certain matters for themselves : wage agreements , culture , education and hospitals - also things that are in ordinary federal state constitutions - media , public service enterprises and freedom of speech .
There is a subsidiarity protocol , in which the principle of precedence is established .
There is foreign policy with majority decision-making , a kind of incipient common foreign ministry ; defence is added ; legal policy and the police ; the states lose control of their territory .
Means of coercion are acquired , coinage , military and police .
The only thing missing is democracy , and that is why I voted against it today .
Mr President , I have voted against because this text of the Dutch Presidency on which the Amsterdam Council will have the final say is a construct which leaves the people of Europe out in the cold .
They are not in the know .
According to Eurostat , only about 2 % of the people really know what is going on .
Furthermore , the text offers absolutely nothing .
It is just talk , talk , talk . It mentions unemployment but promises shackles and deprivation .
The representatives of the Council and the Commission have paid homage to employment a hundred times , but they have only just managed to insert some form of protocol , some form of provision , on unemployment in the Treaty .
As if the 20 million people who are out of a job are there because that word has not been in the Treaty .
But the reasons lie elsewhere : in the socio-political system to which the Community is beholden .
Mr President , this text , this construct , proffers a rich menu for the multinational monopolies to gorge themselves on , and all the resolutions are like the waiters at the table , which is why I have voted against them as well .
Mr President , I voted against this text because it offers no prospect or contribution to a democratic Europe , favouring an authoritarian centralized state .
The text of the Maastricht Treaty constantly refers to an area of freedom , safety and justice .
But we are offered no prospect of transparency in public life .
Not only are no new mechanisms for democratic control being introduced , but existing ones are being weakened .
The language adopted is very interesting here : where the term ' freedom ' always used to be used in European policy , we now have the term security - internal security and the foreign security policy .
But security is being created not through more democracy , not through an employment policy or social security , but in a form controlled internally by the national governments , via Schengen and Europol , and guaranteed externally by a new foreign and military policy .
Mr X is not under the control of Parliament but that of an inter-governmental machine , in which human beings - including Members of Parliament - are not involved .
The superpower dreams of this integration reach their climax in the integration of the WEU , and that too is not under democratic control .
Therefore , no democrat can vote in favour of such a text .
Faced with the draft Treaty presented at the Amsterdam European Council , the European Parliament is pretending to be sorry that the text is not sufficiently federalist .
In reality , the European Parliament is only resorting once again to its time-old tactic of asking for the maximum and then backing down , while protesting , at compromises which are nonetheless major federalist advances which secretly satisfy it .
On their side , the national governments habitually fall into the trap with such unbelievable facility that it can only conceal voluntary renunciations .
This is the exactly the case we are facing here .
Let us , for example , take the proposals in the draft treaty in the areas of security , justice and immigration .
The European Parliament 's resolution declares that the draft treaty is not enough as it does not provide for the possibility of referral to the Court of Justice by individuals .
But that protest serves mainly to distract attention from the federalist reality of this text ; if adopted , the questions of the movement of persons , asylum , immigration , would be removed from national competences and fall within the Community scope , with the Commission holding the monopoly of initiative , the Court of Justice the power of interpretation and majority decision-making with the Council ( unless it acts unanimously with codecision by the European Parliament ) .
These proposals would represent an extraordinary federalist leap since , in future , for example , immigration issues would be decided in Brussels .
The French people could no longer decide for themselves their own policy in that area , and the parties could simply delete the ' immigration ' chapter from their manifestos , with a view to national general elections .
And how would that fit in with the French Constitution .
In order to make this huge pill easier to swallow , the Dutch Presidency is using a perfectly hypocritical strategy , but it has often turned out to be expensive in the past : a principle is inscribed in the Treaty , by application is deferred for some years to give citizens the impression that they might , in the meantime , benefit from the right to repent , which in reality is absolutely no the case .
The current draft text provides that the Council , for matters of circulation , asylum and immigration which would be communitarized , would continue to decide unanimously , for three years after the Treaty comes into force ; personal controls at borders will be maintained , but for a maximum of five years ; Europol would receive operational powers on the territories of the Member States but only after five years have lapsed .
In other words , the lamentations of the European Parliament designed to distract attention from the vital points are accompanied by the Presidency 's manipulations designed to have dangerous principles adopted , making us believe that their consequences would be far off or hypothetical .
The great federalist strategy is under way , to hoodwink the peoples !
. ( DA ) We have certain objections to the resolution .
Recital C and paragraphs 1 ( c ) and 12 read as though some would like to postpone enlargement , but we favour the timetable adopted .
The real difficulties are the budget and agriculture , rather than institutional matters .
Subparagraph ( a ) of paragraph 1 is not entirely correct , ( b ) is tendentious and ( c ) is , as already indicated , a possible threat to enlargement .
We cannot vote for paragraph 3 , as it is affected by a Danish reservation .
We vote against paragraph 5 , because it is affected by a Danish reservation .
We cannot vote for paragraph 6 because of the references to the third pillar and the allusion to the composition of the Commission .
Despite this we vote for the resolution , because it supports the areas that are most important to us , namely openness , democracy , human rights , the environment , consumer protection and employment , and because we do not have a wholly negative attitude to a transformation of the EU that patently sets out to achieve transparency in so many areas .
I voted against because the unanimity rule should not be abolished and Parliament should not be involved in deciding where the seat should be , since things should stay as they are .
As the President of the session deviated from the voting list which I had , I and many others in the Chamber did not really know what we were voting on when amendment proposal 47 suddenly came up for discussion .
So it was not clear in the vote that I supported amendment proposal No. 47 , which stresses the importance of maintaining the balance between large and small countries , although this was my intention .
I would also like to stress that the resolution which has now been approved should , in my opinion , mean that Parliament can view the forthcoming enlargement negotiations positively .
The Amsterdam Treaty does not mark a step towards a European democracy .
Quite the reverse : the revision of the Maastricht Treaty provides for a proliferation of procedures conducted between the Member States without adequate parliamentary or judicial control .
The principle of power sharing is being made a mockery of .
Without codecision , the otherwise desirable extension of majority voting in the Council becomes highly dangerous .
The Treaty does not introduce openness of legislation , nor is the EP being given rights of codetermination and control in key areas of integration , such as monetary union .
The new Treaty does not create equilibrium between the Union 's political and economic integration .
Despite its protestations of being committed to sustainable development , the EU still cleaves to the logic of unrestricted competition .
Maastricht II offers no guarantee that Member States will retain or be able to introduce higher environmental standards .
No mention is made in the draft Treaty of the introduction of eco-taxes .
The employment chapter is verbose and empty .
No mention is made of the objective of full employment .
The Amsterdam Treaty provides no financial or institutional instruments for carrying out an active employment policy at EU level .
Instead , it talks about co-ordinating the employment policies of the Member States , but they have long since lost any budgetary room for manoeuvre for employment offensives because of the tight corset of the convergence criteria .
In its present form , the Treaty undermines democracy and civil rights , which are the true foundations of European Union .
Now it is up to the EP and the national parliaments to cement an alliance for European democracy and take action to have the Intergovernmental Conference deferred .
Because , as the Treaty stands at present , it is unacceptable .
Results should be more important than sticking to a timetable .
Europe is at a crossroads .
The closure of the intergovernmental conference is the first main deadline .
In order to pursue completion of the European Union and its preparation in view of the next century , treaties , the rules and the institutions must be adapted .
The outcome of the governmental conference will be judged according to three criteria :
1.The paralysing unanimity rule must be restricted as much as possible .
The European Union cannot act efficiently as long as one of the Member States can put its national interests before the general interest of the inhabitants of the Union as a whole.2.The social aspect must be reinforced .
The European Union must listen to its members and respond to the demand for employment dignity for all .
That is why the social chapter must be improved .
That is also why we are recommending integration of an effective chapter on employment into the Treaty .
The balance must be struck once again between monetary policy , on one hand , and social and economic policies , on the other.3.The European Parliament 's democratic involvement in the second and third pillars must be strengthened .
The European Union must be able to intervene in order to maintain peace and security both inside and outside its borders .
The European Parliament must take a more active part in this procedure and must be able to resume the democratic prerogatives lost by national parliaments in a certain number of vital areas.As far as we know , the Dutch Presidency 's proposals offer too few prospects in terms of these three criteria .
On behalf of the PS delegation , I would like to insist that efforts be made in Amsterdam in order to improve the texts and for measures to be taken in order to come closer to the positions frequently taken by the European Parliament , in particular in the resolution that we have just adopted .
If not , if significant progress proved impossible because of a lack of time or political restraints , a slight delay will be preferable to a negative outcome .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Progress in CFSP 1996
The next item is the report ( A4-0193 / 97 ) by Mr Spencer , on behalf of the Committee for Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on progress in implementing the common foreign and security policy ( January to December 1996 ) .
We are very glad that the President-in-Office is still with us , and we are glad to take this opportunity to hear Mr van Mierlo 's views on this report by Mr Spencer , on behalf of the Council .
Madam President , I am very much obliged to Mr Spencer for giving me the floor .
It would be logical for him to take the floor first , but as often in the final days before a summit of this type , logic is overridden by the events and I must travel quickly to Bonn in order to meet someone who is playing a key role in the problem concerning us just now . That is why I welcome this generous gesture and I am very grateful to it .
Since we are approaching the end of the intergovernmental conference , which is designed to prepare the European Union to meet future challenges , it is vital not to lose sight of our current position and the results that we have already obtained , not only in terms of European integration in general but also in respect of its common foreign security policy .
The reports which Mr Spencer drafted on 1996 and the draft resolution attached to it sketch a varied image on the ground .
It is also pointed out that we need to improve the effectiveness and coherence of the CFSP .
The Council shares this opinion and that is why we are aiming at a structural improvement of the functioning of the CFSP and that this on the agenda of the IGC .
But we must not forget that the Union still has a long way to go even if progress already made in recent years is not negligible .
It is in accordance with this situation that we must express our expectations and form our judgment .
As you know , the Maastricht Treaty threw down the bases of a common foreign and security policy for the European Union .
This matter also obviously confronts the traditional powers of national states with the reality of European integration .
The modelling of the CFSP expresses that reality very well .
A strong CFSP can be forged thanks to the feeling of proximity of the Member States of the European Union .
Fashioning a common policy on the ground means that reality is becoming aware of the need to express shared common interests .
In certain areas this awareness is stronger than in others but a process of gradual evolution is clearly emerging here .
This evolution is reflected in institutional terms in the growth of European political cooperation from 25 years ago until implementation of the CFSP following Maastricht .
The institutional reforms with regard to the CFSP , currently envisaged as part of the intergovernmental conference , are a further stage in this process and must be regarded as such .
Only ten years ago it was obvious that the economic giant that the European Community was had feet of clay when it came to foreign and security policy and that that ground was insignificant .
In reality this situation , inspired by geopolitical relationships , was an artificial one .
However , the fall of the Berlin wall and the wave of democratization in central and eastern Europe have placed the Community suddenly and unexpectedly up against new challenges .
Europe was , in any case , going to have to affirm its political identity and weight more markedly .
The way of making progress is gradually emerging although it is obvious that this process is going to need more time .
The IGC is examining , as it were , the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty vis-à-vis the CFSP in the light of the experiences that we have gained over recent years and the needs that we have pinpointed in looking towards the future .
It is true that the CFSP 's tools have seldom been used and public opinion often had the impression that the Union still cannot react firmly .
Let us be realistic !
Is this situation due to the instruments or to the will of the Member States to use them ?
In fact an efficient and firm common policy in this area calls for a desire and will to collaborate , justified by an awareness of the fact that our common interests are at stake .
The Union is in full evolution and is preparing for its future , including that of the CFSP .
Our relations with associate countries in central and eastern Europe and around the Mediterranean are being strengthened .
Moreover , we are working on lasting relations with our neighbouring countries in eastern Europe and around the Mediterranean basin .
As far as problems on our continent are concerned , such as Belarus , former Yugoslavia and Albania , the Union is beginning to play the role allocated to it and which it is its duty to play with increasing success .
It is trying to fulfil this role in conjunction with organisations such as the United Nations , the Council of Europe and the organs of the European Convention on Human Rights , by implementing every available means .
That does not mean that the Union can advance or impose short-term solutions , but that it exercises an influence in terms of foreign policy in the respect of its own interests but also in the light of the importance of its economic relations with the countries in question .
It is obvious that the rehabilitation and promotion of political and economic stability go hand in hand with this and are of major importance for the Union and its Member States .
To this effect , tools such as the pre-adhesion strategy , PHARE and TACIS are very important .
Recently the European Union has also been very active in the field of relations with other neighbouring countries .
For example , let us mention the pursuit of dialogue with Mediterranean countries .
The process begun at the Barcelona Conference has led to a system of closer economic links and a more intense political dialogue of strategic interest for the Union , its Member States and our neighbours to the south .
Links with eastern European countries have also been strengthened .
On the basis of general action plans , the Union is endeavouring for example to transform its relationship with the Russian Federation and Ukraine into a lasting and significant partnership .
The Union is thereby contributing to the formation of a stable European security structure .
The Union has also made considerable efforts concerning developments in the Middle East and the region of the Great Lakes in Africa .
Representatives have been specially appointed for both of these regions , namely Mr Moratinos and Mr Ajello , in order to express the Union 's commitment and to pursue the Union 's policy more effectively .
You will nevertheless understand that the Union 's role in these regions is limited to support .
Initially , conflict based problems have to be tackled by the parties themselves , but the Union can lend support .
Arbitrage and preventive diplomacy can also complement support in terms of humanitarian aid and any other kind of aid .
I myself was able to see the importance of appointing Mr Moratinos for the Middle East question .
In fact , at that moment , and following the very specific manoeuvres of the Presidency , it was recognized for the first time that Europe can play not only an economic role but also a political role in the peace process in the Middle East .
It is vital that we continue to try and complement efforts by the United States .
Too often and for too long we adopted a childish attitude aimed at sharing our powers - who could do what in the Middle East .
The Middle East is very special for Europe .
I think that American diplomacy would fail unless Europe were supporting it .
In my view , we have exploited this point carefully and harmoniously .
However , we could act even more coherently .
Relations between the Union and its trans-Atlantic partners have evolved .
Even though sometimes we have differences of opinion over the use of means - we often , for example , have different conceptions of the usefulness and efficiency of isolation or boycotts - we do share the same objectives , standards and values .
This understanding may be seen in the extent of cooperation in the framework of trans-Atlantic dialogue .
Only recently , at the Summit , relations between European Union and the United States led to good results .
As I have just said with respect to the Middle East , cooperation is called for .
That was also important in the framework of the unfortunate story of a common resolution in terms of human rights policy over China but , as far as Europe and the United States are concerned , there was excellent cooperation .
In this case cooperation within Europe was less evident .
Closer cooperation in the field of political dialogue has just complemented our economic relations with the countries of Latin America as well as our main Asian partners .
The European Union - ASEAN Summit is an example of the framework of cooperation which enables an exchange of open and constructive ideas to be held .
No-one would have thought , at that time , that we could discuss the Burma situation for two and a half hours in a very open way .
We have managed to make some progress but not that much .
I think that a well studied diplomatic manoeuvre might prove more profitable than we tended to believe .
In other words , the Union is no longer a simple trading partner but is also increasingly becoming a major partner in external political dialogue .
It is obvious that the policy to be pursued must reach a consensus within the Union .
We will only be listened to if we adopt a single position .
This unanimity , emerging from an awareness of shared common interests , cannot be obtained through institutional structures .
That is why it is all the more important that we exchange ideas and try to reach an agreement on the external political challenges to be met by the European Union and in the framework of the Council , but also dialogue with you , representatives of the peoples of the Union .
The structures can , of course , help us in this process .
So far we have chosen the least restrictive structures , intergovernmental decisions and consensus .
Everyone can , therefore , act as they wish and block the process at the last moment .
We have to make this option more difficult and that is what we have tried to do in the new Treaty .
I admit that the structures are not decisive but they can help us to avoid weak points .
That is exactly what we are examining just now and where all of our efforts are being placed .
I shall stop here . Thank you for allowing me to address the European Parliament .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for those remarks on the foreign and security policy .
Madam President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his comments .
I am always happy to oblige the presidency in the hope that we will see both the Dutch presidency and other presidencies perhaps a little more frequently in front of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
As you have indicated , this is the annual report on the implementation of the common foreign and security policy that is specified in the Treaty .
As this is the third such debate , I have this year provided comparative tables showing the trends - and in some cases the lack of trends - in the instruments of the policy .
I am grateful to our excellent secretariat for the accuracy of this complex data .
The third part of my report represents , for the first time , this data on a geographic basis , spiralling out from countries in the rest of Europe and nearby to every other region of the world .
I look forward to the time when we can lift our eyes from the institutional development of the CFSP to an undistracted debate on the substance of Europe 's relations with the world ; a state-of-the-world debate on a par with our successful state-of-the-Union debate .
I was very pleased and attracted by the President-in-Office 's reference to kitchens and dishes in this morning 's debate .
That is absolutely right .
On foreign policy we need to get to the food and stop worrying about the plumbing .
Sadly we are not yet in that happy position so the second part of my report lists , once again , our criticisms of how the CFSP has failed to develop as was anticipated at Maastricht .
It is a story of institutional timidity and occasional failure of European solidarity under commercial pressures .
I would not wish to concentrate solely on the shortcomings and failures of the policy because we are making progress .
Twenty years ago our inability to act together on foreign policy matters was not regarded as either surprising or culpable .
Ten years ago we felt guilty about our failure .
Five years ago we had developed aspirations and rhetoric but had neither institutions nor ground rules .
After Maastricht we had some mechanisms but we have not been good at using them .
We have played with them at the margins but we have not used them to guide our way forward on the great issues that confront the Union .
I am most worried by the impact of this failure on our public and in particular , the impact of that failure , both political and technical , in the wars of Yugoslav succession , where our public expected us to save lives and we failed .
The lesson of Bosnia , it seems to me , is that in the last resort , the Union must have the ability to intervene militarily .
If we shy away from that responsibility we are doomed to being merely the paymaster for the peace-making efforts of non-European powers .
It is in this context that we need to embark on a process of bringing the European Union and Western European Union closer together .
My report contains a section , again for the first time , on the role of this Parliament , its President , its committees and its delegations .
I am an unapologetic enthusiast for parliamentary involvement , both national and European in the CFSP .
I do not accept the doctrine that foreign affairs is the prerogative of the executive .
In my view , the executives of Europe are already far too strong and parliamentarians too weak .
This approach seems to be based on theories about the primacy of the Crown in foreign affairs , an argument which was rejected by the US Senate from the very early years of that great republic .
It seems to me proper to aspire to such influence , but it requires us to be self-critical of our own performance as an institution , not least in our tendency to shoot from the hip in urgency resolutions in this plenary .
I echo President Santer 's concerns this morning about attempts to restrict the coherence of the Commission 's role in negotiating on behalf of the Union under Articles 113 and 238 .
There is important foreign policy in the first pillar and we should not dismiss its usefulness .
For me , foreign policy , as understood by the electorates of Europe , is not limited to the classic diplomacy of the kind which absorbs the attention of those involved day-to-day in the CFSP .
For any power , but especially for a predominantly civilian superpower such as this Union , foreign policy must be a mixture of trade and economics , of environment and development , of security and human rights .
It must grow and be rooted in the genuine fears and perceptions of our citizens .
It is not just the completion of the technical process of Treaty revision .
It is not just a game for diplomats .
It is about trade , jobs , drought and hurricanes .
It is at least as much about what goes on in Kyoto and Geneva as what goes on in Moscow and Washington .
We have hopes for progress in Amsterdam .
In the jargon we will not be holding our breath .
But we will stand ready to do our part in making a political reality that lives in the minds of the people of Europe of whatever the Member States bring forward as a reformed and improved CFSP after the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Madam President , I should like , on behalf of my Group , to thank the Rapporteur , Mr Spencer .
I think that he has emphasized all of the relevant points in this report and in the attached resolution .
My gratitude also goes to the Minister , Mr Van Mierlo , for his detailed apology of the CFSP in 1996 .
I found it excellent .
I also noted that the debate which has been held here today was a debate after the event and without conviction whose conclusions unfortunately have already been drawn .
The CFSP is not going very well and the European Parliament should try to influence to a greater extent its development rather than holding this kind of post mortem debate .
This institution has no doubt about the interest of the common foreign policy .
But now all that we can do is assess it .
The members of my group would like to look at the various aspects of the policy .
It must be said that , in terms of foreign policy , the Union did not meet the expectations of 1996 .
It is true that , in a certain number of areas , progress has been made - especially in areas belonging to the first pillar - I am thinking of humanitarian aid and stepping up relations with central and eastern European countries , including the former Soviet Union .
In various other situations , however , the European Union has not been able or has not succeeded in contributing decisively to solving conflicts and tense situations .
In many cases , a common human rights policy was out of the question especially since the larger Member States in a good many major situations have remained faithful to their own conduct and orientations .
Furthermore , as has already been said , the United States have interfered on several occasions in situations that we ought to have been able to solve alone .
It is a shame because the European Union is a major factor and it is also an important sponsor of very many international activities and we do not reap the fruit of that enough . These actions are not sufficiently well known to the public .
I am thinking in particular of the European Union 's role within the United Nations .
As far as security is concerned , we must await the outcome of Amsterdam , but there too I find that the European Union 's image is a pessimistic one . What we see is that it is really NATO which has been doing very well in recent years at the expense of the development of the European Union .
The Spencer report clearly tackles those aspects which need to be changed .
We support this approach .
We need to create better institutional conditions for the European Union 's foreign policy , especially when it comes to conflict prevention .
But that will only have any meaning and will only function if the Member States also demonstrate more ambition when it comes to collaborating over foreign affairs .
Madam President-in-Office , I very much welcome the publication of this report .
It highlights the ineffectiveness of the European Union 's policy in this particular area .
I find it somewhat ironic that we refer to the common foreign and security policy .
On many issues we have no policy and when we do it is rarely a common policy .
This report highlights a number of critical areas where we have failed .
It talks about the failure to respond to the continuing problems in Bosnia-Herzegovina or taking any initiative on Kosovo , the lack of effective response to the continuing problem of Cyprus and our relations with Turkey and the absence of a long-term policy for the Middle East or Africa .
It must also be admitted with some shame and embarrassment that our response to the recent Albanian crisis has been somewhat defective .
Various reasons are suggested for this .
We often hide behind structural deficiencies and I would certainly acknowledge that there are structural deficiencies , not least the requirement for unanimity .
However , that does not tell the whole tale .
Look , for example , at the failure of the European Union to act as one with regard to the continued breach of human rights in mainland China - an issue which will be debated later on .
There , economic interests have overtaken political principle and if we fail to act as one , particularly where principle is involved , then we will have no meaningful role in the geopolitical world .
So certainly let us address the problem of structural deficiencies but let us also recognize that there is a lack of principle involved in some of the ways we shape our policy .
I hope that this IGC deals with the structural deficiencies , that we end unanimity and replace it with QMV , that we strengthen the relationship with the Commission and the Parliament in this whole area and move away from intergovernmentalism and that we promise to start a real debate on the framing of a defence policy , hopefully incorporating the WEU and the EU pillar .
I once again pay tribute to the rapporteur .
The report shows where we are weak and let us hope that , especially in the rest of the week and in Amsterdam , we will make a start on rectifying that .
Madam President , as everyone is aware the CFSP is a bone of great contention in the European Union ; not because of its existence , but rather because of its absence .
The Union 's inability to implement a real common foreign and security policy , which has been lamented very often in this Chamber , means that while it is always willing do its share of the paying it cannot act effectively in the international arena .
The Spencer report , which is meticulous , honest and clear-sighted , underlines that reality in many of its points .
It also indicates what needs to be done in order for the Union to be able to assume its role in this field at some juncture .
It calls for the European Parliament to be given a bigger say with regard to the adoption of common actions and positions and for it to be afforded a participatory role in international negotiations .
It defines the concept of common security as having to do above all with economic and social stability , the defusing of ethnic tensions and the promotion of ongoing integration ; a security , that is , which extends beyond military confrontation and conflict and must be the model for the twenty-first century .
In addition , the report insists on the need to maintain parliamentary control of the financing of the CFSP , and it is a well known fact that not all of the Member States agree with that .
Even so , it is an important general point which remains unresolved .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Spencer on his excellent work .
Unfortunately , the record of CFSP is rather disappointing and current events do nothing to belie that .
Mr Spencer draws lessons from European powerlessness , not to say Europe 's absence from the international diplomatic arena .
The crisis in former Yugoslavia revealed the European Union 's inability to act .
Now the same is true with the Albania situation .
For the lack of a genuine common foreign and security policy , Europe cannot play the role that should be its , including that of restoring peace .
How could it be otherwise if the CFSP remains the expression of the Member States at intergovernmental level ?
The IGC must put that right by strengthening the principle of political solidarity , while enabling the Member States not to take part actively in certain common actions .
The Council has so far resorted too seldom to common actions and positions and has demonstrated obvious sloth .
I regret the weakness of Community diplomatic action in Cyprus and Turkey , for example .
I deplore our paralysis vis-à-vis Algeria .
Our absence of a common policy in respect of Africa is dramatic . I am afraid of what is in store in central Africa .
Since the failure of the European Defence Community in 1954 , for the first time , the basic conditions for the emergence of a European security policy now seem to be in place .
Let us not miss this opportunity .
Madam President , the record of the CFSP this year shows , as on previous occasions , that the European Union 's international activities are marked by a lack of political will , the non-existence of common aims and an insufficiency of institutional mechanisms .
This was so in Bosnia and more recently in Albania . What happened there has led to dissatisfaction of public opinion despite some truly positive efforts , such as those of our special envoy to the Middle East , Mr Moratinos .
But the immediate future does not suggest that the situation there is getting any better .
We saw how NATO and Russia signed an agreement over which Europe simply applauded and waited .
We will see in early July in Madrid how NATO , an institution with its origins in the Cold War , is enlarging to the detriment - of whom ?
Of the European Union 's own capacities in the security field .
Despite some positive aspects , what is proposed at the IGC is clearly insufficient .
We shall quickly have to change this situation .
We lack an autonomous external policy , a European entity for its own , independent security and defence , an ability to prevent conflicts and take decisive action to narrow the gap between north and south .
Otherwise , we shall be forced once again to mouth immodest and unreal phrases , that could even be qualified as gracious , as presented by Mr van Mierlo , over the fact that US diplomacy is sometimes wearied when Europe fails to act .
That is not true .
Madam President , the annual report on the progress of CFSP , as my group deplores , is unfortunately more of an occasion for a ritual celebration of integrationist fundamentalism than a far-reaching examination aimed at confronting aims and realities .
This report , despite its undeniable documentary quality and the wealth of its facts and figures , is no exception to that rule .
It takes the same ideological approach as last year 's , developing a conception of the CFSP that would set out to absorb all of all our nations ' external means of action , constantly conceived in opposition to national diplomacies , as if a successful initiative by one or more Member States could not , by its very nature , benefit Europe as a whole .
On the contrary , the competent and efficient national diplomatic services on which such actions rely are presented as an obstacle to the development of the CFSP and , during the debates , serious consideration has been given to their recycling , not to say their re-education .
The lack of consistency in today 's CFSP is attributed to the continuation of an intergovernmental dynamism reflecting the fear of the Member States to relinquish the fantasy of national power .
After Mr Lamers ' empty shell , now we have Mr Spencer 's fantasy .
The national State now plays in the new dominant ideology the role that used to be attributed to the class enemy in the ideology immediately before it .
Setting the CFSP against national foreign policies , is condemning it to sterility .
The CFSP will only be effective if it plays a complementary role and not that of replacing national diplomacies .
When we have genuinely common interests , which are properly inventoried , acting together to make them work undeniably brings added value .
In other areas , our attitudes differ .
The CFSP process can then make it possible , by means of concertation , to reconcile to the maximum the diversity of our approaches .
But we also have to recognize the existence of divergent policies linked , in certain vital areas , to the protection of vital national interests that are perfectly legitimate and respond to citizens ' wishes .
Wishing , for the sake of CFSP , to deny those realities can only do a disservice to the very aim being sought : affirming Europe 's place on the new international arena .
I regret that the Spencer report has not taken the realistic approach to the CFSP which is a necessary condition for its success .
That is why our group will not be able to vote for its adoption .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , every year since the Maastricht Treaty entered into force on 1 November 1993 , our Parliament has produced a report on the progress achieved in the elaboration of the common foreign and security policy , defined in Article J7 of the Treaty .
Every year , the European Parliament has deplored a disappointing progress report , the absence of a common policy in international crises .
The Spencer report is no exception to that rule .
According to its author , the beginnings of the CFSP are still unconvincing in the eyes of European citizens .
Reviewing the crises in 1996 , the report regrets in particular the absence of common proposals and initiatives by the Union for former Yugoslavia , the enlargement of NATO , and relations with Russia , its ineffectiveness in Albania , its diplomatic weakness over Cyprus and Turkey and its divisions over China .
Curiously , the report offers a positive appraisal of the action by the Union 's special envoy to the Middle East and thinks that there are still possibilities to be exploited in central Africa , Zaire , or the Great Lakes region .
No comment .
The measures proposed , as usual , to remedy these gaps are the following : integration of the WEU into the European Union , inclusion in the Community budget of CFSP operational non-compulsory expenditure , enabling the European Parliament to exert controls , and systematic consultation of the European Parliament by the Council before the adoption of common positions .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs is relying on the IGC to implement these reforms .
Whereas it increasingly dismantles Member States ' sovereignty in terms of foreign policy , it unfortunately brings with it hardly any harmony or peace between nations , and that is why we shall not be voting for the report .
Madame Chairman , when three new Member States joined the EU at the beginning of 1995 the tradition of military neutrality in the Union was strongly reinforced .
What is at issue here is a tradition , not the invalidity of security policy , as surprisingly often seems to be thought .
In post-war Europe the history of military neutrality is at least as long as that of alliances .
This should be remembered .
I should like to stress that Finland , for example , does not wish to be politically neutral .
We wish to support and strengthen the European Union 's common foreign and security policy .
In this area , Finland , together with Sweden among others , has been very active in recent times .
We do , however , wish to remain militarily neutral because this informed choice , in our opinion and according to our experience can best secure stability and peaceful development in northern Europe .
If Finland and Sweden now declared that they were going to give up their military neutrality , this would very probably result in the increase of military tension in our area and along the 1300 kilometre long border between the EU and Russia .
Why should we pursue a policy which increases tension ?
It would , amongst other things , make peaceful border cooperation considerably more difficult .
Against this background , we have followed with some concern the calls for the unification of the EU with the WEU .
This would mean that we would have to give up our military neutrality .
We understand that a majority of the EU Member States have wished to resolve their security problems by entering into military alliances .
We respect these solutions .
We would wish , however , for our decisions too to be respected in the same way .
The way from the division of Europe towards more peaceful development has been be preserved precisely by good cooperation between militarily allied and neutral countries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the credibility gap between the standing and economic strength of the European Union and its weakness and impotence as regards external security and defence policy is ever more striking .
This disparity arises because the Treaty on European Union was not implemented .
The scant progress made with regard to implementing external security and defence policy is disappointing , as mentioned in the excellent report by Mr Spencer , which we should support and vote for .
We do not in the European Union possess any strategic information services which would enable us to make analytical forecasts of world political trends . In Europe we do not have the power of decision on external policy within an acceptably rapid time .
It is well known within the European universe that there is no operational capacity or resources within the sphere of security and defence .
For the urgent implementation of these measures we need to set up a solid and coherent institutional framework , as this Parliament has recommended and is still recommending in this report , which drew very little attention from the Council .
We are very concerned about the timid progress made in this matter and , I repeat , about the timid progress proposed in this matter proposed for the Intergovernmental Conference .
Madam President , we all know that the threefold strategy which could lend credibility to an external policy supported and framed in a common European Union security and defence policy would be to provide a basis and knowledge so that we could decide swiftly then act effectively .
Without these structural conditions the European Union will continue to lack prestige as regards external policy - it is a hard truth - and it will not in the medium term provide the appropriate support for the development of economic and financial policies and the relevant social progress .
Nevertheless , I hope that the operation of economic and monetary union as a whole , an operational Central European Bank , a single currency as a positive factor and a factor for greater cohesion will provide us with a basis for launching a European Union ( but that will certainly be a matter for a new generation of European political leaders - this one is already exhausted - and possibly within a new institutional framework - this one already being exhausted ) ; the objectives should be , in addition to improving living conditions , a little more pride in the life of the European citizen .
Madam President , I too would like to compliment Mr Spencer on an excellent report , but I also want to express my disappointment at the fact that , once again , this Parliament is just having a nice chat .
And I want to say , once again , that a common foreign policy is needed , but the reality is we are not going to do anything concrete to achieve that objective .
I ask myself - and I ask you - whether anyone still cherishes the illusion that , as Mr Spencer rightly mentions in his report , the old nation states can play a leading role in a strongly and sharply evolving international scenario .
I ask myself whether Europe , which certainly has a role at the highest level on the world scene , prefers to continue in the role of fifteen political dwarves , fifteen political gnomes who continue to argue about every important foreign policy issue which arises at international level .
The events in former Yugoslavia are an obvious case , but we can cite many others , like the policies on Russia , China , which we shall be discussing later , and the Mediterranean too .
Actual common actions and positions can be counted on the fingers of one hand .
So I believe a specific and strong position should be taken after this debate through a specific intervention by Parliament .
Madam President , Mr Spencer deserves our thanks for his efforts , if only because his report makes it clear that any report on the implementation of the EU 's common foreign and security policy must , nowadays , quite simply amount to a list of missed opportunities and failures .
And , since the Intergovernmental Conference is producing no genuine progress in this area , I fear that such reports are going to take the same form in the future .
In order to find practical examples of this failure , we need not look very far afield : even among the Member States of the European Union , present or prospective , threats are being openly backed by military force .
I regard it as an unforgivable failure of the European Union that it has not been able to resolve the crisis between Greece , Turkey and Cyprus .
Indeed , if we look around we can see economically weak countries investing economic resources in totally disproportionate armaments -resources that they urgently need elsewhere .
I believe this should be a clear priority of all the European institutions , so that what is nothing less than a European scandal can be brought under control .
Madam President , the Spencer report makes some accurate observations .
However , I see things in a slightly harder light .
It is , of course , true that the development of a common foreign and security policy is being impeded by an institutional deficit . But there are other deficits as well , and there is an absence of solidarity .
We saw that in the essentially neutral stance taken by the European Union during the crisis over the Imia islands in 1996 , even though one of its member countries was involved .
Secondly , the principle of equal treatment does not seem to count for much .
The European Union took one approach to the rights of the Chechens and is taking another , at the present time , to the rights of the Kurds , and it says nothing about incursions into the territory of other countries by the Turkish army .
Thirdly , there is a lack of self-confidence .
In foreign policy the Union displays an enduring inferiority complex , and it has become reconciled to following in the wake of the United States . Cyprus is a case in point .
The Union did whatever it could to downgrade the status of its special envoy vis-à-vis the United States and now the United States has just appointed Mr Holbrooke as its own special representative .
I think that the tragedy of the Union 's foreign policy was illustrated also by the situation that developed in Albania in 1996 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome this report because we want to see the swift implementation of the CFSP with regard to Austria 's accession to the WEU and to NATO .
Matters we regard as particularly important are improving the working conditions between the WEU and the EU and the development of a European security system that is not dependent on the USA .
The primary purpose and objective of a European security system must be the prevention of military conflicts ; the resolution of conflicts , even by the use of military force if necessary , is a secondary priority .
In view of its history during the present century , Europe has a special responsibility to adopt an active security policy .
That policy must not be jeopardized by a naive form of pacifism , because there is one thing that none of us here should ever forget : adherence to the principles of unilateral pacifism , anti-militarism and military neutrality would have meant that Auschwitz was never liberated .
Madam President , I would like to say the same as everyone else here is saying that this is a very good report .
It contains a good , broad concept of security policy and is not restricted to narrow military areas and military issues .
I also welcome what Mr Spencer himself has said that there is a need for a long term strategy to tackle global problems including poverty , the environment and ethnic and social conflicts .
I think this is excellent .
Above all , in the background documents for the report I see a good description of how a common security policy could be developed ; there is an analysis of shortcomings but there is also a description of what could be done .
They form a good reference book for anyone who is interested .
Even the sun sometimes has its spots .
And so has this report in some places .
I support instead what Mr Paasio said on the situation of the non-aligned neutral States .
These spots are still present in points 15 and 19 .
I hope that they will disappear at the vote when we support amendment proposals Nos. 1 and 2 .
Otherwise : Congratulations on a good report .
Madam President , congratulations are due to Mr Spencer for his report .
The great absentee , the great unknown , the great guilty party : the so-called but , in reality , non-existent common foreign policy has been described as all of those things at one time or another , and not without justification .
After the historic events of 1989 it should have become the dominant concern of our Union , but still , today , on the eve of the revision of the Treaty , it remains a distant dream - albeit an undesirable one for some people here .
Sad experience , starting with the Gulf crisis and followed by the break-up of Yugoslavia , the Bosnia-Herzegovina drama and the tragedies in Africa - leaving aside the confusion with regard to Turkey - should have taught us that the growing trend in European foreign policy is more towards renationalization than communautization .
The biggest trading power on earth , as our Union affects to call itself , seems to confirm the views of those who mockingly describe it as a voiceless diplomat , a blind general and a lame soldier .
Certainly , there is no lack of pious aspiration about the CFSP in the Maastricht Treaty , and nor will there be any lack of it soon in the Amsterdam Treaty .
What is really lacking though is the unanimous political will to forge an effective foreign policy .
Various technical solutions are being searched for .
There is , in fact , a desire , within the diffuse economic perception that grips us , to substitute money for our political and strategic absence .
As Mr Van den Broek said perceptively yesterday , in all of the trouble spots , from Sarajevo to Palestine , the Europeans are doing the paying and the others are doing the action .
If we want find the root cause of this inability we have to look back to the thing that in recent years we have been sedulously keeping quiet about : the abandonment of the federal idea .
Madam President , I too wish to congratulate Mr Spencer on his report .
I agree with him that progress on the common foreign and security policy has been disappointing .
It is true that the EU has been unable to implement human rights and democracy clauses in its agreements .
The Commission has , as Mr Spencer outlined , failed to make proposals as it could do under Article J.8.
I particularly welcome his reference to the analysis unit , which would assist the EU in drawing up a more effective common foreign and security policy and help with conflict prevention .
It is true that we need a closer relationship between the EU and the WEU .
However , like Mrs Theorin , I disagree with paragraphs 15 and 19 , on the integration of the WEU in the EU and more majority voting in the common foreign and security policy .
As Mr Lambrias said , the common foreign and security policy has clearly failed in certain areas , such as former Yugoslavia , Albania and other areas of the world .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Mr Spencer for including a reference to antipersonnel mines , and to ensure that we all work together to see that they are eliminated from the face of the earth , because they cause so much damage and hurt to people across the world .
Madam President , whatever the result of the Intergovernmental Conference may be , one thing is certain : applause for that conference will be muted .
However important it may be to give our citizens the feeling that they live in an area of freedom and internal security , which includes social security and the right to work , external security is a necessity too .
Particularly for countries like Austria , which are frontier states of the EU , it is important that the European Union should carry weight in its foreign and security policy and so become a stabilizing factor in Europe .
So far we have seen mainly the shortcomings of the CFSP , in Bosnia and also in Albania and the Middle East .
The Spencer report makes this painfully clear .
Let us not deceive ourselves : without the commitment of the USA in these crisis areas , nothing could be done .
They show up the shortcomings of the European Union .
This makes it all the more important to us that , with regard to the CFSP as elsewhere , majority decisions should make it easier for the European Union to act .
The fact that the EU accepts the Petersberg undertakings , peace-keeping and peace-making missions in other words , is positive .
The fact that there is still no date for the integration of the WEU , so that the military backbone is lacking , is negative .
A clear CFSP line would also facilitate the national debate in neutral States such as Austria .
While uncertainties remain regarding the CFSP , it is an easy way out to take refuge in neutrality , which has lost its meaning as a result of the changed political scenario in Europe and should be replaced by solidarity in favour of a common security policy .
Madam President , it is customary on these occasions to congratulate the rapporteur .
What may be less customary is that in congratulating Mr Spencer I actually mean it , because previous chairmen of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy have produced the annual report on a very absolutist basis : they have talked about the world they would like to see rather than the world that exists .
Mr Spencer 's report , however , is practical and concrete , and that is precisely the basis on which we should address this subject .
After all we have a common foreign and security policy not because we want some sort of status symbol to prove to the rest of the world we have grown up as an organization , but because we believe that our economic and political strength can , through CFSP , produce benefits not only to EU citizens but to citizens of the broader Europe and , indeed , of the world , and it is on providing those positive benefits that we have to be judged .
At the moment the CFSP is very piecemeal : it owes more to the inspiration of Heath Robinson than to the modern , computer-driven technological age .
What we need is a clearer definition of what we want !
What is a common foreign policy and what is it trying to achieve ?
We have no judgement of what we define as a common difficulty , a common challenge , and we have no idea of a common approach .
How could anybody decide on a strategy for Albania when the Council of Ministers had 15 different briefing documents ?
You cannot even begin to attack the problem .
While national governments are still briefing their civil servants , we cannot have a common foreign security policy .
That is why we need an analysis unit , which I hope we will see in Amsterdam .
It is also why we need more coherence in funding the CFSP .
Passing the hat round and trying to move things from pillar to post is not the model way of doing things .
I hope that the interinstitutional agreement on the funding of the CFSP is cemented into the Amsterdam Treaty , and not before time !
We need a decision-making structure which respects the sensitivity of national sovereignty and the sensitivity of some of these issues to our Member States but still allows us to make progress .
The idea of constructive abstention and more majority voting within commonly agreed strategies is a new way of moving forward .
The IGC will address some of these issues .
What it cannot address is the lack of political will .
The biggest disgrace of the common foreign and security policy is what happened in Mostar , and what happened to Mr Koschnick , who was our administrator in Mostar .
The Council of Ministers betrayed him because of a lack of political will .
What we have to build is a political will .
We have to improve Parliament 's role in a common foreign and security policy .
Having said that , I am delighted that Mr Spencer has been critical of Parliament .
How can the Council trust us and take us seriously if we are incapable of making coherent recommendations and produce urgencies which are inaccurate and contradictory ?
We have to look to ourselves if we are really to take a major role in the developing foreign and security policy .
Madam President , I hope that the compliments that I shall make to the Spencer report and which will be added to those of former speakers will also be seen positively following Mr Titley 's introduction .

I think , in particular , that Mr Spencer has provided in his very serious report an almost perfect analysis of the lacunae in the European Union 's foreign policy and he has analyzed the possible improvements to it .
In this sense and following this morning 's debate on the intergovernmental conference , it might be said that there is a consensus emerging on possible improvements to the tools of the common foreign policy .
On this score , we are also very anxiously awaiting , along with this institution , the outcome of the Amsterdam Summit and we will then see to what extent the Treaty really has given us instruments and improvements to procedures and structures which might possibly enable us to reach a truly more effective and more dynamic common security and foreign policy , as has been demanded by so many speakers this afternoon .
Without wishing to undermine the just criticism of the common foreign policy , I should also like to issue a warning against the possible tendency to attribute , in some way or another , all of the international conflicts currently raging and all of the suffering still present in the world to the European Union 's inaction or the lack of means enabling us to bring them to an end within a reasonable time .
Unfortunately , there are still many examples of big countries , world powers still with considerable diplomatic , military and economic capacities , but unable to find an immediate solution to any conflict , be it the Middle East conflict or the wars raging in Central Africa .
The European Union 's foreign policy presents , happily I would say , a number of positive elements too : we are the world 's number one donor , Europe supports countries and people who are suffering throughout the world and we are also ready to explain to our publics that it is necessary to pursue the huge international effort in order to reestablish and reconstruct former Yugoslavia , a situation which we did not sufficiently react to at the time , in terms of political and diplomatic activity ; but , nevertheless , we are now genuinely trying to consolidate the Dayton Peace Agreement .
As for the global strategic environment , Eastern Europe , the former Soviet Union , the Mediterranean and the Middle East , we have reviewed our individual relations with each of these countries and strengthened our links with them .
The same goes for a country which arouses so much controversy in the European Parliament , namely Turkey , with which we concluded a customs union , two years ago , and with which we are still trying to strengthen links ; it needs to take clear and practical measures rather than condemning to 21 years in prison a political activist who did nothing more than lower a flag .
In brief , there are also positive comments to make about the European Union 's foreign policy .
However , I should like to come back to the beginning and the nerve centre of the Spencer report - namely - as Mr Titley also just emphasized - that regardless of the structures of the procedures to be adopted shortly in Amsterdam , they can never replace the genuine political will to defend common interests at Community level .
On this score , we obviously are lagging behind .
Finally , Madam President , I should like to emit a cry of distress .
I think that it would be beneficial if all our Member States conscientiously re-read the existing Union Treaties in terms of a common foreign and security policy and that they echoed the words of the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , namely pacta sunt servanda . They should remember that , in 1991 , in Maastricht , all of them declared that they should not only aspire to a common foreign policy but also to a security policy and , in the end , a common defence policy and all of the necessary tools for that purpose ; their remarks made on this subject on strengthening WEU and the acquisition of tools which might also be used or exert pressure when diplomacy looks like failing - that all of subjects - also ought to retain our attention .
Madam President , I should like to conclude by expressing once again my considerable regard for Mr Spencer and my hope to see , in the coming years , numerous debates on the European Union 's common security and foreign policy in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , as well as in the plenary session of the European Parliament .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
EP-national parliaments relations
The next item is the report ( A4-0179 / 97 ) by Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments .
Since the Maastricht Treaty , the European Union has made genuine progress in political terms . The ratification procedures which followed then showed the strength of the call for a duty to justify .
This appeal has never been denied and the current changes to the Treaty will only enforce it . Given their status as elected representatives of the Union 's peoples , the national parliaments and the European Parliament play a key role in the exercise of democratic control over activities , in particular the legislative activities , of the European Union .
The quality of the relationship between the European Parliament and national parliaments is therefore of crucial interest for the democratic nature of the European Union . If they oppose each other democracy will suffer .
If they recognize that they have a common mission , democracy will be strengthened . That , ladies and gentlemen , was the thought that I have had throughout the year since I was appointed as Rapporteur on relations between our Parliament and the national parliaments .
Convincing you was not that difficult . On the other hand , obtaining the approval of the national parliaments was and still is harder .
As the Finnish parliament said , our relationship is both one of competition and complementarity .
As for the latter aspect , the European Parliament monitors the action of the Commission and the Council while the national parliaments monitor their national governments , especially when they are acting at EU level .




That seems to be a matter of course but it is far from being the case since numerous EU legislative documents and nearly half the budget are passed without sufficient parliamentary controls , without mentioning the second and third pillars over which parliamentary - and , therefore , democratic - controls are virtually impossible , still today .
Consequently , my resolution contains fundamental demands , in the run up to the closure of the IGC - firstly : integration into the Treaty of openness and transparency as a general principle , valid for all of the European Union 's institutions .
This simple fact , ladies and gentlemen , should lessen public mistrust and should even help to do away with it altogether .
Secondly : strengthening the European Parliament 's powers and introducing codecision into all Council decisions taken by a qualified majority .
Thirdly : an obligation under the Treaty to indicate all pre-legislative and legislative texts in due time to the national parliaments so that they have at least four weeks to express their opinion before the Council takes its decision .
Fourthly : strengthening cooperation between the Union 's parliaments by means of a better definition of the COSAC , by means of communicating in due time the Commission 's legislative programme to the national parliaments , allocating reciprocal facilities and organizing multilateral electronic communications .
The IGC 's current proposals respond partly to this demand .
I hope that , in the run up to the Summit , these proposals will not be watered down but they will actually be strengthened .
I am also aware of the fact , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that my report and resolution are only one cog in a relationship between our Parliament and the national parliaments , because they will still have some difficulties .
That is why I hope that they will not be neglected but special attention will be paid to them .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to use my remaining 30 seconds to thank everyone who has helped me in drafting this report because , of course , I did not act alone .
I am very happy to have been able to count on the support of staff working for the Institutional Committee , my own assistants and a large number of colleagues .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I congratulate the rapporteur .
We have had excellent collaboration in committee , and the Socialist Group will be supporting her motion for a resolution when it comes to the vote .
The role of national parliaments and of the European Parliament are , and must be , complementary .
Attempts by Eurosceptics and assorted nationalists on the extreme right to set the national parliaments and the European Parliament against each other must be resisted .
The role is complementary because national parliaments have a role in their national capitals in controlling , scrutinizing and monitoring the activities of the ministers who represent their country at Council meetings in Brussels .
They all have different ways of doing it which they have developed in accordance with their own constitutional traditions .
I have no doubt that some of these ways could be improved .
That is up to them .
But however good it is - be it the Scandinavian model whereby the minister appears before the relevant parliamentary committee on his or her way to the airport when going to a Council meeting and on his or her way back from the airport when returning from a Council meeting , a very intense form of scrutiny - or one of the other methods which have been developed , the fact remains that , however good that national parliamentary scrutiny is , it remains separate scrutiny by fifteen different national parliaments , each over one member of the Council .
That is where the role of the European Parliament comes in .
Somebody has to deal with the Council as a collective body , as an institution that is taking decisions at European level as a European institution .
And that is the importance of the co-decision procedure - to have a parliamentary body directly elected at European level to interact with the Council .
The two roles are therefore complementary , and care should be taken in the Treaty to distinguish these two roles .
We can support the compromises that seem to be emerging in the IGC to take measures that would facilitate the national control that national parliaments must exercise through better time limits and better circulation of documents giving them the time to get stuck into issues .
More important than that in the IGC is a related matter , that of extending qualified majority voting .
If you have unanimity in an enlarged Union of 20 or so Member States , there will be no decisions for anybody to scrutinize and control .
There will be nothing for national parliaments nor for the European Parliament to deal with because there will be paralysis .
Unless we extend qualified majority voting in the new Treaty throughout the whole realm of Community legislation at the very least , then there will be no point in discussing the best ways to carry out national or European parliamentary scrutiny .
That issue must be tackled by this IGC .
Madam President , I think that the success of Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck 's report , approved by a large majority in committee , lies in its appropriate focus .
Why ?
Because it sets out from the premise that the European Parliament and national parliaments both represent European citizens and , as Mr Corbett said , we must not fight in vain , we have to head in the same direction in exerting controls and conducting legislative activity .
This report , which mentions the support of national parliaments - as the COSAC also recognized at its Dublin meeting - for extending European Parliament codecision to legislative acts , heads in the right direction .
What can we do to head in that right direction ?
I think that this report contains practical proposals that improve the political control that national parliaments exercise over Community legislation in the scope of their own competence , that of the national parliaments , and the control that governments are subjected to , which as we know has its place in the Council of Ministers .
The rapporteur also makes practical proposals on how the controls exercised by the European Parliament could be improved and finally on cooperation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
The rapporteur recognizes in her report , Madam President , that the proposals are not spectacular .
They are not but they are governed by common sense , head in the right direction and are in keeping with what the national parliaments , with the representations of the European Parliament , agreed on in the COSAC - and here I wish to pay tribute to VicePresidents Fontaine and Imbeni .
They head in the right direction I referred to earlier , in other words .
I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her splendid work , her practical proposals in which the wishes of the national parliaments are reflected , as they were expressed at the hearing held in Brussels a few weeks ago .
With texts like this one , which are not spectacular , we make real progress , set by step , towards European construction .
Madam President , the proposal we are analyzing today is certainly not intended to transfer responsibilities or powers from the national parliaments to the European Parliament , far from it !
Its logic is to develop better links and synergy between the two assemblies , with one specific objective : improving representation of the citizens , so that as well as having a national identity , they feel more European .
Inevitably decisions will increasingly be taken in Strasbourg and Brussels , but complementary and parallel to decisions taken in the individual Member States .
We want to associate the two institutions , Community and national , in evaluation , analysis , objectives and especially urgent situations .
Within this framework the regions should take on basic responsibilities for their territories , and there should be better organization of their own institution , the Committee of the Regions .
The European Parliament is ready to work directly with the national parliaments .
We hope this is mutual .
For this to happen in real time , it would be very useful to have two-way electronic transmission between the European Parliament and the national parliaments - as the rapporteur proposes in her report , and we congratulate her - for each political group and each individual Member of Parliament , together with the respective committees .
We are working together to simplify legislative procedures , we are working together on common urgent intervention , we are working together , above all , to help the citizens understand why the two major institutions that represent them exist and how they function .
Madam President , I have just tabled an amendment taking up the main suggestion that I worded in a report dealing with the same issue and addressed to the Luxembourg Prime Minister , i.e. granting a right of appeal to national parliaments for the purpose of annulling Community acts for ultra vires or other serious reasons , according to the provisions of Article 173 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
It must be noted that the national parliaments are very much excluded from European legislative procedures , including in areas within their remits originating in constituent powers , which sometimes causes serious problems in an atmosphere of defiance against the cause of European integration prevailing in most Member States .
My intention is therefore to propose what in German is called ' ein Vorschlag zur Güte ' , an idea that can cut corners , to counter the feeling of frustration and powerlessness that national parliamentarians often feel towards European construction .
To the extent that we are in a system of delegation of powers , this is only a rightful reversal whereby those who delegate also have the means of checking whether or not those powers entrusted to Community bodies are effectively used properly and in the framework of the delegations accorded .
It is therefore essentially to avoid the undesirable inflation of a blank cheque that I am proposing that the national parliaments should become parties to the European Union 's jurisdictional system , alongside national governments and the Union 's institutions .
The main quality of the Neyts report is the interest that it takes in the main function of national parliaments in the European Union .
As parliamentarians we should acknowledge that the citizens are , above all , attached to their national parliaments because they are close to them and have a historic and traditional role to play in their countries .
That is why , if we want to strengthen democracy within the Union , we must as a priority seek to enhance the role of national parliaments in the European system .
Although strengthening national parliamentary controls over European legislation is up to the parliaments themselves , a certain number of measures could be taken at European level in order to increase their involvement .
For that purpose , the Neyts report contains a large number of precious ideas .
We welcome the fact that proposals such as improving the information of national parliaments in terms of European matters should be taken up in the protocol on the role of national parliaments presented by the Dutch Presidency , with a view to the Amsterdam Summit .
We also note that the report does not sufficiently take into account the lack of democratic legitimacy of the European Parliament .
Too much is expected of the strengthening of the EP 's powers .
Although the European Parliament is elected directly by the citizens , increasing the role of the European Parliament does not narrow the gap separating the Union from the ordinary people .
Ordinary people are hard put to identify with a parliament in which national political pluralism has difficulties in breaking through and where linguistic barriers prevent a genuine political debate from taking place .
Consequently , an effective democratic representation of a genuine diversity of citizens , languages and cultures in the European Union in Brussels and Strasbourg will remain problematic by definition .
As a result , the European Union 's political agenda should limit itself to tasks with obvious added value in terms of the national approach .
That will be the best way of helping to bring ordinary people closer to European policy and filling in the democratic deficit .
Madam President , the rapporteur , our honourable colleague Mrs Neyts , whom I warmly congratulate from the other side of the barrier on her report which I disagree with , is wrong according to me when she states that the democratic deficit can notably be combatted by granting this institution , the European Parliament , greater powers .
I think that the European diversity of peoples , languages , cultures and political systems is so great - and I think that this diversity is a wealth that should be defended - that increasing this institution 's powers or that of any other federal institution would only contribute more to the grey areas .
I note , for example , in my country , Flanders , that all the political parties in the Flemish parliament are opposed to introducing the right of vote to all Europeans .
The protest of the whole people is not taken into account or even respected in the European Parliament .
That is a very good example of the democratic deficit in my view .
That is why I recommend in particular maintaining all Member States ' right to veto in the hope that my country , Flanders , can as quickly as possible become a Member State of the European Union in its own right .
Madam President , there is , we know , a kind of ill-feeling between the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
The former complain that they have been relegated to the rank of chambers for rubber-stamping decisions taken elsewhere , including the European Parliament .
The latter wants to preserve and even increase its democratic powers , something often taken badly by the national parliaments , which are afraid of losing even more of their own powers .
Faced with that ill-feeling , I think that the Neyts report is an excellent clarification of this issue and shows that the European Parliament and the national parliaments have the same fight to fight : that of democratizing Europe .
This report shows above all that instead of rivalry , we should talk of complementarity . The national parliaments have an enormous wasteland to cultivate .
It includes all of the Council 's legislative activity , that of the national governments and the whole area of intergovernmental cooperation .
Having sat in my national parliament before becoming an MEP , I can testify to the difficulty faced by national parliaments in committing themselves to European politics .
Apart from the small number of MPs very much committed to European politics , most national MPs are barely interested in it , not for lack of political will , but for a whole set of practical reasons .
Often , the national parliaments have neither the time nor the means to follow the development of European issues .
Many things are complicated , bureaucratic , in Europe , and the simplification of the Treaty , we can predict , is not going to be done straight away .
Transparency has never been the key word of European construction .
All that could facilitate the work of national parliaments should be done , but I should like to put people on their guard against a recent trend in certain countries , in certain national parliaments , which consists in wanting to create a new institution out of the national parliaments .
Adding to the number of assemblies has always been a democratic retreat rather than an advance , as each assembly tends to develop its own lease of life and wants to assert itself to the detriment of the others .
Let us find ways of understanding each other , cooperating , respecting each other 's competences , facilitating our respective work .
Once again , Mrs Neyts ' excellent report is a major contribution to that .
Mr President , I cannot help getting the impression , when I travel around , that there are two Europes .
There is a Europe of the institutions , i.e. the Commission , the Council of Ministers and Parliament , on the one hand ; on the other hand , there is the Europe of the people .
I feel that here too , on the eve of the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference in the Netherlands .
Thus the problem of understanding the interests of the general public is still there .
Also , what is often called Eurospeak , now as ever , acts as a barrier to ordinary people .
The language of the EU hardly catches the imagination , and it is full of acronyms of all kinds .
One sometimes gets the impression that the institutions are in some spaceship far above the earth , communicating with one another in a special coded language .
We can pick it up here on earth , but cannot understand what it is about .
It is full of terms like subsidiarity , variable geometry , comitology and the like .
The result is that people find it uninteresting and sometimes downright annoying .
That is the reaction in news offices wherever you go .
Precisely in such a context it is important to highlight the role of the national parliaments : quite simply , they need to discover Europe .
The national parliaments are after all closer to the people than the European Parliament , so the obvious thing is to use the national parliaments to make the whole system more relevant to the people .
As has been so forcefully pointed out here today , it is necessary .
And I say all of this in the recognition that what we regard as national home affairs policy has in crucial respects also become European home affairs policy . Precisely as an extension to this recognition , it is important to involve the national parliaments in the European context , so that they do not just hover out there like satellite stations .
Hence my support for this report , which is a good and practical contribution to strengthening the role of the national parliaments , also in relation to the European Parliament .
Mr President , of a report intended to be part of the grandiose work of European construction , we expected a hymn to joy .
Instead we have a pop song for school girls , with a fashionable refrain , repeated fifteen times over , about the democratic deficit !
The old parties have just discovered the summer hit for 1997 , just as last year they did the same in Belgium , after digging up the bodies of four little girls - they discovered the summer hit for 1996 , the breakdown of Justice and its institutions .
Dear liberal colleague , dear compatriot , you know that it is pathetic to speak about the democratic deficit these days .
When , for example , most European parliamentarians and federal parliamentarians in Belgium tolerate the fact that , in our country , the elections , both national and European , are systematically fixed by taxpayers ' money which all parties receive , apart from mine , the Front national , by the media in Belgium where the press is free but subsidized , by the courts which ban the Front national list for the Senate for no good reason - and tomorrow , why not , the list for the European Parliament - and by the authorities which regularly throw my party 's militants into prison just because they want to brush aside corrupt politicians and finally give people a say in things .
I might still vote for the Neyts report , however , because it is even more beautiful than it is useless .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my ceterum censio has nothing to do with the destruction of Carthage .
It is , rather , directed against the lack of transparency in the Union , its lack of closeness to the citizen and the existing democratic deficit .
I should therefore like to offer my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur .
Even though I cannot share her opinion on everything , I have admired her work on this report in committee - her circumspection , her sharp eye for essentials and , not least , her stamina .
In my opinion , acceptance of the European idea - and , of course , opinions may differ as to what form that idea should take - will be crucially dependent on overcoming the problems listed in the report .
Only an increase in democratic control , and especially a working involvement of the national parliaments , can ensure that the European idea is put across to the citizens of the various Member States .
But the absence of these proposed improvements will mean a further increase in the existing euroscepticism , even without any contribution from those right-wingers mentioned - perhaps by force of habit - by Mr Corbett .
Mr President , the European Commission believes , and has already stated on many occasions , that the national parliaments must play a major role in the process of democratization , in particular of the European Community .
That is why the Neyts report is of capital interest .
The role of national parliaments is important primarily because they have to ratify any changes made to the Treaty and they also have to approve the main decisions taken by the Council .
Secondly , the national parliaments can help to reduce the democratic deficit by exercising democratic controls over their own governments .
That is important in areas where the decision-making process is still essentially an intergovernmental matter , such as the common foreign and security policy , as well as justice and internal affairs where , like the European Commission , I feel that the European Parliament 's role is still too limited .
Well-informed national parliaments can play a major and useful role in the current decisive debate on European integration .
We cannot over-emphasize the importance of involving national parliaments more closely and especially not excluding them , and thereby turning them into precious and highly thought-of allies in terms of this process .
That does not mean to say that we should further complicate the decision-making process nor slow it down by creating new institutions and structures .
For all of these reasons , I go along with the political message contained in the Neyts report which stems from discussions according to which a certain number of measures have to be taken at the intergovernmental conference and elsewhere in order to strengthen the role of the parliaments of Member States of the European Union and to optimize their collective influence , while respecting the single institutional framework , without creating new formal structures nor undermining the constitutional provisions or parliamentary traditions of each nation .
I fully approve this point of view .
By way of conclusion , please allow me to add a few words on the intergovernmental conference .
It seems that the role of the national parliaments is to be extended by means of a protocol on two major aspects .
First of all , national parliaments must be better informed of the Union 's activities by granting - as Mrs Neyts has already emphasized - a four-week period for them to examine the Commission 's White and Green Papers as well as legislative proposals .
The second aspect concerns the consultative role of COSAC which has already been mentioned .
This structure must be strengthened , in particular in terms of subsidiarity , justice and internal affairs .
We think that the measures aimed at strengthening the controls exercised by national parliaments should remain principally the responsibility of those parliaments and that they can help to fulfil their role within the European Union with greater effectiveness .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner Van den Broek .
The debate is closed .
Thte vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Legal and judicial area to protect EU financial interests
The next item on the agenda is the debate on the oral questions tabled by Mrs Theato on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control and by Mr Bontempi on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs to the Council ( B4-0168 / 97 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0169 / 97 ) on the establishment of a European legal and judicial area to protect the European Union 's financial interests against international crime .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , these two oral questions follow on from the knowledge obtained during the hearing in April on the legal protection of the EU budget and therefore of its tax revenue .
At the same time , they constitute an urgent appeal to the Intergovernmental Conference to adopt effective measures to combat the problem of fraud .
That hearing produced conflicting information .
First , there are already a number of instruments to deal with fraud , corruption and international organized crime .
Examples include the convention for the protection of the Community 's financial interests , with its first protocol on the corruption of EU officials and second protocol on money laundering .
Other proposals are on the table , such as the high-level expert group on international organized crime and the planned joint action by the Commission against organized crime and corruption in general .
I would remind the House of the reports by the Member States on national legislation to combat fraud , and also of the notable study of a corpus juris on criminal law and criminal law procedures , which was produced at Parliament 's initiative .
This makes it apparent that the ideal way of providing effective protection for the EU 's financial resources would be a kind of European public prosecutor who could shift the obstacles to co-operation between the national legal institutions without violating the sovereignty of the States concerned .
All these legal texts , proposals and studies show how sensitive the public is to the abuse of Community funds and to international fraud .
But if we turn to reality , we find it both disappointing and contradictory .
Although we have achieved a degree of protection in administrative law , through the Regulation on Administrative Penalties and on-site Inspections , we are lagging far behind in terms of criminal law .
The convention I mentioned earlier , signed as long ago as 1995 , and the two associated protocols have still not yet been ratified .
Indeed , I fear that it is becoming more and more improbable that they ever will be ratified by all Member States .
So these texts remain a dead letter .
But even if all the Member States were to ratify them , that would not automatically achieve balanced protection of the EU 's financial interests .
The fact is that some Member States have let it be known that their legislation is already harmonized with the convention .
That this is not the case is apparent from their own national reports .
But even assuming that the convention were to be properly implemented , harmonization would still turn out to have feet of clay , because a number of aspects are not covered - such as the conciliation procedure , the limitation period , and the flow of information from administration to jurisdiction .
Clearly , we cannot sit back and wait for the possible ratification of what is in any case weak legislation .
Action must be taken , over and above the present framework .
We therefore make the following demands . First , the Member States must accept their responsibility and ratify the convention and the two protocols by next year ; secondly , if this ratification does not take place , the Commission should be called upon to propose more effective action .
Thirdly , the Intergovernmental Conference should , as previously agreed in Dublin , reinforce Article 209a of the EC Treaty to give Parliament the right of codecision .
Fourthly , the text of the corpus juris should enable the Commission to phase in proposals on criminal law and the law of criminal procedure , having due regard to aspects of constitutional law in the Member States .
In conclusion , I appeal to the Commission and to the Member States , as a matter of urgency , to do everything possible under the existing regulations to combat fraud , so that the public -and we in this House - are not constantly being horrified by subsidy scandals , real or imagined .
Madam Minister , Madam Commissioner , we tabled two questions to prompt this debate , which is really intended to raise another strong warning from the European Parliament about the fight against organized crime , which everyone proclaims to be a priority , yet in practice little is done and what is done is not very effective .
I think the reasons for this glaring contradiction between what is said and what is done are now clear .
To put it briefly , we are in the presence of an international criminal situation , and the legislative , administrative and institutional framework designed to contain it has become generally obsolete .
To counter this crime wave we find a static and alarming situation : fifteen national legal systems which are heterogeneous in substance and procedure , and between which there is no effective and rapid communication .
And all the vast array of treaties and administrative and legal cooperation conventions that have been signed is not worth much if these instruments frequently remain the dead letters denounced by Mrs Theato .
So on one side there is speed and incisiveness - unfortunately on the side of the criminals - and on the other there is delay , discontinuity and inefficiency .
So , especially after the hearing we have held , and after the strong warning that has reached us from the seven European judges who launched an appeal from Geneva just a year ago , it is clear that , given these difficulties and this powerlessness , we need to consider new instruments for a European legal area , new instruments for the European taxpayer where fraud is involved , but for the European citizen full stop in terms of the way this organized crime affects their safety .
We have received suggestions and pointers .
I think some of these absolutely must be kept in mind and we must seriously think about converting them into reality , into concrete provisions .
I refer to lifting banking secrecy when international assistance is requested , introducing rules which would allow a European judge to talk directly to his colleagues , without going through tortuous , lengthy and wearisome procedures , and the importance of new common types of offence , especially where economic crime is concerned .
In truth we have adopted plenty of instruments in recent times .
I want to mention , over and above financial interests , that something interesting has happened : a convention on corruption has been approved , there is the Commission 's communication on anti-corruption policy in general , the Council is making a major drive against organized crime , and , amongst other things , a convention on mutual legal assistance is also being discussed .
We do not undervalue either the content of the political importance of these acts , but - I want to stress this - without a revolution , cultural as well , which goes beyond traditional instruments of international law and also beyond the historical nationalistic inertia which characterizes the legal systems , it will be very difficult for the measures , however good , to produce satisfactory results .
The case of the conventions is a disturbing warning : we have so many , but there they are , they lie there , they await ratification , they are not operational .
So I think the moment has come , with these questions , with this debate , but above all faced with the appointments which await us - the ratification of the conventions , but most of all the Intergovernmental Conference and then the opportunity offered us by the corpus iuris - for a great qualitative leap . It is time to move from declarations , from statements , to action .
Legality and protection , both of the taxpayer and the citizen as such , themselves indicate the path we must follow .
There are four courses of action , which are clearly contained in the motion for a resolution .
The first is reform of the third pillar : it is not very democratic and it is not very effective either .
We expect important results from Amsterdam on this , although the text we have seen is certainly far from satisfactory .
The second is an extraordinary initiative that this Parliament is ready to take to obtain ratification of the outstanding conventions .
The third is experimental , at least as regards the financial interests of the Community : drafting common legislation on law and criminal procedure contained in the corpus iuris .
Here too it should be stressed that this must operate with every democratic guarantee , the guarantee of parity for the prosecution and the accused , but certainly something must be done in the direction of common legislation .
The fourth is giving the UCLAF the functions of coordination and technical support to the national legal authorities .
These are the four courses of action that the European Parliament is indicating .
We are not a Parliament which just complains , we are also a Parliament which believes it has practical proposals to make on these issues .
Madam Minister , Madam Commissioner , please give serious consideration to the results of this debate and vote .
Debates have been held in the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs on setting up a legal area which would protect the financial interests of the European Union against international crime .
Members of the European Parliament , Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi , have asked questions on this subject .
You are emphasizing - rightfully - to what extent we need to combat fraud within the Union .
I support your position .
This fraud costs millions of ECU every year and it is the Member States and Union citizens who pay .
The Council and European Parliament support each other in the fight against fraud and crime .
The Council therefore thinks it is important to ensure a permanent exchange of ideas between the Council and the European Parliament .
Such an approach would be stimulating for both institutions .
During the Dutch Presidency , this exchange of views has been fruitful .
I have had the privilege of discussing on several occasions with the responsible committees in the European Parliament the subject of progress made in negotiations within the third pillar , and also on the ground , in the fight against fraud .
On this score , I have fortunately noticed that the European Parliament also attaches considerable importance to this information and exchange of views .
I am , therefore , happy to be able to discuss this issue with you here today .
I shall also be willing to answer the questions put by Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi .
In my reply , I shall deal with the decisions taken under the Dutch Presidency and the Council in the field of fighting organized crime in general .
Organized crime really is a growing threat to our societies .
It is becoming harder and harder to maintain the values that we all find so important .
That is being blocked by the fact that crime - as we all know - is increasingly transgressing the limits of the Member States ' jurisdiction .
Criminals are helped by new technologies .
The free movement of persons , services and goods means that Member States need to work out better methods to combat growing transfrontier crimes .
However , we all have the impression , you and I , that we are going backwards .
If we want to turn Europe into an area of freedom , security and justice , we must all do our best to improve prevention and fighting organized crime .
The Council and the European Parliament must throw themselves behind that aim .
It is also with this in view that an action plan has been worked out at the request of the European Council under the Dutch Presidency to take a European approach to fighting organized crime .
This action plan will be subjected to the approval of the European Council in Amsterdam .
On 28 April last , the Justice and Internal Affairs Council gave its opinion on this plan at an extraordinary sitting .
This debate led to unanimous support for the content of this plan by the European Union Ministers responsible for justice and internal affairs .
At this Council meeting , I told my colleagues of the importance of proper parliamentary and judicial controls when measures aimed at combating organized crime are being worked out .
I have conveyed to you the text of the action plan and held a fruitful discussion with the Committee on Civic Liberties and Internal Affairs - as you recall - on the measures proposed in this action plan .
It is now for the Council to urge action on working out particular points in consultation with the European Parliament .
As you know , the action plan contains a large number of measures which should jointly help us to fight organized crime in Europe effectively .
It goes without saying that this European approach is necessary .
You have insisted here on a rapid implementation of Europol and I go along with that .
I am not going to go into detail of the content of the action plan .
You all know it sufficiently well , I think .
However , I should like once again to emphasize the importance of this plan .
It is a framework in which we should tackle fraud in terms of the European Union 's financial resources and as such I should emphasize the foundations of the European legal area within which the Member States can cooperate in the best possible way , within the framework of their common approach to dealing with organized crime .
The Member States ought , of course , to be assisted in this matter by an effective Europol .
In my opinion , this is the framework and corresponding measures referred to by those two speakers .
I should also add that they obviously know their limits , given the current structure of the third pillar .
That also means that the Council and the European Parliament will quite frequently be discussing isolated measures worked out by the Council and I hope that there will be a constructive and lasting cooperation between the Council and the European Parliament .
I should like to add another word about the declarations made by Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi on implementing these measures , something I have already said on several occasions : they are , of course , fine texts but what we really have to do now is implement them .
The Treaties must be ratified and the measures implemented .
The States must therefore use these instruments .
The questions put to the Council refer specifically to the fight against fraud in terms of Community funds .
For many years now the Council has been taking a great interest in the creation of effective tools .
This interest is reflected in particular in the multiannual work programme on cooperation in the field of justice and internal affairs .
In other words , the Council really is taking this seriously .
It also emerges from the fact that the most binding instrument in the framework of the current structure of the Treaty on the European Union is the conclusion of Treaties .
It is a great advantage for the judicial practice and relevant services of the Member States .
The precise definition of mutual obligations can only strengthen the effectiveness of that cooperation .
However , there is a major disadvantage which has been highlighted by the members who put these questions .
I repeat it here : entry into force depends on the state of completion of national ratification procedures .
Of course , it is a fact that these constitutional procedures are the very basis of our parliamentary democracies .
That is a fact , but let us make it quite clear , you really must act quickly .
On this score , the Member States are consequently urged to speed up the ratification of the Treaty on the protection of the Community 's financial interests by means of the first protocol .
The Council has answered this expectation by going along in full with the recommendations which emerged from this action plan .
It is stipulated in practical terms that these instruments must come into force by mid-1998 at the latest .
The second protocol to the Treaty was examined at the meeting of the Justice and Internal Affairs Council of 26 and 27 May .
We reached a political agreement on all the questions which were still outstanding .
The second protocol I refer to contains regulations on the liability of corporations , criminal or administrative sanctions for corruption or fraud , sanctions applied to money laundering , the seizure and confiscation of advantages illegally obtained by means of fraud corruption and also encouraging cooperation between the Commission and the Council in this field of action .
I must emphasize the importance of the liability of corporations , a novelty in European Union regulations .
Consequently , this text is now ready for submission for signature and I hope that this signature will take place under the auspices of the Dutch Presidency .
The judicial area cannot be achieved by treaties alone .
Both speakers also emphasized that .
The Council shares this vision which emerges from the action plan .
I would not be fully performing my informative task unless I told you of the other achievements of the Netherlands Presidency .
Staff of the European Community and Member States of the European Union have signed an agreement to fight corruption . They did so at the meeting of the Justice and Internal Affairs Council .
This instrument is also a major weapon in the fight against fraud and corruption .
Activities on the draft agreement on mutual judicial assistance in criminal affairs - another important matter - have not yet been completed but we have made substantial progress on this .
Various detailed reports have also been drafted , for example on the Treaty on the protection of the Community 's financial interests and the agreement on extradition , which should in any case make it possible to speed up ratification procedures .
All the instruments I have just referred to are , together with the framework offered by the action plan , the best means of achieving an efficient protection of the Union 's financial interests .
In this respect , measures aimed at fighting fraud and corruption are being complemented by other measures to fight organized crime .
There is still a lot of work to be done but this does not seem to be close to changing . In my opinion , the European Parliament is going to play a lasting role in these developments .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal of work has been undertaken in recent years to improve the protection of European Union financial interests .
The fact that the fight against fraud in the EU is now considered a clear high priority task demonstrates that this work has yielded results .
There is no common legal framework in Europe which regulates all matters involving fraud .
This , in itself , is only natural , of course .
In many cases we are talking about areas where previously there has not been any particular form of co-operation at all .
I agree with those who say that a lot can be done to improve co-operation between the existing legal systems but I am also convinced that we must be open to change where this is required .
The agreements which have been concluded in recent years must be viewed as a big step forward in this area .
I refer particularly to the Convention on the Protection of Community Financial Interests .
A great deal of effort was required to reach agreement on this issue .
I am as concerned as Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi about the fact that this Convention has still not been ratified .
After all , two years have passed since it was signed .
I can assure this Assembly that I will take every opportunity open to me to remind the Member States how important this is .
I will do this not only at Council meetings but as a general rule every time I give an interview , write an article or give an address during a visit to a Member State .
Of course it would help enormously if you , ladies and gentlemen , would also put pressure on as many people as you can in the course of your contacts with National Governments and Parliaments .
As you know the slow process of ratification is a problem in other areas as well .
So far only Great Britain and Denmark have ratified the Europol Convention and only Great Britain has ratified the Extradition Convention .
Everyone is aware that both of these instruments will have an important role to play in the future in the fight against internationally organised crime in Europe .
So it can be very difficult explaining to people why it is taking so long for these Conventions to come into force .
It is my conviction that the methods of working which we have at our disposal are not effective enough .
This is also the reasoning behind the Commission 's proposal to transfer everything except police co-operation and criminal law from the Third Pillar to the First Pillar in the governmental negotiations which are currently underway .
Furthermore , co-operation on those areas which remain in the Third Pillar must be made considerably more effective .
I have also seen , just as Mrs Theato pointed out , that there is also a proposal to the Intergovernmental Conference to give Article 209a greater force . I expect and hope , just as you do in this House , that the summit meeting in Amsterdam next week really will give us the tools we need .
I also welcome the fact that the top level group , in their action plan on internationally organised crime , have strongly and clearly reiterated how important it is that the ratification process is finalised as quickly as possible , and that a timetable for this has also been proposed .
This particularly applies to the three additional protocols to the Convention on Fraud on which there is now agreement and which concern corruption , notification and legal aid .
This latter protocol was agreed , as Minister Sorgdrager said , at the meeting of the Home and Justice Ministers on the 26-27 May .
It concerns issues such as money laundering , legal aid and the opportunity to demand accountability of legal persons .
This would mean that the Commission , for the first time , would have a role to play in criminal law proceedings .
Although this is only a limited role I still see this as a big step forward .
As far as the Commission is concerned , we will of course continue to develop those instruments required to protect the EU 's financial interests in the best possible way .
We have already proposed regulations on the mutual recognition of evidence , direct co-operation between legal authorities , centralisation of the legal examination of fraud cases and the introduction of a register on fraud committed .
All of these proposals will be raised for discussion during the Autumn .
The 1996 report on fraud to the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament clearly shows how difficult it is to legally examine cases of cross border fraud .
There is an obvious risk that the lack of proper co-ordination , both at a national level and between Member States will lead to such divisions that a legal trial would be impossible in practice or in any case would not give a result .
It is precisely for such cases of cross border fraud that the UCLAF should strengthen their competence in criminal law . By introducing a legal co-ordination unit , what we would call a judicial interface , consisting of a judge , a prosecutor and other legal experts , UCLAF would be able to exercise the current well managed co-ordination role and could also have a supportive and advisory function towards the Member States .
Mr President , the Commission will naturally examine the themes which are taken up in corpus juris , in other words in the study which has been carried out at Parliament 's request and in which the Commission has been an active participant .
The introduction of a European public prosecution function which has the right to pursue criminal cases involving the protection of the Union 's financial interests is an enticing thought .
It goes without saying that there is room for further initiatives to improve the conditions for legal aid and in the exchange of information in cases of criminal law .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me the floor again .
First , let me once again offer my sincere thanks to Commissioner Gradin - she knows how much we always value her support , and her resolute approach .
Rome was not built in a day .
But I do have one specific question for the President-in-Office , whom I also thank for her remarks .
Perhaps I did not fully understand what she said .
Mrs Sorgdrager , can you assure us that you expect the protocols , and the convention too , to be ratified by mid-1998 , or were you referring to the protocols alone ?
That would be somewhat unbalanced , because , in principle , the convention itself is the basis and the protocols are supplementary to it .
Perhaps you can answer that question for me .
Mr President , it is a fact that we have jointly agreed in the action plan that we will make sure that treaties and protocols are ratified by mid-1998 . Do you want a guarantee ?
I will have to answer that it is impossible .
Obviously , I have no control over the procedures in the other Member States but we have reached a common agreement and I therefore hope that everyone will stick to it .
Mr President , in terms of effective organization , the European Community 's efforts to combat organized subsidy fraud is roughly equivalent to Michael Schumacher trying to win a Formula I race in a horse-drawn cart .
This is not the fault of the European Parliament .
There are knowledgeable Members of this House , notably Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi , who have long been trying , with a wealth of knowledge and persistence , to make something happen .
So this charge has to be laid at the door of the Council .
After all , it is really endearing when Mrs Sorgdrager refers to the mutual exchange of ideas between Parliament and the Council , but I cannot help suspecting that this cosy chat will leave organized crime somewhat cold , and will certainly have no impact on its activities .
And it costs little to talk about Europol at every opportunity , especially when the convention which is supposed to provide the basis for Europol has not even been ratified yet .
The reason why our organization is so wretched and so detrimental to the reputation of the European Union is that we are talking here about system failure .
We have vested the European Community with powers of disposal over money .
But we have failed to give it the authority to defend that power of decision against abuse , by making use of the criminal law where necessary .
That situation does not exist in any Member State .
There , whoever has the power of disposal over money can haul the perpetrators of fraud before the courts and have them sentenced .
The European Community cannot do that ; it has to rely on the Council , on the individual Member States , to do it , and that is precisely where the system breaks down .
For the Community to take action under the criminal law supposedly violates national sovereignty .
Since the most important power of government , the power to distribute money , has already been transferred to the Community , it would only be logical if , in addition to that power , the Community were to be authorized to protect that money by recourse to the criminal law .
Because any other approach is ineffective .
We know that from experience , and from the comic if appalling example that Mr Bösch has just quoted .
So unless we are prepared to ensure that the Community has criminal law jurisdiction to act in certain areas where it already has responsibilities , then we are always going to be impotent to deal with the criminals .
And that is a responsibility that no one can really take .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yet again we are dealing with the scourge of fraud .
We have set about this a hundred times over , but we have to admit that the results have been few compared with the size of the problem .
I would even say , without irony , that the problem is so great that we cannot even assess the size exactly .
What does fraud represent ? 5-10 % of the European Union budget , according to estimates , or even more .
Billions of ECU , in any case , which stray every year from the European Union budget .
We know that fraud can be found everywhere , that it rots away at Community policies , especially the EAGGF but also the structural policies , the Union 's internal policies , like tourism .
The European Parliament 's ad hoc committee of inquiry into Community transit , which conducted a remarkable piece of work , revealed that as the European Union 's single market works it has become the favourite playground for international crime .
So who is to blame , you ask ?
It is sometimes hard to establish responsibilities , which lie in many quarters , but one fact seems significant to me .
The European Convention on the protection of the Community 's financial interests , signed in July 1995 , has still to be ratified by the Member States ' parliaments .
It is therefore not operational and even useless .
At best we might expect it to be ratified next year .
Is that serious ?
The ambitious plan for combating fraud , indefatigably demanded by the European Parliament and well defined by the Commission has broken down because the Council , by its attitude of profound inertia , opposes all progress .
When it comes to fraud , the Council and the Member States are more concerned with protecting themselves from Commission prerogatives than with the bold deeds of the fraudulent .
They have chosen the wrong adversary and that error will cost the European Union 's finances dearly .
The real difficulty is the absence of political will in the Council .
It is the Member States which see to the execution on their territory of nearly 80 % of Community expenditure and they should recognize that the Union 's institutions , the Commission in particular , have genuine , undeniable rights to control and intervene in the running of the Union 's own resources , given that Community money is going missing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to hope today for once that the Council will make an explicit and courageous commitment .
Europe 's credibility in the eyes of its ordinary citizens is at stake .
Do we really want the sieve to be the image of Europe ?
Mr President , this debate is getting to be a wearisome business - after all , it is nothing new .
I find it depressing to hear time after time ' we hope ... ' , ' we believe perhaps ... ' , ' we expect ... ' .
Our answer from the President-in-Office today is that we will perhaps get the Convention on the protection of the Community 's financial interests ratified in mid-1998 , i.e. three years after it was agreed .
I am sorry , Madam President-in-Office , but to me , it sounds like yet another in a series of poor excuses from all Council Members , including those representing both your country and mine , for having done nothing to ratify the conventions .
The fact is that the governments are dragging their feet on the ratifications .
It shows a lack of respect for what they themselves joined together in deciding .
It is all very well to sit round a table and agree on something and then not bother to transpose the text into their own legislation .
I think what we are witnessing is a show of contempt for the problems we are grappling with .
This conduct is in my view disappointing , and , as things look now , when the Intergovernmental Conference is still in progress , we do not even see any signs that the governments seriously plan to do something in this area .
We need to get a change in procedures .
It may well be - as you pointed out , Madam President-in-Office - that Parliament has an important role to play , but our problem is that we have no decision-making power .
If we had that , we would ensure that serious efforts were made to control fraud . But this situation is embarrassing .
In conclusion , Mr President , I appeal to our colleagues in the national parliaments to take a closer interest in this subject and to put pressure on their own governments .
My colleagues have already asked the vital questions .
So I would just like to take up one additional detail .
The basic problem is serious fraud .
What is the reason for it ?
I think that one important reason is that there is no sympathy for the EU and its money .
If you go out and talk to people in EU countries you get the impression that the most important thing is to ' milk ' the EU of its money and to get hold of any EU subsidies available .
This creates an atmosphere in which any method of getting hold of EU subsidies is permissible .
Soon the loopholes also become obvious .
Of course this cannot be allowed to continue .
But is the cure for this to give the EU so much more power in this area , when credibility for the EU , for Europol , for Conventions etc. is already so low ?
I think instead that we should have a ' clear out ' of some of the subsidy rubbish which exists , establish clear rules on how EU subsidies are to be granted and ensure that they are not granted so freely .
I think that drastic action is required in this respect .
I wish Anita Gradin good luck - her work in the EU is now concerned with managing this problem and it will be no easy task .
Mr President , the proposals under discussion today prefigure the inclusion in the treaty of a legal base for anti-fraud regulations , to give shape and effectiveness to the political will to fight against fraud , which is damaging the Community budget in a truly impressive way .
But in harmonizing the existing rules and Community cooperation , we want to keep our feet on the ground and ask the Commission if it really believes , itself , in the ratification of the 1995 convention , given that the difficulty of coordinating the political will of the fifteen Member States is compounded by the fact that the ratification is linked to two additional protocols , which do not relate to the responsibilities of civil servants alone , but also commit governments , Members of Parliament and institutions .
Mr President , in expressing approval for the initiative by Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi , I would like to emphasize the merit of certain essential points .
First of all , the fact that our internal frontiers are now completely obsolete in the face of the phenomenon of Community fraud and the phenomenon of large and small-scale crime which has considerable technical and financial resources available to make crossing them easy .
That is what makes this initiative so very important .
Secondly , legal cooperation and even communitarization have now been superceded as regards the current problem areas , and as regards the substantial differences that exist in the legal and juridical systems of the Member States . So a European corpus iuris , a European legal area , is needed .
But what I want to know is whether it is possible to set clearly defined criteria and responsibilities for taking criminal proceedings and whether there will still be the principle of parity between prosecution and defence .
As long as there is , we will be creating an effective Magna Carta of rights and freedoms , as well as , obviously , security for the citizens .
Mr President , Mrs Kjer Hansen has said that we have been holding the same type of debate for some time now which is becoming quite depressing .
I am somewhat tempted to go along with this point of view because I think that the way in which the European Parliament deals with the fight against crime is quite different from that adopted by the European Council . It is not my intention to say that these two attitudes are wrong or that both of them are quite correct .
You must therefore try to find a way of developing appropriate instruments in order to fight organized crime .
' Appropriate ' does not necessarily mean that everything must be put at European level but that we should at least put into practice what we have already agreed - and that is far from being the case as I said .
From that point of view , I think and can confirm to everyone who has been looking into this problem : let us try to keep our feet firmly on the ground .
In my view the most important - and here my reasoning is part of the current structure of the third pillar - is that we should implement our agreements and common interventions , that everyone should ratify them and when people say here that it is too slow I would say to them : I agree entirely .
I am using all of my powers to make sure that this situation can be settled as quickly as possible in my country .
I also know that we are not the first to deal with this situation , but I am looking into it and I hope therefore that the other Member States will do the same .
Of course , we only have a text .
Then we have a convention .
We have a Treaty but it should not stop there .
It must be implemented by means of practical measures which must be taken - this is the work of the police - in particular , on the basis of the legal possibilities created for that purpose .
It is the system which is currently being exposed .
Nonetheless , I hope that that will work but we are going to have to be realistic .
The third pillar activity is quite recent .
Since the beginning of this pillar 's implementation , in other words barely three or four years ago , we have made some progress .
Not enough , I grant you , but we must realize that some progress has been made .
What makes me angry is to see that a majority of the over 200 decisions that we have taken have not yet come into force .
I would like to be able to have a control system in order to monitor , quite independently , whether or not the Member States are really honouring their commitments .
For me this is a vital point at this time .
Fighting fraud is a very delicate matter .
It is relatively easy to syphon off European Union funds but there is also the matter of the quality of the regulations .
I am not only referring to true fraud but also misdirected subsidies , European taxpayers ' money which is prevented from being spent as intended .
These are also aspects that we will have to monitor to make sure that everything happens as agreed .
Mr Bösch was obviously right when he said that fighting fraud presents difficulties . You only have to think of how to recognize everyone 's proof .
Of course , this is a problem that cannot go on in Europe .
I agree .
There are obstacles that we have to eliminate .
The same goes - I am not going to repeat to this here but I did refer to it in my introduction - for mutual judicial assistance in criminal cases .
It is , however , inconceivable in Europe that we should come up against so many procedural problems which prevent mutual assistance in criminal cases .
I have spent a lot of time on this question .
Unfortunately , I hoped that we were going to reach a final conclusion , but it is not the case , although we have made some progress and I would like to be able to predict an agreement on this subject around the middle of next year .
Mr Giansily asked what the extent of fraud is .
We ourselves do not know .
That is one of the special features of illegal acts .
We can never know the whole situation but we do observe what goes on and in what conditions fraud takes place .
Mr President , I am putting a supplementary question to the Minister because I understand the concern for realism - I am a realist - but not when it becomes an excuse for maintaining the status quo .
I would remind him that scandals causing great popular outcry in other sectors , for example the Dutroux case in Belgium , have produced intense acceleration of the process of agreement and understanding at European level in the fight against paedophilia or the trade in human beings .
We should not have to wait for another scandal to break : the scandal of fraud is already there .
I really wonder whether the time has not come to make a qualitative leap .
Everyone has said so .
In a system which seeks to protect our resources , I ask the Minister whether or not it is realistic to face up to the problem as it is , and not as we would like it to be , in other words using methods which do not have any effect .
I do not think that I recommended maintaining the status quo .
All I said was that we have reached a good many agreements and established treaties and adopted decisions which have not yet been implemented .
I expressed my dissatisfaction with this .
This is what I wanted to say .
There is an agreement on paedophilia , agreements on fraud .
Now we just have to put them into practice .
Thank you very much , Minister .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with the terms of Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Question time ( Council )
Here is my answer to these two questions .
At the meeting of the United Nations Committee on Human Rights in Geneva , the European Union will submit to a far-reaching examination its current information sources concerning the human rights situation in China in order to adopt a coherent approach in the framework of future policy , thereby taking on board the various points of view of the Member States .
This process of evaluation of policy will take place over the coming weeks and months in the appropriate fora of the European Union 's Council of Ministers , such as the Council regional working group , the Council working group of human rights , the Political Committee and so forth .
The questions put by the honourable members of the European Parliament will be attentively examined during those debates .
The European Parliament will be informed in due time of the outcome of the debates held in the Council of Ministers on the assessment and drafting of a coherent European policy on the human rights situation in China .
Mrs Van Dok-Van Weele , welcome to the European Parliament .
We sincerely thank you for giving us this official answer . I would like to put a supplementary question : what genuine instruments does the Council wish to implement in order to respond more satisfactorily to Chinese economic pressure , which is genuine pressure ?
Can you think of any other solutions apart from setting up various committees and working groups or study groups ? I think that the Chinese situation has already been studied enough .
I would tell Mr Bertens that when we refer to assessing a policy it has to be examined as a whole .
In the current circumstances I would not like to pre-empt the outcome of the assessment that I have just referred to .
This was really not much of a reply from the Council .
First of all it ought to be possible to give a proper answer to this question , which is what do we intend to do about the fact that several EU countries , including the President 's own , have been the subject of reprisals from China .
What else is solidarity for if we cannot get an answer to this question ?
Secondly , I would like an answer to my original question on what will happen if we move further towards a common foreign policy .
What opportunity will the smaller countries have to do as Denmark and the Netherlands have done with regard to China and in connection with the UN Commission for Human Rights ?
The larger countries will be able to vote down the smaller countries .
Is there a policy to cover this ?
You must , after all , have considered this point !
Judging by the extremely weak and empty response which we received here , I must say that it would appear that the Council representative has not thought these matters through .
I think that that emphasis was already laid in the first part of my answer .
I specified the idea of taking on board the various points of view of the Member States .
It is , therefore , a priority to respond within Europe , in the manner described , to the various points of view which currently exist .
It would obviously be wrong to envisage at this moment in time such a consensus on a range of actions and possible political positions when no agreement has yet been reached .
I have a question I should like to put to the representative of the Council : is the plan you have put forward , for a serious study of the human rights situation , an area where you will introduce general principles that apply equally to all ?
Because I too often have the impression that there are some states , China for instance , which are unpopular here , so that things are applied to them that are not applied to others .
What we need is a common European policy .
Are you prepared to devise a European policy of that kind , which would then apply to all countries , not just one in particular ?
In order to reach a policy and a common position we must have all of the ingredients and the basic arguments of the consensus and it is precisely for that reason that I gave you this answer .
It is absolutely useless to anticipate the outcome of this type of study and debate since that would offer absolutely no solution to what you call a common policy .
Madam President-in-Office , European Union relations with the People 's Republic of China are complex .
The burning issue at present is that of the forthcoming handover of Hong Kong to the People 's Republic .
This is highly paradoxical since the Chinese authorities are honouring the Sino-British agreements of 1984 , whereas the British authorities have not as they have developed democracy which did not exist before 1984 .
However , the new decisions by the Chinese authorities may mean that a democratic handover of Hong Kong in respect of human rights on 1 July 1997 will be possible , if the letter of pre-existing agreements is respected .
Does the Council intend to adopt an approach to this situation ?
Has it undertaken any initiative in face of the decisions taken by the Chinese National Assembly on the legislation in Hong Kong ?
I would like to , Mr President , but my answer is not yet ready .
It is an interesting question .
I would like to answer it later on , either during question time if that is possible or later on , in writing .
Question No 3 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0384 / 97 )
Subject : Job protection under the proposal for a regulation on the COM in raw tobacco
Will the Council give priority to job protection in the new regulation on the COM in raw tobacco ?
What specific improvements has it in mind for the benefit of producers in Granada , Extremadura and other highly disadvantaged Objective 1 regions ?
Notwithstanding the clear concern with tobacco-growing in Austria , on which the attention of certain EU institutions is so intensely focused , will the Mediterranean countries be treated fairly ?
In response to the question on the raw tobacco COM , I would like to recall that the Council discussed the Commission report on the matter at the beginning of the year .
That report includes an analysis of the social and economic situation of the market in question and the outcome of the reform of this regulation which took place in 1992 .
It also contains a certain number of possible scenarios for a new Community policy in this sector .
In the light of the debate held in the Council of Ministers , I would principally point out the following points : first of all , all delegations expressed considerable respect for the Commission report and the analysis of the situation on the tobacco market contained in it .
As far as the approach to be taken , the objectives and main elements of a reform of the raw tobacco COM , it was virtually unanimous even if some different points of view did emerge , concerning the extent of the reform and the nature of specific measures to be taken .
Finally , Mr President , the Commission has shown considerable consideration for the comment on the basis by the delegation .
It declared that it would study these remarks with all the necessary attention in the framework of preparations for its formal proposal .
To conclude , the Council urged the Commission to introduce these proposals as quickly as possible , as soon as it had all of the necessary information and data , including the European Parliament 's point of view on the report .
Once these proposals have been made , the Council would obviously then have to take due account of the European Parliament 's opinion on this matter .
Madam President-in-Office , your answer was most improper .
It is improper for the Council to answer in this bureaucratic , descriptive way to a question not referring to the report presented by the Commission but a question about jobs .
I want to ask the Council : What are we going to do with the southern farmers , if they can grow neither tobacco nor oliveoil ?
My question is about jobs : what you in your speeches call ' the first priority of our policies ' : jobs .
Yet , when you are asked about a huge reform of tobacco-growing , your answer is just ' bla , bla , bla ... ' .
Do you not think that preserving jobs has to be the condition , the basic premise of any actions provided for by the Regulation to be approved by the Council ?
Please answer that question .
What impact is it going to have ?
Do you have studies ?
Have you conducted them ?
What will the social and economic consequences be ?
I can tell you that in Granada over 2000 families live off this crop .
They do not live in luxury but this is their mainstay .
How can you just answer by saying that the Commission report is ' bla , bla , bla ' ?
You are in charge of the European Union and you are stopping the European Parliament from having any further powers .
I appreciate the member 's heartfelt arguments in favour of this cause , which does indeed deserve all of the European Union 's attention and I hope that the European Union will recognize this later on , when the IGC discusses the matter .
But I will only answer the subject contained in the question .
It is obvious that employment is on the agenda of everything that we undertake .
I think that an employment policy does not always have to be approached as an item in itself but should also be dealt with as a whole - otherwise , arguments are always put forward when we are dealing with the agricultural policy , to examine the available resources but also the corresponding market and labour possibilities , in the limited framework of the local and current causes of a strong competitive position and the difficult position of competitors on the market in terms of prices .
I go along with your insistence that the Union take measures in favour of employment , but I do not agree when you say that all we do is speak and do nothing .
That is unfair to the way in which this subject has been dealt with , and at the same time you are not doing justice to the information that I gave you in my answer .
Madam President-in-Office , the subject of the importance of jobs in relation with the future of tobacco-growing in the Mediterranean countries of the European Union is a recurring theme in the European Parliament - I myself have already asked questions about it to the Commission and the Council . Today I wish to raise this matter again , since we now have the opportunity to discuss the COM on raw tobacco .
This is a worrying matter for many modest families , for example in the Spanish provinces of Granada and Cáceres , we are waiting for the decisions to be taken by the European institutions .
We think that the solution is to reject measures to abandon tobacco-growing , for the simple reason that it would not lead to a drop in tobacco consumption but an increase in tobacco imports , with perverse consequences and increased joblessness in European tobacco producing areas .
We think it unwise to change the premium or take similar measures .
However , it would be more proper to increase the percentage for research funds from 1 to 2 % .
You mentioned measures to be taken by the Council . What can you tell us , Mrs Van Dok , about those measures ?
It is not my intention to hold up the procedure that I described .
I have already said that the Council has urged the Commission to put forward proposals as quickly as possible in order to take note of the necessary information , and once those proposals have been introduced to take into account the European Parliament 's opinion on this subject .
I do not think it is a good idea therefore to describe in detail what I have already mentioned in my reply , in accordance with the usual and precise procedure .
Madam President-in-Office , in my Autonomous Community of Extremadura , tobacco has been of considerable economic and social importance for more than half a century .
It is an Objective 1 region , with a GDP per capita of 7322 ECU , and tobacco offers the population high levels of employment , generating intensive labour for most of the year , during both the growing and processing stages .
1 , 600 , 000 direct daily jobs are generated by the growing process alone , to give some idea ; that is without counting indirect jobs generated by related activities .
My question to the Council - although you have already given an answer and I am afraid that you will give the same answer again , but I shall still ask it any way - is : do you not think that reducing premiums , as the Commission document proposes , would wipe out many small farms in the southern part of the European Union and only lead to bigger imports of tobacco , with negative consequences for farmers , who have no other means of earning a living ?
This is a committee entrusted with regulating the market and therefore it examines the place of a product , the location of the production of that product vis-à-vis the market as a whole and the way in which premia function in case of differences .
In this respect , as I have already emphasized , we are also looking into the question of employment .
I would like to insist on the fact that we should not conduct a superficial debate here when in fact what we need is a proper analysis and proper proposals .
I have clearly described to you the current situation and although I can well imagine that you are concerned with precise aspects of the possible outcomes , nonetheless I wanted to ask you to stick for the time being to the elements of my answer concerning the procedure .
The questions put by Mr Andersson and Mr Lindqvist concern the possible consequences of Community support in terms of regional policy on the shutdown of undertakings in general and the Ericsson factory in particular , with a view to relocating production plants .
As the honourable member of the European Parliament knows , the structural funds are governed by special regulations adopted in June 1993 by the Council .
According to those documents , the management of the structural fund is entrusted to the Commission by the Council .
That is why the Commission seems better placed to answer those questions .
More generally speaking I would like to tell you that the Danish delegation has sent a memorandum to the Council asking it to take a closer interest in the effects of the structural policy and regional public support , in order to monitor competition within the European Community .
We could also define the best way of helping the less-developed regions of the Community by means of a structural policy , without that having negative effects on other parts of the European Union . For example , forcing factories to shut down .
This question was therefore on the agenda of the Industry Council of 24 April 1997 .
At that meeting the Council invited the Commission to report as quickly as possible on the matter .
I think that a debate has therefore been started and can be continued in the second half of this year . In other words , your question is on the agenda .
Thank you very much for the answer even if I am none the wiser .
I can understand that there are divisions of labour between the Commission and the Council but I cannot understand why the Council has not tried to find out what conclusions the Commission have arrived at during the long months since the question was asked .
I would like to know why we cannot get a proper answer on whether companies in Scotland have received regional political aid or other aid from the EU .
This is extremely important for the Swedish economy and for the thousands of people employed at Ericsson .
If it is the case that regional political aid has been paid to a company in Europe which has then attracted workers to it but which at the same time has led to unemployment elsewhere then I would like a general answer to a general question : does the Council think this is wrong and how will the Council attempt to prevent something similar from happening in the future ?
I would also like a proper answer to the first question since it is crucial for us .
I am answering these questions as President-in-Office of the Council and I would simply say that his subject was on the agenda of the Industry Council meeting and - according to the normal procedure - the committee has been invited to analyze the situation and report back to the Council so that a solution can be found .
The Council cannot act independently on this subject since , according to the normal procedure , we must submit a request of this type to the Commission which the Council may consider to be of extreme urgency .
I think that it can now be made a priority thanks to Denmark , as the question asked by Denmark has been well received and again been placed on the agenda by the usual means .
I would also to say thank you for the answer .
It is a good thing that the question is now on the agenda but this hardly helps the employees in Norrköping - a town which has experienced major structural change and has a high level of unemployment - if they cannot get an answer to the question which they have asked us and which we have tried to get an answer to , namely whether regional political aid has been paid out in this case .
I happen to know that companies in Scotland have previously received regional political aid of 10 million during 1994 from RSA , Regional Selective Assistance .
My question is : has aid been paid out recently as well and if it has , has it contributed to relocation ?
If this is the case it will be extremely serious .
Both I and the employees in Norrköping want an answer to this .
A considerable misunderstanding is likely to come about not only about the procedure and powers but also the analyses .
Europe has indeed foreseen a support , a structural policy for the weaker regions , which does not mean to say that you should necessarily establish a direct link between the reason why an undertaking relocates and the fact that subsidies have been granted because these subsidies are designed to offset other weak factors in a given region .
That is certainly why it is not possible to say every time something happens : prevent the undertakings from relocating by granting them subsidies , but instead you should look into the extent to which excessive competition results from subsidies , regardless of the fact that the region is receiving those subsidies because it is relatively undeveloped .
It is not therefore possible automatically to establish a cause and effect relationship between a subsidy and the disappearance of an undertaking .
I know that this is not convenient .
We also have the situation in the Netherlands , and so I shall not answer the question as to whether subsidies have recently been granted .
We know where the powers lie .
It is far more interesting to know to what extent analyses enable us to conclude that competition really has been upset in this sector and in what specific location .
I heard that reply from the Council with considerable interest .
Mr Smith and I have an interest in this , particularly Mr Smith 's constituency .
It is nothing new for this to happen .
What I am concerned about is , while Commissioners Flynn and Wulf-Mathies are fiddling with the rules , the dole queues in Sweden and elsewhere are getting longer and longer .
It is small comfort to the unemployed workers in Sweden to know that the Commissioners are studying the problem .
I do not think this is good enough .
Would the Dutch presidency look at the change in the structural funds policy when they come to redraft the rules , or would they assist Luxembourg and the United Kingdom , by writing in some kind of guarantee in structural funds to obviate much of this development and try and make sure that there is proper worker consultation and work involvement ?
There must be basic minimum standards of wages and conditions .
One of the firms , ICI , has a very bad record in this respect .
First of all , I would like to repeat that the shutdown of an undertaking providing jobs in a given region is always painful .
In fact there is generally a tendency to examine the obvious reasons for the relocation of investment in another region .
I already emphasized in my first reply that it was too early to condemn the structural policy .
I find the Industry Council 's approach far more balanced , in other words carrying out a serious inquiry on the basis of a signal that you have given and on the possible presence of elements which can distort competition and their origin , including subsidies .
Legally speaking , when we have a good report and examine distorted competition then we can adapt the situation .
You are asking me to anticipate a debate which has not yet taken place whereas discussions have now been completed concerning the activity of the Commission and the Industry Council .
Following on from what the Minister has already said , I would like to put two propositions to her .
First of all , the main reason why businesses relocate within the European Union is not simply because of structural funds or other incentives but maybe because people in those areas have the capacity to work harder and more efficiently and perhaps there is less tax to be paid in those Member States .
Secondly , with regard to the question of utilizing structural funds in the way that has been suggested , yesterday we had the Commission reporting on the abolition of duty-free , saying that it would allow for state subsidy for certain regional transport sectors to ensure that they were not at a disadvantage .
But we all know in this Parliament that any kind of subsidy , whether it is structural funds or state subsidy funds , cannot last indefinitely in the near future .
Maybe the Council should now look again at some of its own decisions , particularly with regard to areas like duty-free and other decisions to exempt those areas from attacks of this kind .
I think that the honourable member of the European Parliament has raised a very interesting point which also supports my answer and points out that we should adopt a more analytical approach to the matter .
I go along with the idea that support granted to less well off regions should be seen as a catalyst which can help us achieve a Europe in which there is no more major structural lagging .
From that point of view , he is right in saying that we should not believe that this policy is going to go on forever .
I hope not .
I hope that we are going to reach a situation in which we will have competition ' on a level playing field ' .
I thank the President-in-Office for her reply .
There is a little confusion here .
Regional selective assistance - perhaps the Council can confirm this - is not drawn from any European Union fund .
It is primarily United Kingdom Government money .
That does not deal with the issue .
Is it not true that you cannot prevent this sort of issue from happening ?
The reason we cannot prevent it is because of the economic system we live under .
We know why it happens .
We know , for example , my area is supposedly the beneficiary of Ericsson 's decision .
But we are pretty confident that Ericsson is not coming to Scotland because it thinks that it can do us the world of good .
It is because Erikson 's profits motives demand that .
In general , how does it profit any of us in the European Community if we deal with unemployment in one area by creating unemployment somewhere else ?
That is surely not the answer .
The question was the following : how to avoid doing away with jobs in trying to get rid of unemployment .
The questioner was quite right in saying that this is not just a question of European subsidies . Excuse me if I gave that impression but this is a question of support from States themselves within the limits granted by the Brussels system .
If we went further we could even talk about illegitimate government support .
We are speaking here of legitimate support which may be granted in a certain number of regions .
In certain cases , an assessment is carried out in order to determine whether there is still sufficient reason to maintain that support for those regions .
This approach has been carried out quite regularly on the basis of strict criteria , in particular in the field of employment and the general situation 's explaining the relative delay .
I think that even in the absence of the aid system , jobs will continue to be relocated .
That is what we have seen in Europe but also even more clearly in the rest of the world .
Some people examine the immediate results of a relocation : it is , of course , distressful for a whole region .
On the other hand , we note in the Netherlands that the globalization of our undertakings has led to a considerable strengthening of general prosperity and employment .
Briefly , let us not directly link the relocation of jobs to the aid policy .
Perhaps we should not consider the effects of these relocations solely in a European framework but also in the light of globalization .
I agree with the Council representative that there is continuous relocation ; companies move and rapid changes take place .
Of course there is not an automatic link , the setting up of new companies depends on the economic climate as a whole .
I wonder how to find out the facts on whether aid has been paid out to the companies involved .
One of the most important tasks of the EU is to defend competition on equal terms .
If it is proven in the study which will be carried out that the current EU structural policy distorts competition , and it is proven that competition in this case has been distorted , are we prepared to make reductions in structural policy so that it covers fewer areas and there is less money to dispense in order to restrict the harmful distortion and avoid setting old structural problems in Europe in tablets of stone ?
I go along fully with Mrs Carlsson when she says that we need to follow the situation very closely in order to determine the effects of aid granted to regions which are less developed to such an extent that they are unable to take part in what I call ' competition on a level playing field ' .
What needs to be defined is exactly when aid is justified , appropriate and admitted and when everything is balanced . That is when we must say : now aid will have a distorting effect .
That is precisely the reason and I am also referring to the Commission 's policy for which the choice of regions is so often submitted to a very strict evaluation based on certain criteria , including unemployment and a weak economic structure .
As all of you possibly know , a common position on antipersonnel mines was adopted by the Council on 1 October 1996 .
It is in three parts , as follows .
The first part concerns the total banning of all antipersonnel mines and the implementation of all means possible to reach as quickly as possible an international agreement stipulating a formal ban .
The strategy then contains the idea of extending a European Union moratorium on the export of antipersonnel mines to exports towards all destinations .
The final part , and the most complex , considers the elimination of all existing antipersonnel mines .
We wish to act internationally and 7 million ECU have been earmarked for this and should be paid by the end of 1997 .
Since this common position was adopted , the European Union has pursued its implementation dynamically and following this position all of the Member States adopted an agreement in Ottawa along with over 50 other countries , which consists in general cooperation in order to reach as quickly as possible a binding international agreement banning antipersonnel mines .
Since then other conferences have been held by Austria and Germany , in keeping with the Ottawa process .
The Brussels Conference scheduled for the end of June is the main follow-up meeting to the Ottawa Conference .
The European Union feels that it is important to take part in the Brussels Conference , which is an initiative that will mark the turning point in the developing of activities following the Ottawa Conference Declaration , something which the European Union heartily applauds .
Alongside these efforts , the European Union is also trying to have the conference on disarmament adopt a mandate aimed at negotiating as quickly as possible a binding international agreement within the conference with the objective of banning the use , planting , production and transport of antipersonnel mines throughout the world . That would give us an appropriate set of measures .
Just a few more words on the European contribution to the elimination of mines in an international context .
To this end the European Union recently took a decision to earmark 3.9 million ECU to the benevolent fund for the elimination of mines , at the United Nations .
This amount will be spent on projects in Angola , Mozambique , Bosnia , Croatia , Somalia and Tazhikistan. and a further 3.5 million ECU have been earmarked for Community action in order to meet demands from regional organisations or the authorities of other countries .
It has been agreed to earmark 2.07 million out of this to a regional initiative on mines launched by the Southern Africa Development Community .
Ways of spending the rest , some 1.3 million ECU , are currently being studied .
As far as the Member States ' obligations to fulfilling common action are concerned , members of European Parliament will know that Article J.3 of the Treaty of the European Union , in particular , stipulates that Community action is binding on Member States which must adopt positions and pursue the action undertaken .
That article also stipulates that , in cases of serious difficulties in the fulfilment of a common action , a Member State must submit them to the Council which will debate them and look for appropriate solutions .
Question Time has been going on for about an hour now and , in that time , four people have already been killed or maimed by a landmine somewhere in the world .
That is how desperately serious it is .
We talk about mine clearance which is vastly important , and I appreciate all the work that has been going on as far as the European Union is concerned .
However , 100 , 000 mines were cleared last year and 2 million new ones laid .
You do not have to be good at mathematics to work out that , unless we have a global ban , the problem will never be solved .
The most important conferences in Brussels and then in Ottawa are coming up .
This is a tremendous window of opportunity to do something about this horrendous problem .
What will the Council do to ensure that all 15 European Union countries will sign up to a global ban in Ottawa , and what will it do to promote the idea not only in Europe but throughout the rest of the world ?
I am pleased that you have again emphasized the urgency of this problem and its consequences .
That is why I gave a very detailed reply concerning the various aspects of European Union strategy .
Let us add this : alongside efforts made in the framework of the Ottawa process , the European Union will continue to try and have adopted by the conference on disarmament a negotiation mandate in order to introduce a total ban on antipersonnel mines . The European Union will continue to defend wholeheartedly the rapid creation of an ad hoc committee with a negotiating mandate compatible with the Union 's actions .
The European Union believes that international efforts made in the light of the Ottawa declaration within the conference on disarmament must be complementary .
The European Union will continue to look for every means possible to come even closer to working out a truly effective agreement as quickly as possible .
I have a supplementary question on the budget , with a number of different aspects . We know from information received from the UN that it will take 4000 years to clear the land mines in Afghanistan alone .
So the financial resources available to us are a drop in the ocean here .
Is the Council going to increase those resources ?
You have come out in favour of a specific prohibition , a total , universal prohibition .
When is the EU going to set an example , and are there funds for companies which are still producing now to enable them to stop producing immediately ?
Also , I have recently read that Dasa Dornier , a subsidiary of the armaments giant Daimler Benz , which produces mines , is currently benefiting , together with the French arms company Thomson CSF , receiving from the Commission of the European Union a contract worth DM 100 million for research into new military direction-finding and radar systems .
The argument being that the systems can be used to pinpoint mines .
We decided here that anyone producing mines , which includes Daimler Benz , should not receive any additional money for mine clearance .
How can the Council explain this ?
Will it take action here to ensure that this money is not wasted for that purpose ?
I find that it is always very difficult to respond to questions that are so emotional by treaties .
However , it is the only way of defining limits .
Why is the European Union 's strategy so good as a whole ?
Because a various number of possibilities are allowed for .
In the beginning you could say : you have to ban antipersonnel mines .
But you must also ensure that they are no longer planted or used .
A quite supplementary measure and one that can be controlled is to attack the trade in these mines , in other words the import and also export of this type of product .
Banning mines will indeed call for a great deal of energy .
On that score , I think money but also technology and good organisation are extremely important .
I am aware of the situation referred to by the Member .
I do know , however , that it is crucial for us to take advantage of all the experience that we have gained on the ground in Europe and elsewhere in order to get rid of mines as quickly as possible and not waste any time on procedures .
I think we really have to get down to work on this .
Madam President-in-Office , it would be a good thing if the Council were to turn to China in respect of the production of mines and their international trade .
You said rather smugly that the European Union has decided to spend 3 million ECU on this campaign .
I do not need to remind you of the Council 's attitude over this matter for the 1997 budget and who it was who put in those 3 million ECU - the European Union and its budgetary authority .
I hope that the Council will be more sensitive this year for the 1998 budget , at least your colleague in the Finance Ministry .
I should like to ask whether , given that we are cutting back European armies , the Council could not take the decision to send mine defusing experts into many of those countries .
This is a constant demand , for example , in Angola , where there is a lack of qualified staff to instruct mine deactivation brigades .
Could the Council not take a decision to send that type of instructor to trouble spots ?
I must confess that I am not really au fait with the details of the systematic procedure for eliminating antipersonnel mines .
In my reply I concentrated on our administrative activities - in other words , support for organisations which can act thanks to our financial support and other supplementary measures .
Please excuse me but I cannot give you a more detailed reply .
As for your question about China . Of course , it is important that the largest possible number of countries should subscribe to this agreement as was the case for chemical weapons and others .
I will begin by thanking the President-in-Office for her answer .
I am glad that there is agreement in the Council too that it is immensely important that these matters be discussed at the Ottawa meeting .
In relation to what has been said , I would like to ask : what progress has been made in the Council in getting these things in place ?
As I understood it , you are agreed that we should have them in place , so what progress has been made in the negotiations on coordinating views so that it will be possible to arrive at a common position for the Ottawa meeting ?
Is it your view , Madam President-in-Office , that a situation will be achieved in which there actually is a common position in favour of a ban at the very important meeting in Ottawa ?
Briefly , with my approval and to my great pleasure , I can tell you that all the Member States of the European Union will be taking part in the forthcoming Brussels Conference . Two of them , Greece and Finland , will probably be present as observers .
All partners have approved the European Union 's coordination vis-à-vis the Ottawa process .
I should sincerely like to thank the Minister for her enthusiastic reply .
Mr Cunningham and myself are rapporteurs not for but against antipersonnel mines - or rather I would prefer to call them anti-people mines .
You rightly refer to the Ottawa initiative which will be continued next week in Brussels and perhaps by the end of the year will lead to the signature of a ' wholehearted ' convention , as it were .
Would the Council like to comment on the fact that the true forum which should have been chosen , the United Nations Anti-nuclear Conference , is still beset with differences of opinion between the United States and India over nuclear weapons ?
I hope that this is not going to be a bottleneck causing the Ottawa Convention to fail at the end of this year .
I shall be brief for the interpreters .
I go along entirely with your point of view and I too hope that this situation will not arise .
Question No 10 by Mr Arthur Newens ( H-0392 / 97 )
Subject : The EU banana regime
Would the Council make a statement about the future of the Banana Regime in the light of the latest developments ?
As Mr Newens knows , the WTO panel recently made a negative declaration against the Community in the framework of the dispute over the European banana import policy or the regulation of the markets .
In accordance with existing procedures , the Community has 60 days as of the date of the announcement of the panel report to all members of the WTO to adopt a point of view .
As you know , it is primarily for the Commission to decide on the follow-up to be given to the panel report and in particular to decide whether it should be appealed against .
The Commission has already announced that it does intend to appeal against the WTO panel 's findings .
As soon as the WTO takes its final decision - because in fact it has not yet happened - the Council will definitely hold - according to the applicable procedures - a debate on the consequences to be drawn from this final decision .
Of course , this is a matter of the main elements of the banana import policy , set out in the market regulation , while bearing in mind the European Union 's specific obligations towards the countries which signed the Lomé Convention and , of course , the Member States of the WTO .
In this respect , we should remember that the Commission has already put two proposals to the Council .
First of all , the proposal of 8 March 1996 aimed at amending the common regulations governing the banana market .
Secondly , the proposal of 6 April 1995 which enables the ACP banana producing countries to make provisional transfers of traditional category bananas and others between ACP states within the same geographical region .
This means - and here I am addressing in particular those who are not familiar with this jargon - that quotas can be modified .
These proposals are still being studied by the Council bodies , pending the outcome of the WTO procedure .
While thanking the President-in-Office for her reply and expressing the strongest support for the decision to appeal against the WTO ruling on bananas , in view of the devastating effect this decision could have on the fragile economies of Caribbean and other countries , some of which rely in some cases for more than 50 % of their foreign exchange earnings on bananas , will the President-in-Office do everything possible to ensure that we fight to the last ditch on this issue ?
Is it not a fact that the real beneficiaries of the World Trade Organization decision , if it were implemented , would be American-based multinational companies which already control over 90 % of the world trade in bananas , and have we not therefore a duty , if we want to fight poverty in the world , to stand very firm on the agreement we made with the banana-producing countries ?
First of all , Europe will do all it has to to defend its policy if there is complaint , a divergence of opinion or tensions vis-à-vis the WTO panel .
When you say ' pursue to the end ' , I would nonetheless like to make a comment concerning the hierarchy of interests within the WTO panel .
We quite rightly set up the WTO panel to deal with differences of interest , and I am not only referring to the interests of big countries but also to those of small countries such as Honduras , Guatemala , Mexico or Ecuador , in this case - so that they can have a reference in order to be able to react to any disturbance to their markets , in particular in order to face up to the bigger countries .
In these matters , I attach considerable value to the fact that we now have a WTO panel .
That does not mean to say that because we are satisfied with the existence of that panel , we should not use it to defend our own personal interests .
That is really the thrust of my proposal .
Madam President-in-Office , I listened to what you said , and your words about the ACP countries , but neither you nor Mr Newens mentioned Community banana production , which now amounts to 720 , 000 tonnes , produced in the Canaries , Madeira and Crete , etc .
For these regions , which have the scantiest means of defence , the disappearance of the banana would be like the disappearance of dairy cows in Holland .
I do not think that the Dutch would like to see that happen any more than those regions would like to see the banana disappear .
This matter is of important economic and social value .
Secondly , you know that the peaceful solution of conflicts at the WTO is not carried out by a court of justice in the strict sense but the procedure seems linked to certain trade negotiations and I hope that the Council bears that aspect in mind , i.e. the need for negotiations or compensations in order to solve this matter .
I am sorry that I forgot European taxpayers even though I have just visited Spain in order to discuss in detail this subject with my colleague there .
I think that we are talking about two different issues , i.e. the status of the WTO panel and taking into account WTO declarations concerning market disturbances and the European Union 's position . The EU must still take a final decision in order to be able to defend its own interests through the WTO panel .
I think it is rather foolish to say : let us call into question the value of that panel .
That is my opinion .
I think by using a fairly good instrument our interests can be defended to the best possible extent .
That will play a role in the case of bananas but also , increasingly , in the case of all products which are still protected throughout the world in the light of the agreements reached in Marrakesh on the ending of subsidies , quotas and other limits and forthcoming negotiations on new tariff reductions in a whole series of areas .
We must therefore be aware that international trade organisation is going to lead to changes in commercial relationships and new opportunities will arise on the same market .
By referring to this specific situation I would like to repeat to you that we still have a possibility to appeal and we are still studying that . We do defend our interests on the WTO panel , but the WTO panel is a precious instrument in this area , not only for those who are accusing us today but also for the European Union .
I am somewhat bemused by the reply about the complaints and the appeal from the Commission legal services because I have just done a BBC World Service interview which says that the appeal has been lodged today .
Either the BBC is wrong or the Council 's sources of information are somewhat limited in this instance .
I am very interested in what you say .
I would like to know whether you consider that it would be a majority view in the Council , including the view of your own country - the Netherlands - that we should continue with a banana regime and continue to support the banana regime .
I would also ask whether you think that it is appropriate that a country that has no direct involvement with the banana industry should be able to lodge a complaint in this way and to obtain a ruling of the kind obtained by the United States after they lodged their complaints .
Finally , I would also like to ask you whether you think it would be appropriate , now that apparently the appeal has gone in , for the ACP also to put in a parallel appeal and for the European Union to provide funding , resources and support for them in order that they can make their appeal as effective as possible .
I emphasized in my reply that the Commission has already announced its intention to appeal .
I might imagine that you have concluded that this is therefore a decision .
I have no other news .
I do not see any major difference between Mrs Kinnock 's conclusions in respect of the decision and my analysis of the situation .
Let us turn to the decision .
At the moment - as I have already stressed - the complaints procedure is part of the Commission 's remit , which does not mean that the Council should not take any decision nor that it should discuss any proposal .
You would like to know the Netherlands ' point of view as a Member State of the European Union .
I am afraid I cannot satisfy your demand , because I am not here to represent my country .
I am trying to defend the interests of Europe with a certain neutrality .
The procedures for making a complaint or for appealing are carefully determined within the WTO . They will , therefore , play a role in the new declarations to be made .
You also mentioned the matter of funds , compensation , etc .
This is a problem which calls for specific attention in the European Union .
It is not currently being dealt with by the WTO panel 's review procedure .
Question No 11 by Mr Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0393 / 97 )
Subject : ' Open skies ' air transport agreement between the EU and the USA
Can the Council provide information , in view of the recent work carried out by Transport Ministers in this area , on the possibilities of reaching an ' open skies ' agreement between the EU and the US on commercial air transport in the near future ?
Mr Camisón Asensio 's question concerns negotiations for an open skies agreement between the European Union and the United States .
My response is the following .
On 17 June 1996 , the Council adopted the negotiation mandate enabling the Commission to open , on the European Community 's behalf , negotiations with the United States on air traffic .
One of the basic principles of these negotiations is the idea of a common air traffic area between the European Community and the United States , and this agreement should ultimately replace the current system of bilateral relations between isolated European Union members and the United States .
Since 1995 , the United States has contacted several Member States of the European Union in order to reach so-called ' open skies agreements ' , and some of those Member States have reached agreements with the United States while others are still being negotiated .
The European Community 's new approach , however , implies the organisation of structured negotiations with the United States which should in due time lead to an agreement aimed at setting up a common air traffic area .
I should like to emphasize the fact that these negotiations will take place over a number of stages .
Initially the European Community would examine with the United States the possibility of introducing a set of directives which would be applied to air companies based in the European Union and the United States in order for them to be submitted to similar competition rules , the so-called ' soft rights ' .
If this led to substantial results , the negotiations could then move on to a second stage , that of regulating common air traffic as a whole , i.e. the so-called circulation or ' hard rights ' .
In this framework , the Community , represented by the Commission , and the United States held talks on 30 and 31 October in Washington and 3 April in Brussels .
At the Transport Council meeting on 17 June , the Commission reported on the results of the discussions which had been held so far .
Madam President-in-Office , having listened to you , we are afraid that the negotiations are being stalled .
Secondary aspects are being dealt with and the real crux of the matter is being neglected , namely that of establishing traffic rights beginning , once and for all , with access to third markets , to benefit ordinary people .
Once again we see the overriding need for union in our European Community - which you have begun and which I urge you to continue .
It is obvious that if the 15 Member States united their forces , the agreement would be a better one and strike a perfect balance between the United States and the European Union , with neither winners nor losers .
This is another great opportunity for the European institutions - especially the Council - to show how agile and efficient they are .
This agreement is urgent , especially with the possible - perhaps imminent - integration of American Airlines with British Airways , a group that Iberia seems to be joining forces with , which is perfectly reasonable and understandable given the facts .
Could you tell us about this urgent matter ?
First of all , we need a certain dynamism in order to reach a good result on the basis of a 100 % win situation .
I told you that the interest of these two stages is first of all to ensure that there are equal competition opportunities , the so-called ' soft rights ' , before turning to a more extensive regulation which should enable us to reach an ' open skies agreement ' .
But quite a lot of factors have to be taken into account - as you very rightly stressed - including the question of the merger of airlines .
That is one of the issues which comes into the first stage , i.e. the process of establishing equal competition opportunities .
This is , therefore , one aspect which will definitely be on the agenda during the first stage .
In order to give the whole process a boost , on 17 June 1996 , we adopted the negotiating mandate and I have just pointed out that the Transport Council meeting of 17 June has already reported on the initial findings of the process .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 12 , 13 and 14 lapse .
Question No 15 by Mr Sören Wibe ( H-0406 / 97 )
Subject : Follow-up to future elections in Albania
In the recent parliamentary elections in Albania held in May 1996 there was organized electoral fraud which clearly favoured the ruling Democratic Party .
International observers at the elections protested but there has been no diplomatic follow-up by any other European country against the Albanian Government .
The result has been an authoritarian regime which did not draw the line at machinating its way back into power and has also systematically been involved in corruption and out and out fraud throughout the country .
Armed insurrection has been the result .
Talks are now taking place between the political parties together with the rebels .
There is disagreement over the electoral system and the timetable for the rebels to disarm has been ignored .
Strong feelings have also been aroused over the question whether President Berisha should continue in office .
Will this situation be repeated ?
Will the EU Member States react and demand new elections if there are irregularities in the forthcoming parliamentary elections in June ?
What is our threshold of tolerance of future electoral fraud in Albania ?
This is my answer to Mr Wibe 's question .
The Council has often expressed a wish for free and honest elections held in Albania .
Recently , the General Affairs Council , meeting in June , expressed its satisfaction on receiving the declaration by the Albanian authorities on the holding of elections on 29 June , calling all parties to take part in those elections with the promise of respecting the outcome of the ballot .
The Council has also stressed that this country 's future depended , above all , on the Albanian people .
Nevertheless , it is our duty to assist the national reconciliation government in preparing free and honest elections in which all the parties will take place , if possible on the scheduled date .
The European Union fully supports the efforts of the Council of Europe on this score , in particular the framework of the common position adopted by the Council on 2 June on the basis of Article J2 of the Treaty on European Union .
In it , the Council urged the international community to support the electoral process in Albania by supplying the necessary number of observers .
The European Union also emphasized its support for the multilateral protection force which during its mandate will ensure that the elections take place in full security .
If the electoral process were to be threatened by a policy of internal pressure in Albania , the European Union and the international community should review their position in respect of that country without any question .
I would like to emphasise to the Council the importance of maintaining a high profile on this issue .
Exactly one year ago , just after the Albanian election had taken place , I asked the same question of the Italian Presidency as it then was .
As there were clear signs of vote-rigging , I asked whether we should introduce some form of sanctions .
I received the response then that ' this was not necessary , Albania was already on the way to a democratic government ' etc .
Now we have the results to hand .
There was almost a civil war in the country .
We have already seen some indications of fraud here and there .
For example , I think that the so called ' car accident ' which President Berisha is supposed to have had is the work of his own staff to draw public attention to him .
I would just like to ask the Council : can you give a guarantee that we will introduce immediate sanctions against the government , if we notice the slightest indication of vote- rigging this time ?
I think that Mr Wibe is warning us against being excessively or glibly optimistic about this process .
On the other hand , it is obviously very positive that elections are being held and that a balance might be restored , so that something can be rebuilt in the country .
That is why I gave a positive response , but I was also careful in pointing out in my first sentence - I might even say that it was the safety net of my pessimism - what you have just commented on .
However , for the time being , I stand by the answers that I gave in respect of the support that might be given to the country .
Mr President , the written question is , in my view , not a question at all but a horror story .
But I do have a clear question to put to the Council .
First , is the Council not also of the opinion that stabilization in Albania includes striking a balance between the re-elected President Berisha and the former opposition , which , I am happy to say , now forms part of the coalition government ?
Secondly , how are elections to be held unless these armed bands in the south of the country are disarmed ?
And thirdly , how can democratic local authorities be re-established there ?
There is a danger that massive economic interests which support those armed bands will simply seize power from the streets .
That makes it very important to re-establish democratic local authorities .
You might interpret that as a question , but what you are describing is our concern and yours that the electoral process should be carried out correctly and everything that is related to that .
I share that concern , but I simply wanted to demonstrate how the position of the European Union and other bodies might actually lead to conditions and circumstances which might allow these operations to take place properly . I also said that the Albanian people have considerable responsibility .
Once again I agree with you , but I just wanted to try to follow up my previous thoughts .
That concludes Question Time to the Council .
Questions Nos 16 to 31 with be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

China-Europe relations
The next item is the report ( A4-0198 / 97 ) by Mr McMillan-Scott on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy on the communication from the Commission on a long-term policy on relations between China and Europe ( COM ( 95 ) 0279 - C4-0288 / 95 ) .
Mr President , this evening we are discussing a document produced by the Commission - a communication on EU relations with China in the long term .
The European Parliament has taken a close interest in China and over a number of years has adopted many resolutions , almost all of them highly critical of China in many respects .
During the time we have been preparing this report we have tried to establish a new way of working with China , and in particular with the National People 's Congress , against a background of hugely expanding trade with the People 's Republic , where all our Member States are closely involved in the economic development that has taken place in China since 1978 .
But we are also conscious that China remains a one-party state - in some ways a tyrannous regime - and has been justly criticised , both here and elsewhere , for its human rights problems .
However , the theme we have chosen for this report is not just ' business as usual ' but also ' politics as usual ' , seeking to underline that while we welcome the development of trade , at the same time we are seeking to establish some form of political dialogue with the Chinese political elite .
So it was , for the first time , we gave the delegation from the National People 's Congress , which visited Brussels in April , the opportunity to discuss in detail the draft report .
I was pleased they were able to do so - we sent them an advance copy and they looked through it in detail and , of course , were highly critical of certain aspects .
It is important to try to engage the Chinese in some form of dialogue , and so we based the report on the Maastricht criteria , which are democracy and the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms , and we hope that over time all these four conditions will find their place in Chinese life .
The Commission is involved in the promotion of democracy in China , through the village democracy programme .
The Commission is involved , as are Member States , in the promotion of the rule of law , without which human rights cannot operate in any territory .
As to fundamental freedoms - the most basic aspect of political life - these are still not available in territories such as Tibet , and we deal in some detail with that question in the report .
We seek also a more cooperative approach with China .
For example , an EU-China summit , raising relations to a new level and not just through the ASEM process .
We would like to see a new trade and cooperation treaty replacing that of 1985 and including the standard human rights clause .
We would like to expand the European Union 's programmes in China .
At the moment they are not significant in monetary or , indeed , in real terms , and they should be much more addressed to the size of China and its potential in the world economy and , indeed , in world politics .
We would like to see an office opened in China for the European business groups which wish to take advantage of the trade .
But , above all , I have tried to indicate in my report that there is a great deficit in China : the so-called internal market does not function - indeed never has .
The Commission has a great deal to offer the Chinese in the experience we have had in creating the single market in Europe and in converting the economies of the former Soviet Union to market economies .
We look at the experience we have had in operating the CFSP : the failure , for example , of the European Union in Geneva this April .
We look to the resumption of the Troika discussions on human rights with China .
We would like to see added to that a six-monthly report , not just on human rights , but also on the economic aspects of our relations , to look in particular at the approach of China towards WTO and OECD membership .
These are all aspects which are covered in the report .
Of course , we deal with the transition back to Chinese sovereignty of Hong Kong .
We say quite specifically that we repudiate the legitimacy of the Provisional Legislative Council and we look forward to the Chinese honouring the promises they have given both to us and the international community in respect of Hong Kong 's civil and political rights .
I am grateful for all the help I have had from academics , business people , colleagues in the European Parliament , the Commission and Parliament 's staff in the production of this report .
Mr President , as we debate in this Parliament , the American Congress is debating too .
I want to highlight the symbolism of this coincidence : perhaps the Conference of Presidents of our Parliament has not really understood the importance of this strategic definition of relations between the European Union and China , probably the most important political and economic issue affecting development and stability in the world at this time .
It has not understood , because we are being forced to have a debate under these conditions , to put it politely , while in the American Congress it seems this is a subject which actually draws crowds .
This means we still have a long way to go before our parties , this Parliament and indeed the European Union , achieve full awareness of the importance of defining a long term relationship with China which is effective and useful for peace , stability , cooperation and development .
Today , with this report , Parliament has the opportunity to start pointing the way forward for a comprehensive organic policy which is long term and does not consist merely of occasional though often justified denunciations but which fail to take account of the whole range of issues involved in relations with such a large country .
China is necessary to peace , stability and economic growth .
The right line is not to isolate China , a position which would anyway be virtually unachievable , given the size and , now , the international relations of that country .
The right line is one of dialogue and cooperation applied with sincerity and clarity , gradually leading that country to weigh up the advantages of cooperation to its development , growth and welfare and also the advantage , to obtain all this , of respecting international rules on agreements and treaties , human rights , and the solution of certain major problems still outstanding , like Hong Kong , Tibet and Taiwan .
Engagement with China is the only possible way .
I see that in the American Congress Mrs Albright has upheld this view , which is also our own , and has mentioned four areas - I do not have time to cover them all - where China is , to a degree , entering positively and constructively into international policy issues .
A very important one is its contribution to the approval of the nuclear test ban treaty , a second is helping control the instability on the Korean peninsula , supporting peacekeeping operations in Cambodia and elsewhere , the beginnings of effective control over exports of important and dangerous technology , and positive discussions , according to the Americans , about China 's entry into the World Trade Organization .
I could go on .
Of course , there is still the human rights chapter .
I believe it is right to create a clear , open and fair policy on China , in which a will to cooperate is announced and sustained .
Action must follow this and not accusations about differences , because I actually think intensification of relations and development of economic cooperation will contribute to shifting opinion even amongst the Chinese leadership and lead to political changes which are already partly in progress .
So I believe this is an important report .
It does not exhaust our drive to define the right policy , which , as a Parliament , we have only just begun , but it is a good start .
Mr President , adapting something that Heine once said about Germany , ' To think of China in the night puts all my hope of sleep to flight . '
That is doubly valid here .
All our plans for the evening have been put to flight by this important subject , but the important subject itself causes us deep concern .
And the topics of foreign policy and foreign trade policy , which create so much debate in the European Parliament , also include topics connected with China , with China 's role in the world , and especially matters relating to those regions that are politically and / or culturally connected with China .
Mr McMillan-Scott has presented us with a comprehensive report , covering many different aspects .
I should like to confine myself to one : human rights , which after all is the most critical for us .
The attitude of the European Union is becoming a test case here , not just as regards a common policy towards China but also as regards its attitude in future negotiations with other countries .
Many countries produce a hostile reaction if tackled on the issue of human rights .
They will see our attitude to China as a yardstick .
The McMillan-Scott report imposes requirements in the human rights areas that make our principles clear .
In this sensitive area , especially , we should not become entangled in contradictions and so weaken the demands we make on other countries .
Economic relations are also political relations .
Anyone who sets his hopes on contributing to the democratization of a country is supporting that precise argument , but human rights are part of democracy .
Good relations with China are something for which we all hope , including in particular greater openness towards people in China .
China , for its part , has expectations to live up to .
The handover of Hong Kong will show how far it stands by its obligations under the handover treaty , which will provide a pointer for international co-operation .
No one would dispute that the restructuring of a gigantic empire into a modern state involves many problems , especially in the case of a state which is home to many nations .
But China 's government should have the courage , too , to proceed towards the rule of law , human rights and democracy .
Thousands of years of Chinese culture can give it the strength to do so .
The same applies to its attitude towards Tibet and respect for an equally ancient culture .
And it applies , too , to a peaceful settlement of relations with Taiwan , which is an area where trade relations really should lead to changed relations .

Mr President , I greatly appreciated the report by Mr McMillan-Scott , but I share Mr Colajanni 's view that this Parliament is not demonstrating a serious attitude in holding the debate on such an important issue before a half-empty Chamber , in competition with football matches and so much else .
I agree with Mr McMillan-Scott that a framework agreement , for example , should be reached on economic and trade cooperation , because I also feel sure that human rights tend to be better understood and protected in societies open to free trade and free movement of investment , persons and ideas .
But I think the importance of the human rights issue cannot be understated given what is happening daily : illegal practices , systematic violation of human rights , growing recourse on a vast scale to the death penalty , even for minor crimes .
Many people are detained just for peacefully expressing their own political or religious ideas .
Well , we cannot keep quiet about it , or we would be false to ourselves , just as we cannot keep quiet about the fact that Hong Kong will provide concrete proof of whether the intentions of the Chinese government are good .
We cannot relax our vigilance over the maintenance of the provisions in force on freedom of expression , of the press , of association and of the right to hold demonstrations .
Whether a framework agreement with China is seriously possible soon will depend on this .
Mr President , the Liberal Group is satisfied in general terms with Mr MacMillan-Scott 's report .
We congratulate him on it .
The report accords considerable importance to relations between the EU and China and they are looked at from many angles .
We are pleased that human rights issues have a central place in the report .
In this connection I should like to stress that we must also be consistent in these matters .
What we demand from China we must also insist on from others .
On behalf of the Liberal Group I have tabled two amendments to this report which concern environmental questions .
In the committee after the vote , a recital was adopted on a proposal from the Greens stating that the West , including Europe , should reduce the use and pollution of natural resources .
In my opinion it is important for environmental issues to be included in the operative paragraphs of the report too .
My first amendment aims to do this .
The substance of the paragraph is the same as that of the recital already adopted .
In addition , I am proposing a new wording for paragraph 9 .
The form of words I am proposing places the EU and China on an equal footing with respect to each other and is more diplomatic than the original version .
I hope that I will have wide support from Members of this House for my amendments .
Mr President , the first paragraph of the resolution on long term relations with China rightly points out that they should be based on cooperation rather than confrontation .
Unfortunately , the rest of the resolution heads in the opposite direction , with heavy interference in China 's internal and external policies .
The starting point for any cooperation consists in considering the partner country as a sovereign state .
This resolution does not do that , and demands that China make social choices that are not its natural ones , especially concerning its territorial integrity .
Without giving ground on the concept of human rights , which the European Parliament upholds , it would have been possible - and , I think , far more useful - to deal with this matter in such a way as to contribute to a positive evolution in China in this field , rather than make demands of it which are not even always respected by the European Union 's Member States or allies .
An historic step has just been taken in the case of the handover of Hong Kong , in the conditions of a positive negotiated settlement of a difficult dispute . There is not a single word in this resolution to salute that smooth handover , alas so rare in the modern world .
The pressure demanded of the Commission in favour of Taiwan 's accession to international organisations and the plan to open an information bureau in Taipei would be provocative and irresponsible rather than favouring normal and balanced relations with China .
None of this is reasonable and has nothing to do with the desire for relations based on cooperation and mutual respect , which would only be beneficial in terms of economic and social matters as well as human rights , peace and security .
A lot has changed in China since 1995 , even though many problems remain , and it is quite regrettable that the update of the Commission 's communication dating back to 1995 should be done in such a negative way .
I hope that Sino-European relations , a major challenge for the 21st century , will soon be looked at from a completely different angle .
Mr President , I must congratulate Mr McMillan-Scott on an excellent report which is in no way vitiated by the fact that practically all of the amendments from the Green Group were accepted by the external affairs committee .
As President of the China Delegation I often have to listen to the complaint , when I am in contact with representatives of the Peking Government , that we pursue a unilateral and unjustified campaign against China .
I think that this report makes it clear that we are laying the foundation for constructive co-operation , that we have noticed the small but nevertheless real improvements which have taken place in China while at the same time we openly and without reservation level the necessary criticism , which is absolutely justified , against the very serious shortcomings in the Chinese system when it comes to democracy and human rights .
We must continue in this vein .
This is why it is all the more regrettable that it has been impossible to co-ordinate a collective criticism at government level in our respective countries .
It is particularly regrettable that some of the larger states , with France at the head , have put free trade before human rights .
This must be severely criticised by Parliament .
Mr President , there are not many of us here but we have the pleasure of having the Commissioner with us , which I think is particularly important .
I do not say this for Mrs Moreau , but I think that when we speak of human rights we also speak of democracy and our aim is also to ensure that the world does not become one big Singapore , with development but no democracy .
Our work as parliament is therefore to define a policy that helps to bring about democracy in China as quickly as possible .
This report is , I think , a first important step in that direction .
It will also enable us to harass Commissioner Brittan , but that is only a tiny part of the problem .
I think that we all remember the serious events that have occurred in terms of defining a common European police for external matters , and the respect of human rights in China .
We all recall Geneva and the disaster that befell the Union 's policy .
Then there was President Chirac 's trip to China , where promises that we are still awaiting were made , and last week the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Prodi , also visited the country and repeatedly told us that he would be very firm and would demand specific commitments by China over human rights .
We are still waiting for a practical outcome to that trip .
What I mean to say is that what we are doing here is very important but we have to be very hard on the Council in the coming months - the Council announced earlier that it is redefining its policy on China .
If that policy is based on the McMillan-Scott report , I think that that would be a first step in the right direction .
On the other hand , if that new policy is a confirmation of Mr Chirac or Mr Prodi 's approaches , then I think we are heading straight for disaster .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mr McMillan-Scott on his report , which has kept to a realistic line and avoided the usual mistake in dealing with China of taking an ideological approach rather than a political one .
In general there are two kinds of excess : the mercantilist culture and the radical culture .
Instead a more pragmatic approach is needed , the one our rapporteur has adopted , which takes account of the different history and the different objective conditions of a country with one billion two hundred million inhabitants , the weight of its tradition and of its enormous contradictions .
So we need to make an effort to understand and support a possible transition , trusting to the culture of development and freedom : this is a more difficult path , but a safer one , and anyway it is the obligatory path .
In the next twenty years we will have to reckon with China , which will be the greatest factor for change but also for uncertainty , so there will either be strongly absolutist and nationalist growth which will constitute a danger for the surrounding area and for the entire world , or progressive movement towards the market and freedom .
A great deal depends on us .
Head-on confrontation is a mistake , because in the Chinese tradition it leads to them cutting off relations . It is also wrong to try to export the worst of our culture , like consumption , corruption , and the law of the strongest .
We must focus on economic , technical , scientific and cultural cooperation to help China 's development effort , and export the culture of freedom , of diversity understood as richness , of tolerance , pluralism , human rights , peaceful co-existence , and respect for minorities .
If we gamble on cooperation and on the attraction of our values , then in time we shall certainly obtain political fallout .
The policy of the Chinese government - one country , two systems - will demonstrate the superiority of the market , but at the same time the cultural influence of the values of western civilization will convince the Chinese people to take the road of freedom .
Mr President , there are some positive things in Mr McMillan-Scott 's report .
There is the explanatory statement , and in the resolution there are between 30 and 40 points which are positive and underline China 's enormous economic importance and its importance to the stability of the region in the more general sense .
At the same time , however , there are about 20 points which negate all of the helpful things that are said .
The rapporteur deems them necessary as a means to promoting constructive cooperation between the European Union , in particular , and China .
It is if China were a defeated country to which Mr McMillan-Scott is dictating terms .
At Point 18 he gives full details of the type of constitution that today 's China should devise .
The Chines people are to have constitutional democracy .
I do not know where he gets his authority from .
From the Dalai Lama ?
From God ?
I have no idea .
Secondly , he speaks about Tibet and the Dalai Lama .
But Tibet has been an integral part of China since time immemorial .
What happens in Tibet is China 's own internal affair , just as what happened and is happening in the eastern part of Germany that united with western part was , and is , an internal affair .
Thirdly , he speaks about Hong Kong .
Hong Kong has changed sovereignty .
Has Mr McMillan-Scott not got wind of that yet ?
Two sovereign states came to an agreement and Hong Kong is now part of China ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I would like to congratulate Mr McMillan-Scott on an extremely useful and balanced report on relations with China .
I very much agree with Mr De Luca that it is important when developing our policy on China to be realistic and to be pragmatic .
As it happens , I do not think there is a conflict of objectives , as some have suggested .
Mr Gahrton seemed to think that we were preferring free trade to human rights .
I do not see that conflict because we are talking about an extremely large and important country , as many speakers in the debate have said .
We have to ask ourselves a practical question : what is our interest as far as China is concerned ?
It is , of course , an economic one , but it is also that China should be a peaceful participant in the world and a major economic player , developing a free society and expanding the rule of law and human rights in China .
That is our objective .
Now how do we achieve it ?
People talk about consistency .
I do not think one can be entirely consistent because the way of achieving results in China will be very different from achieving results in other countries , which are smaller and perhaps at different stages of development .
I have no doubt at all that the best way of achieving these common objectives is to develop the closest links with China economically and politically , to assist its development , particularly in the areas of special interest , but also to be forthright in our views on human rights .
I do not think there is any contradiction in those objectives .
In the long run the most likely prospect of improving the human rights situation is for China to develop economically and for us to encourage China in that development , not only internally , but towards the outside world through , for example , participation in the World Trade Organization ; not a meaningless participation as if it were a club which we just wanted to give them the prize of entry to , but participation on the basis of acceptance of the rules of the WTO which , on the one hand require China to open up and become a more liberal economy , recognizing its difficulties and its stage of development , while on the other hand , giving China access to the rest of the world .
If that happens you will automatically open up economic freedom in China .
In the long term economic and political freedom cannot be divided .
The growth of economic freedom in China is the most certain , long-term way to achieving political freedom as well .
But it does not follow from that that you say : let us trade with China , let us negotiate China 's participation in the WTO and hope that will lead in time to a freer society in China .
That is not enough either .
We have to work actively for that .
We have to give the appropriate signs and signals .
But we also have to give the appropriate help .
I was glad to hear Mr McMillan-Scott say that the cooperation programme should be expanded .
Parliament has an important role in enabling that to happen an it should be targeted in a way that helps the development of a civil society and encourages democracy .
We have a programme which encourages , as has been said , support at village level for reform in the right direction .
Reference was made by Mr Väyrynen to environmental issues .
There too we have much to offer China and China is interested in taking what we have to offer in terms of environmental programmes , training key environmental planners , supporting pilot projects involving technology transfer and assisting environmental planning and management in China .
In addition to trade and cooperation there is the question of human rights .
That has been central also in the most direct sense , and not just in the indirect way that I have described , to our policy toward China which is comprehensive and coherent .
The Commission has never hesitated to express our criticisms , both publicly and privately , of China 's lapses on human rights .
I have done so myself at the highest level , mentioning particular cases .
I agree with those who have said , or implied , that the inability of the European Union to reach a common view to put that view forward in Geneva at the Commission on Human Rights , is a great failing and a great weakness .
I very much hope that the Intergovernmental Conference , in reinforcing our capacity to create a foreign policy , will enable us in future on this issue , as in others , to present a rather more impressive picture to the outside world and advance our interests in a more effective way .
We should not hesitate to do that .
Hong Kong is important .
We are witnessing a unique experiment , an experiment to create one country with the two systems of Hong Kong and China proper .
The commitment of the Chinese Government to do that is unique and we should observe and watch it with care , with interest , and with concern that it meets the commitments that have been made .
There is a common European interest , not only because of our economic interests in Hong Kong , but also because Hong Kong itself can set an example , not as a base for subversion , but as an example which can lead people elsewhere in China and in the whole region to believe the route of economic freedom and political freedom is the right route forward , not just in Western Europe or in countries with a common tradition , but also in other parts of the world which have different backgrounds but where human values ultimately must prevail .
I commend the report and believe that the policy that we are pursuing towards China is comprehensive and pragmatic , recognizing the importance of trade and economic development both for its own sake and as a point of entry towards the creation of a more liberal society in China , but bolstering that up with cooperation programmes pointing in the same direction and a robust expression of our views when human rights are violated in China as elsewhere in the world .
Thank you , Sir Leon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Baltic initiative
The next item is the report ( A4-0196 / 97 ) by Mr Burenstam Linder on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy on the Commission communication on the Baltic Sea Initiative ( SEC ( 96 ) 0608 - C40362 / 96 ) .
Mr President , the Baltic Sea region had the fastest economic growth in Europe before the communist revolution .
Now that the planned economy has been scrapped , the former communist countries , together with the other countries in the Baltic Sea region , can once again develop this region into an economically flourishing democracy .
This will also help to strengthen political stability .
This stability can be improved through the fine web of co-operation at all levels which has developed and which continues to develop , in the public and private sectors for example , in business , administration , organisations and between private individuals .
At an inter-state level this co-operation also includes non-binding support on defence issues and common efforts in international peace keeping missions .
The work which is handled in the Council of Baltic Sea States , in which the EU participates as a full member , is of particular importance for co-operation in all these areas .
In this respect , the European Union has an important task .
Further far reaching reforms are needed in the former communist countries which , in the short term , can prove difficult because change is often seen as arduous .
The incentive to overcome short term thinking in politics has increased in those countries which have applied for membership of the EU .
They know that further change is required for membership .
The requirement for change gains increased acceptance in this way .
It is therefore especially important that , before membership negotiations begin , the Commission adopts the principle that new members will be accepted by order of merit , in other words , that objective qualifications will be the deciding factor .
If a particular group of countries consider themselves chosen from the start , the enthusiasm for reform felt by them is reduced .
If other countries feel that , even if they put more effort in than others and are really successful , they will still be left out , the desire to introduce reforms will be weakened , even if they should continue with the changes for their own sakes .
The political leaders who have been particularly involved in pursuing these changes will be compromised if successful reforms do not meet with an appropriate response during the membership negotiations .
It is particularly worth reminding ourselves of this view with regard to the three Baltic countries , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
They have applied for membership of both the EU and NATO .
I do not think that they should be made members of the EU just because they may not be able to become members of NATO .
They must fulfil the requirements laid down for membership of the EU , both with regard to the Union and to themselves .
But a particular country , or countries which are successful must also find themselves among the first new members of the EU and not left out in favour of another preselected group .
It is in the EU 's own wider interests to promote stability in this region which is sometimes the subject of threatening speeches arising from Russian domestic policy .
This is one reason why the Commission should make greater efforts to get the four EU states which have not ratified the European Agreement with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania to do so now ; after all it is two years since this agreement was signed .
Furthermore , the Commission ought to actively assist in concluding and approving border agreements with Russia in all cases and in so doing eliminate this area of uncertainty .
It must not appear appropriate for Russia to create uncertainty because of a lack of clarity on border issues .
One particular problem concerns the position of the Russian minority in Estonia and Latvia and of the many Russians who emigrated there during the Soviet era .
I think that we can take these criticisms which sometimes come from the Russian side very lightly .
This can be a difficult area but , in fact , the Baltic countries have managed to establish a relationship between citizen and immigrant which , in many respects , is better than that in many EU countries , even despite the fact that the minority is so much bigger here than in any other country .
Of course it is possible to make further improvements .
Establishing domestic harmony is in the interest of the Latvians and the Estonians as well .
Co-operation in the Baltic Sea region as a whole can yield important results in a number of particular areas .
The environment in the Baltic region was badly damaged during the Soviet era .
There is now a huge repair job to be carried out with our joint forces .
The joint fight against organised crime can also be mentioned as an area where combined efforts have been made and there is a strong chance that these will be successful within the framework of international co-operation .
Russia is included as an active and interested party in the regional co-operation in the Baltic Sea region and in the Council of the Baltic Sea States .
This gives the region and the co-operation there special significance and weight .
Successful co-operation between equal partners , with the EU as the driving force will in all probability yield significant benefits .
The introduction of democracy in Russia and economic reforms there would make the whole of the Baltic Sea region a new peaceful source of strength in Europe , and this is what we have set our sights on .
Mr President , the accession of Finland and Sweden and the association of Poland and the Baltic States have meant that the Baltic has become almost a European Union lake .
The European Union therefore has a direct responsibility to gear its policies more closely to the Baltic region as a whole , rather than to the individual states of the Baltic seaboard .
In doing so , we should make every effort to encourage the developing regional structures such as the Council of Baltic Sea States - as Mr Burenstam Linder just said - HELCOM , in the sector of environment policy , and other initiatives of a regional character .
The aid framework envisaged by the Commission should provide for ' help for self-help ' , which is now a major issue in the Baltic region , and should also make an effective contribution to the development of the private sector - small- and medium-sized enterprises , in other words .
The Committee on External Economic Affairs therefore emphatically supports the conclusions reached by Mr Burenstam Linder 's excellent report , which adopts this approach .
We are particularly glad that our suggestions have been incorporated in full .
There are three points of special interest to us here .
First , there is the cross-border expansion of the infrastructures - roads , railways and ports .
Secondly , however , we do urge that this should be done in an environment-friendly and environmentally compatible manner .
In case of doubt , the redevelopment of existing facilities and stretches of road or rail should take precedence over new building and new lines of communication .
Thirdly , co-operation between governments in the Baltic region needs to be supplemented by a continuous parliamentary dialogue between the European Union and the parliaments of the Baltic States .
We feel that the President of the European Parliament and the Presidents of the Baltic seaboard states should take the necessary steps to ensure this .
Mr President , the initiative for the Baltic Sea region which was taken by the Commission before the Baltic Sea Council 's summit meeting in Visby was an important one .
We must work towards creating closer ties between the EU and the Central and Eastern European States in the Baltic Sea Region .
The Region is currently a unique platform for political dialogue and for the co-ordination of measures to promote democracy in Europe .
The region is also important from the point of view of political stability .
The Baltic States , for historical and geographical reasons , because of the occupation by the Soviet Union and the border with Russia , form a region subject to potential conflict , which in its turn could have consequences for the rest of Europe .
This risk must be eliminated .
This is best achieved by placing the countries firmly within the sphere of international co-operation .
The role of Russia is also important .
Russia must be integrated closely in the co-operation on the Baltic Sea region .
Currently existing co-operation instruments must be used to the optimum to strengthen democracy , political stability and economic development in this region .
The EU is an important organisation in this co-operation .
The forthcoming enlargement is of great importance to the whole of the Baltic Sea region , indeed for the whole of Europe .
This unique opportunity to unite Europe socially , culturally and economically must not be ignored .
All the applicant countries must have the same chance to qualify for membership .
No one shall be excluded from the discussions at the start . Everyone must start on one and the same starting line .
In this respect it is important to view the Baltic States as three separate States and to treat them as such .
Finally : the enlargement of the EU into a peaceful , united Europe must be kept separate from the enlargement of NATO 's military defence alliance .
International co-operation must be built on a peaceful note and must not remain in the shadow of the cold war .
Mr President , I should like to express my thanks to the rapporteur .
The report approaches Baltic cooperation in a very broad sense .
Economic and security cooperation in the Baltic must stress the varied nature of security in the area .
The political , economic and social situation of the states in the region varies , for there are both EU Member States and future Member States there , and the region is also an EU border region .
Stability and security can only be increased by cooperation networks , in which grass-roots influence is essential .
The process of EU enlargement will only have a real democratic basis when ordinary people , and not just states , feel that they are in the same boat as other Europeans .
Baltic cooperation considers not only the integration process , - common regional needs , - but also the northern dimension .
A policy for the north ought also to be a part of the Baltic strategy , because there are in Baltic policy more multiplier effects and elements increasing cohesion than in what is generally termed , ' Nordic policy ' .
However , this presupposes that it is understood that the Baltic region comprises the states of the Baltic together with their varying spheres of operation , including a northern dimension .
Mr Väyrynen 's amendments focus on the right issue , but approach the question from the opposite direction .
It is easy to endorse the principles of the Kalmar action programme , namely citizen participation , sustainable development and environmental cooperation in the region .
More binding provisions are needed .
In the Baltic States region there are opportunities and threats , including environmental protection and nuclear safety .
It is important that the meeting of the Baltic Council this month will also make evaluations of the implementation of the programme .
The areas own cooperation and priorities are of primary importance .
The Union is only one protagonist in this cooperation .
Among the EU Member States , ratification of the Europe Agreements is being held up by two ' snails ' , Belgium and France .
In evaluating the applicant states , the Commission should realise that in the border dispute between Estonia and Russia the ball is in Russia 's court .
The Commission should also decide soon whether it will act on Parliament 's demands to begin negotiations simultaneously with the applicant countries , for the clock is ticking inexorably on towards July .
Mr President , just as membership of the European Union has meant increased security for Sweden and Finland , it will also mean increased security for our neighbours along the Baltic Sea , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Poland the day they become members of the European Union .
Not only will their security be enhanced but also the security of Europe which makes it extremely important for us all that these countries become members as quickly as possible .
This is why it is also important that we do not place further conditions on those who are applying for membership other than that they must fulfil the requirements , the conditions of membership .
This alone must be the deciding factor .
It is in the interests of the security of Europe that we open our arms to these countries .
The European Agreement is an important part of this and an important step towards membership .
This is why it is incomprehensible that a number of countries - out of pure laziness as far as I can understand - have still not ratified the European Agreement which exists with the Baltic States .
Let me also point out that it must be an absolute requirement that those countries seeking membership - and that includes the countries surrounding the Baltic Sea which are currently applying - fulfil the requirements that we have stipulated on human rights .
We will help them in this , but it is really important that we do lay down requirements which must , for example , include everything stipulated by the Commission and also the requirement that they abolish the death sentence .
Finally , I would like to say thank you to Mr Burenstam Linder for an excellent report .
It is a truly high quality report well in line with that which his predecessor from the Moderate Coalition Party , Margaretha af Ugglas gave to Parliament on the same subject .
Mr President , it is important that the Union gives its full support to regional cooperation in the Baltic region , because it will create prosperity and stability for the whole continent .
For example , trade between the EU countries and the ' transitional economies ' is expected to quadruple in the next few years in the Baltic region .
The Commission 's role in Baltic cooperation is currently too modest .
It must move from observation and coordination to fully-fledged participation .
The Agenda 21 programme for sustainable development is currently under preparation in the Baltic region , as the report mentions .
The Commission is also involved in the creation of programmes , but with a very small input .
In my opinion , Parliament should insist that the Commission increase its input into the Agenda 21 programme .
The traditional concept of military security has lost its meaning in the Baltic region as elsewhere .
On the other hand , environmental questions , stable , democratic and socially just development in the ' transitional economy ' countries , minority issues and the prevention of crime and terrorism are even more important .
The development of cooperation in the Baltic region calls for cooperation to be built up with Russia , too .
Mr President , Parliament should promote the conclusion of a border agreement between Russia and Estonia , because it is a precondition for the development of cooperation among the states of the Baltic region .
Mr President , with the EU facing the challenge of making an effective contribution to the development and stability of the Baltic region and the final abolition of frontiers within Europe , the Commission 's communication falls far short of the mark , and to call it an initiative is an embarrassing misnomer .
In an area where regional and local relations have existed for centuries the objective , now that the Iron Curtain has fallen , must be to pull aside the silver curtain too by making greater efforts to close the gap in living standards and strengthen democratic reforms , rather than setting up new frontiers by means of the Schengen Accords .
What is needed here is a second stability pact to follow on from the one adopted in 1993 , with a programme adapted to the new situation which will develop the Baltic region as a model of stability , democracy and disarmament , and so provide an effective response to the security needs of the states of central and eastern Europe , especially such small countries as the Baltic States .
Let us put the clocks back to December 1995 .
The European Council meets in Madrid and decides that an approach be adopted to the preparations for EU enlargement guaranteeing that the applicant countries will be treated on an equal footing .
I strongly supported that line , and still do .
It is very important from the point of view of stability in the applicant countries that we do not start making pronouncements on which ones are more eligible than others and are more deserving of EU membership .
In his original draft for the report , the rapporteur did advocate a strategy on those lines , which is neither reasonable nor well thought out .
Fortunately my Swedish colleague , Mrs Theorin , made sure that the report in its final form would make it clear that only when all the applicant countries were lined up at the same starting point and the negotiations had got underway would consideration be given to which countries best met the conditions for accession .
Cooperation in the Baltic Sea region could be strengthened by a specific Baltic Sea Programme .
The Council of the Baltic Sea States could be the focal point for such cooperation and could participate in the political process as a responsible partner .
The many good initiatives for which budget lines already exist could be brought together in a proper Baltic Sea Programme .
The common economic objectives awaiting political implementation are obvious .
They relate to energy , transport and the environment .
The development of a pattern of trade is something else , but equally important .
Finally , I must stress how important I think it is that , if after the start of negotiations the conditions for accession are found to be met by one or more of the Baltic countries and they therefore qualify for membership , existing EU members must not put obstacles based on historical considerations or strategic self-interest in the way of their accession .
Mr President , I too would like to offer my congratulations to Mr Burenstam Linder .
He has succeeded in producing a synthesis of penetrating analyses and far-sighted visions . And those visions can become reality if opportunities are consistently taken and risks are minimized .
Nor has the rapporteur disregarded the necessary next steps , and it is one of those necessary next steps on which I should like to focus .
In paragraph 1 , the rapporteur calls upon the institutions to promote the full ratification of the Europe Agreements with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
When we vote on this report tomorrow , those agreements will be precisely two years old - they were signed back on 12 June 1995 .
So the rapporteur is more than justified in calling for ratification , and it is also in the interests of the European Parliament .
Because , after ratification by all Member States and the Council , the existing delegations can be reconstituted as joint parliamentary committees , which is not just a formality but secures binding participation in a structured dialogue .
It secures the participation of the European Parliament and of the respective national parliaments in the structuring of the treaties , in the defining of political focuses and priorities , and in control .
We thus secure the right to influence the complex processes of adjustment that are going to be necessary both in those states that wish to join the Union and in the Union itself .
Especially in the Baltic region , there is a need both for closer co-operation and for the rapid acceptance of new Member States .
Because it is precisely here that we have the opportunity , in the future , to involve Russia , too , more closely in regional co-operation and so make an essential contribution to stability .
Mr President , Mr Burenstam Linder has tabled a very good report on Baltic cooperation .
I congratulate him on it .
On behalf of the Liberal Group I have tabled two additional amendments referring to cooperation in the Barents Sea area .
They are based on the report by Mr Tindemans adopted in May .
As Mr Tindemans said in his report , the Baltic and Barents Sea cooperation areas partly overlap .
In addition , all the Member States of the Barents Sea Council are also members of the Council of Baltic States and the Commission is involved in both on the same terms .
According to the Tindemans report the Union should have a comprehensive policy for northern regions , in the context of which cooperation in the Barents Sea region should be developed .
My amendments seek to obtain a definition by the Union of the position of Barents Sea region cooperation in the Union 's policy on northern regions and its relationship to cooperation in the Baltic region .
I hope my amendments will be adopted .
Thank you , Sir Leon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Equal pay for women and men
The next item is the report ( A4-0143 / 97 ) by Mr González Álvarez on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the Commission communication - a code of practice on the implementation of equal pay for work of equal value for women and men ( COM ( 96 ) 0336 - C4-0460 / 96 ) Rapporteur for an opinion ( ) : Colombo Svevo for the Committee on Womens ' Rights ( Hughes procedure ) .
Mr President , I think that we should begin by thanking Mrs Colombo for her work , which complemented that done by us in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and expressing our thanks also to members of that committee - Waddington , Wolf and Schörling - who tabled amendments .
These amendments definitely enriched this report and simply seemed very important to me .
One of them referred to the effect of public spending cuts on aspects such as health and education , where female employment rates are very high , and the fact that those cuts can harm women 's job chances .
Certain amendments provided for Code measures to be taken not only in favour of a group but all workers , i.e. all female workers , who often have so-called ' rubbish ' contracts or work part-time .
Susan Waddington 's amendment is also important - it analyses the effect of the Code and looks at whether it might not be more effective to turn it into a legal instrument within three years .
To sum up , the Code is addressed to the social partners , governments and associations .
It also sets down guidelines for analysing pay structures and assessing jobs and , as a prior step , the compilation of adequate information on pay systems - which differ from country to country - and the study of collective bargaining procedures , to determine where action must be taken to avoid wage discrimination .
Twenty years after the 1975 Directive was adopted , it can be noted - as Mrs Colombo does and the European Union 's own statistics bear out - that there is still a 20-30 % wage differential between women and men doing work of the same value .
According to other statistics , only 20 % of contracts deal with the problem of inequality between women and men .
We still have a long way to go .
I must say that I am slightly sceptical about voluntary agreements , because if we cannot apply compulsory legislation I do not see how we can be expected to comply with voluntary agreements , such as the Code of Conduct between employers and the various social partners .
However , given that there are still salary differences and that legislation has been unable to reduce them , it seems that any measure that we can take might be of use .
One formula that might be useful would be first of all to encourage training and information for women so that they can accede to collective bargaining .
Secondly , to foster the presence of women in company committees . At present it is men who discuss women 's problems and defend their rights but it is really up to women to defend their own rights .
The current precariousness of employment - as is stated in one of the amendments - and public spending cuts do nothing to help the situation .
We believe that the public sector would probably give a good example to private initiative if it adopted measures to continue to reduce pay differentials .
We think that transparency is needed not only for assessing jobs but also for collective bargaining .
We must raise awareness of social partners and inform them , and disseminate the Code , not only in large companies , not only among the social partners , not only among governments , but also among the SMEs which create more than 85 % of jobs in the European Union .
I should also add that women 's associations should be informed .
We rapporteurs shall do our best to make sure that women 's associations hear about the Code so that they can use it as an instrument to defend their rights .
We should also consider extending Article 119 now that the IGC is coming to a close .
If that article were to be extended , equal pay for work of equal value would then be enshrined in the new Treaty .
Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights has obviously taken an interest in this report and thanks the rapporteur for having accepted a large number of its proposed amendments .
Our interest is clear because , as you know , this form of equality is to some extent the mother of all other forms of equality and it is on this form of equality that we have built all the others .
So it is paradoxical that while it has served as the basis for greater equality in other fields and other rights , both social and political , equal pay for equal work is still not properly applied in our countries .
Just recently , at a trade union conference , it was confirmed that women are earning 20 per cent less on average in Europe , and averages , as we know , very modestly conceal disparities which are even more serious in reality .
Worse still , because of casual work , wage differentials are now increasing in countries where they were previously less significant .
As these unequal conditions are persisting despite the existence of laws on formal equality , while the Committee on Women 's Rights recognizes that the code is certainly a weak instrument , it nevertheless feels it may prove strong enough to reveal the mechanisms which conceal the disparities and thus help identify systems which could become more binding in the future .
These hidden mechanisms are now going to be revealed : how a job is evaluated , how the evaluation systems come into being and how they are applied , how the payment system is constructed , and why this disparity even lurks in collective agreements .
A second point is that the code will be part of the memorandum .
It is one part of it , not the whole and it does not replace it , but although we think it can be improved , this code is not superficial , it is incisive because it leads to an analysis of the payment system ranging from collection of the relevant data to evaluation of that data .
After analysis there is also corrective action against discrimination on pay , and , finally , it also provides an evaluation of the application of such action .
The third point highlighted by the committee is that the code has its own internal logic and therefore operates in that logic . The committee believes this mechanism can only be effective and productive with one essential prerequisite : transparency .
Without transparency nothing can be achieved . There must also be widespread diffusion of information through an awareness campaign , training of experts , and above all an exchange of good practice including following an evaluation to completion , which will also reassure those of us who are a little sceptical that this is a useful initiative even if it does not solve the problem - as long as no-one cheats , of course !
Mr President , Commissioner , the report we are considering relates to the Commission 's proposal for a code of practice on the implementation of the principle of equal pay for work of equal value for women and men .
It is a good report .
I share the view of many other Honourable Members as to both the report and the code of practice .
We have made no progress at all in recent years with legislation to ensure equal pay for men and women .
The only reference to equality , in the European Union Treaty is Article 119 , which in fact is specifically confined to questions of pay .
Women are demonstrably underpaid in all Member States , and this article has brought them nothing more than a gleam of hope .
Women are not asking for preferential treatment - they are simply asking to be paid the same as their male colleagues for doing work of equal value .
Surely that cannot be too much to ask !
Editorials and soap box oratory have achieved nothing , nor have applications to the Court of Justice .
So something must be done , something to provide clear guidance to employees of both sexes - not just empty wrapping , not more theoretical protestations , but a genuine guideline .
Well , the code of practice can fulfil this need precisely and help bring about a genuine improvement in the pay principle .
It will be a practical toolkit for the social partners , focusing on a form of job classification and evaluation that is nondiscriminatory and free of any misinterpretation regarding job content and performance .
From the start , we have been very reliant on good co-operation from the social partners , without whose active participation the code of practice on equal pay is doomed to be yet another failure .
A few points in the report make me uncomfortable , for that reason .
If we start demanding the right to interfere in collective bargaining and the resulting agreements , and if we threaten sanctions if the necessary legislation is not complied with , I can only say that although we have to have control , we should ensure a form of communication based on mutual respect .
There is another point I regard as largely nonsensical .
Up-to-date comparisons of pay levels are needed , but they can only be possible within one sector .
Inter-sectoral comparisons - which is what the report calls for - are totally unrealistic .
You cannot compare a coal miner 's job with that of a secretary or a care worker .
It makes no difference whether the employer is the same or not .
The critical point really is the job as such , and indeed the text states as much .
You can only compare a female cook with a male cook , not throw everybody into the same comparison .
I hope we shall find many allies to support this code of practice so that in this case women 's hopes are fulfilled by genuine equality , even if only in matters of pay .
Mr President , the policy of equality must be pursued at every political level in national parliaments and at a European level .
One of the most important issues of equality is equal pay for equal work .
This ought to be taken as read now that we are approaching the year 2000 , but it isn 't .
The code of practice proposed by the Commission and the report drawn up by Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez are important steps towards realising the objective of equal pay .
Unemployment affects women more than men .
We must improve the opportunities for women to get and keep jobs .
The labour market must be broadened for women .
Here are a number of suggestions which I think would facilitate such a development : longer parental leave and equal opportunities for paid employment and parenting for both men and women . The same social security conditions for part-time work as for full-time work are very important as is access to good childcare and care for the elderly which would improve equality , and active information centres at work and at school are a must .
In Sweden and in other countries the public sector is very important in providing work , equality and equal pay for both women and men , but particularly for women .
Cutbacks in this sector can have a negative impact on development which must not be allowed to happen .
Mr President , support this excellent report !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the González report and I must congratulate her but the Commission proposal on the Code seems insufficient to me .
According to the Commission 's annual report on equal opportunities , dating back to 1966 , only countries that systematically and strictly applied systems to correct inequalities manage to eliminate those differences .
That is the case of Sweden .
However , the Code deals with equality in terms of women 's and men 's wages , but it is only voluntarily applied by governments , employers and workers ' representatives .
More radical action is needed in order to achieve wage equality and to eliminate labour segregation .
Let me give one example : information supplied by the Staff DG and its equal opportunities unit , covering all European institutions .
In its 1996 report , it says that in Group A , there are 18.91 % women and 81.09 % men . In group C the figures are 71.16 % women and 20.84 % men .
I would ask you to pledge that , in accordance with paragraph 16 of the motion for a resolution , if in three years ' time the Code has still failed to achieve the desired results , it will be transformed into a genuinely binding legal instrument .
Mr President , I should also like to thank and congratulate Mrs González Alvarez and Mrs Colombo on this magnificent report .
I must say that I am not very optimistic that it will have the effect that most if not all of the European Parliament would like it to have .
I am not optimistic because , if a Directive of over 20 months ago , which must be enforced , has not had the necessary effect , and would have ruled out the need for this report , a voluntary proposal is bound to have even less effect .
This is a good report , even so ; we must make the Council , which represents the governments , more aware of the need for this initiative as well as other authorities , at regional and local level , and through public and private companies , to put this instrument into practice , as its application is fully justified in my view .
We should also raise the awareness of the social partners : trade unions , businessmen , women 's associations and others , which are already very aware and fighting for equal rights on a day to day basis .
I hope that the Commission will give this proposal support and follow it up .
I would even go as far as to say that , if in three years ' time the Code is ineffectual , we should introduce binding regulations .
I have a little less confidence in the Council , as I said earlier .
There are few things that affect the dignity of individuals and offend people as much as these . It is not right for women doing exactly the same work as men to be receiving 20 , 25 or even 40 % less .
It is for the European Parliament to demand equal opportunities and I think that this is an interesting subject for us to follow up .
Mr President , at a time when the phenomenon of the new poverty , especially amongst women , is being discussed with growing concern , I can only agree on the need to inject a code of practice into the application of equal pay between the two sexes .
I particularly agree if that code is not limited to general statements of principle , but succeeds in guaranteeing concrete application of national legislation on pay , and hence also provides real and appropriate processes and sanctions .
I also believe it is important not to restrict the information and awareness campaign on this code to the social partners and large firms , but there should be maximum effort to publicize it amongst those women - and they represent the majority - who are employed in small and very small work places , women who are not in unions and are often forced into really casual work and precarious contractual conditions , which barely fall short of exploitation .
The governments of the member countries of the union have the main responsibility for guaranteeing the success of this code , but too often they pretend not to know of the existence of such discrimination , or anyway fail to intervene positively to remove it .
Those who govern cannot have a clear conscience just because they have changed laws , codes or regulations , if they then do not have the political will to monitor their effective application constantly .
As Mrs Colombo Svevo has already said , and I compliment her , this code , like any other instrument or procedure , makes sense and can work only on condition that no-one cheats .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mrs González and Mrs Colombo Svevo .
I am also pleased that there are male colleagues speaking this evening on this issue .
But allow me to convey to them a certain sense of bitterness which I cannot help but feel .
Certainly , we can agree on the fact that there exists a considerable legal corpus in the European Union on the issue of equal opportunities and equal pay : article 119 of the treaty , which we all hope will be improved in the next treaty , article 6 of the social protocol , numerous directives and judgements of the Court of Justice .
We also hope that the Council will quickly approve , on the basis of Parliament 's recommendations , the directive on the burden of proof , which provides a precise definition of indirect discrimination for the first time .
Finally , we have a series of relevant programmes financed from the Union budget , which the member countries as a whole have promoted and contributed to , making the application of the right to equal pay and equal opportunities a general given .
But I have this sense of bitterness because , despite all this , the code of practice we are discussing tonight is important because the fact is , women 's pay is still lower than men 's in Europe by an average of about 30 per cent .
In some sectors women receive a lower salary not just for work of equal value , but for the same work ; there is occupational segregation , both horizontal and vertical , and discrimination , as others have mentioned , is on the increase because casual work with few guarantees is increasing , and this discrimination also exists in the pension schemes .
So , if all this is true , this code of practice is welcome provided that it contains the features the two rapporteurs recommend in their reports and provided that , after three years , if the results are not good enough , it really becomes binding on everyone .
Mr President , Commissioner , the principle of equal pay for work of equal value , as between men and women , exists only on paper .
Reality is something very different .
Even today , women earn on average 30 % less than men - even now , more than 20 years after a directive on equal remuneration was passed .
Women are over-represented in the low-pay sector , and the recent recession widened the gap between women 's and men 's earnings .
The fact that women are disadvantaged is also apparent in the training sector , in the fact that they are diverted into so-called typical women 's jobs - often part-time jobs offering no social security - and the prevention of career advancement and access to management positions .
But complaining in itself achieves nothing .
If change and effective action are to be achieved , specific analyses are needed .
The Commission has adopted the suggestions made by the European Parliament in producing a code of practice as a basis for eliminating sex discrimination from the working world .
The intention is to examine what kinds of professional inequality exist , whether discrimination is being disguised by paying men additional bonuses , or whether job evaluations are quite simply one-sided .
The progress achieved is to be documented , as are successful model projects .
The action plan is to be produced by stages , in co-operation with the social partners .
They are to receive training and information and their awareness is to be improved so as to ensure precise compliance with the principle of nondiscrimination in future pay agreements .
Finally , women are to be much better represented than previously in collective bargaining , with full involvement to protect their own interests .
The European Commission 's initiative , Commissioner Flynn , if you take due account of the suggestions made by the Committee on Women 's Rights and the Employment Committee , and this valuable report , is an important step towards a more just working world .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are happy to have this occasion to discuss this excellent report just before what we hope is going to be the conclusion of the final text of the new European Amsterdam Treaty .
The code of conduct on equal pay for equal work will certainly gain importance thanks to the rewording of Article 119 which finally takes into account the Court of Justice 's case-law and recognizes the right to equal pay for equal work .
I fully agree with the rapporteur when he declares that women should be involved in working out employment evaluation systems and collective bargaining negotiations .
As long as wage negotiations are conducted by men , wage discrimination will continue to exist .
As my colleagues have just emphasized , we should consider adopting a legally binding instrument if the voluntary code of conduct does not lead to the hoped for results .
In my country , the minister intends to impose employment assessment on labour regulations .
I think it would be a good thing if all the other Member States followed suit .
Mr President , I would like to thank both rapporteurs for a really first-class report and at the same time also thank the Commission for an excellent communication on a code of practice .
Those of us who have spoken here can testify that the legislation in place has been inadequate .
Legislation is important but , on its own , it is not sufficient .
Much more is needed alongside it .
Even in my homeland , Sweden , which often congratulates itself on having made more progress than other countries in improving the participation of women in working life and reducing wage differentials , even here there are differences between the situation for men and women .
These differences have tended to increase during the recession which we have experienced in recent years .
Many changes are needed .
The labour market needs to change .
Currently it is women who have the low paid jobs , who work within the public sector , who have part time jobs and atypical work patterns .
We must ensure that this type of work also brings with it social security as other jobs do .
We must ensure that those women who work part-time have the opportunity to change to full-time and we must allow positive discrimination so that men can take on women 's jobs but also so that women can enter the male-dominated professions .
Furthermore we must have gender-neutral job evaluation .
I do not share Mrs Glase 's opinion on this point .
It is possible to evaluate work in different sectors .
It must be possible to compare the work undertaken by a woman caring for the elderly with that of a builder .
They are both equally hard and demanding jobs .
Although legislation is important , this is really a matter for the partners in the labour market .
We must get them to take these matters seriously .
Only when we get the partners in the labour market to do this will we have any chance of success in this work .
Mr President , the communication is good because it draws attention to the fact that women have qualifications to bring to the labour market .
But efforts over the years to define the concrete value of these more invisible or informal qualifications have come to nothing .
If it is now made absolutely clear that these qualifications are indispensable and worth paying for , perhaps we can move a step further and release women from rigid pay structures .
The communication rightly stresses the role of the social partners .
It is important that the trade unions should play a central role in the achievement of equal pay and it is therefore crucial , as the communication points out , that women should be involved in the negotiation of agreements .
The worst enemy of equal pay is a decentralized , fragmented and individualized labour market .
Experience in Denmark shows that , when there is a move from central to decentralized pay negotiations , the pay gap widens .
In Denmark the pay differential is DKR 60 000 per year .
Only a committed male chauvinist or a bad employer can accept that .
The trade unions are in a unique position to lead the way in laying the foundations for a more modern way of assessing men 's and women 's work .
We hope that the Commission communication may help to promote development in the right direction .
In this matter we men must show solidarity with women .
Anything else would be disreputable .
Do you not think so , Commissioner Flynn ?
Thank you , Commissioner .
I can inform the House that eight women and six men took part in the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
New information and communications technologies ( ICT )
The next item is the report ( A4-0153 / 97 ) by Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on the development of new information and communications technologies ( ICT ) in the next decade .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , my report and the resolution before us this evening are the result of an own initiative of the Committee on Research and Technological Development .
This committee attaches considerable importance to the development of the information and communication technology sector in Europe .
Despite the large number of documents already conveyed by the European Commission to the European Parliament on the information society , my committee had no clear analysis of the information and communications technology sector .
Given the importance of the ICTs for creating jobs in Europe , my report contains recommendations aimed at stimulating a climate likely to help new ICT products and services develop and , does so in keeping with the fifth framework programme due to run in this sector from 1999 to 2004 .
The economic sectors opening the most promising prospects for the coming years lie in the electronics industry , information technology and the services linked to these sectors .
As far as job prospects are concerned , it is very important that growth in these sectors be monitored .
Europe is rapidly losing ground in the world ICT market .
In 1990 , Europe 's share was 35 % but this had gone down to 28 % by 1996 .
Europe is stuck in the middle , that is the conclusion of an assessment carried out under the Dutch Presidency on the European ICT industries ' competitive capacities .
The fall in the market share is remarkable because Europe could have an excellent scientific infrastructure .
Numerous new technologies have been developed in Europe in recent years , but they have not been applied .
We only have to think , for example , of high definition television .
We could , for example , learn the following lesson : development does not only have to have a technical aspect .
A great deal of technology fails to be introduced successfully onto the market .
Marketing remains the key to market success .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot leave everything to the market .
This may not sound very liberal but , to begin with , the authorities must become good users of electronic services and products .
Both national and European authorities must act as catalysts and set good examples .
In other words they must show the way .
How can we convince European citizens to use ICT products unless the authorities do the same .
By setting themselves up as leading consumers or launching consumers of numerical services and products , the authorities can have considerable influence on certain local , regional , national and European segments of the market such as health care , the policy on the elderly , transport , education and encouraging the application of the ICTs .
What important role can Europe and the Member States play ?
First of all we need a stronger legislative framework .
At European and national levels .
We must strengthen Europe 's position on the world information and communications technology market . This means that we must find legal solutions to solve problems linked to the unlawful use of software .
Standardization , legislation on patents and registered trade marks must also be better regulated .
We must also inscribe into European legislation the fact that telecommunication technologies and information technologies are coming closer together .
This development cannot be halted by legislative lacunae .
In short , Member States must improve the harmonization of their ICT policy .
Only once this condition has been met can a European market come into being .
R & D programmes currently being implemented under the fourth framework programme are not enough to strengthen the European position in the ICT sector .
In the perspective of the fifth framework programme , we must analyze the contribution of these programmes to the Europe 's economic well-being .
These analyses should make it possible to work out the best practices likely to contribute to the strengthening of the effectiveness of future programmes .
Finally , I should like to come back to the importance of the ICT sector for the job market . The ICT policy should not only be aimed at large undertakings but also small and medium-sized firms .
Greater attention should also be paid to the innovative capacity of SMEs .
I therefore hope , and I shall take a personal interest in this , that SMEs will not be left out when programmes for the fifth framework programme are being selected .
Mr President , congratulations to Mrs Plooij , who is a good speaker , but more importantly , a very good listener .
She obviously listened during the debates in the committee on her report and has incorporated many of the ideas which came up .
We have own-initiative reports because we wish to highlight issues often to do with forthcoming legislation .
That is the case here , this is part of our committee 's thinking process for the fifth framework programme .
Should we continue the emphasis on information and communication technologies which has been present in the fourth framework programme ?
Look at the title of the own-initiative report , it is both the development and the application of information and communication technologies in the next decade and it is important that we look not just at the technology itself , but at the application .
This is a well-focused report with concrete suggestions .
First of all competitiveness of the European Union .
We are heartily sick of this syndrome invented in the EU , made in Japan , and we have to change that mentality .
Mrs Plooij warns us very starkly that our competitiveness is falling .
I have recently been warned by research scientists in my own constituency who have visited South-East Asia that we are kidding ourselves if we imagine that they are not about to overtake us .
They send students to learn from what we are doing , go back and improve it .
We are complacent and do not visit those countries to see what is happening .
The United States , as a free market capitalist society , is very keen on intervention to help its industries . We should copy that too .
Some of the factors involved in competitiveness include - as Mrs Plooij has identified - the single market and coordination and compatibility between Member States .
But the single market on its own is not enough .
We have to have regulation , to look at things like public service obligations , important in this field , our cohesion policies , support for smalland medium-sized enterprises .
I am constantly visiting little workshops where people who used to work for big IT firms like Alcatel have gone off on their own and have decided to use their ideas - a huge growth area .
We have to look at the societal implications of ICT , the environmental benefits that can come from it with things like less travelling to work .
And the societal implications include misuse , pornography , etc . , applications , health , education .
What a big advantage we have with our linguistic variety , including two world languages , English and Spanish - and I must say French of course , with Mrs Cresson here .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel is right to say it is not just quantitative , it is qualitative much more than growth .
This is the lives of our citizens .
Well done , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her report .
The whole field of information and communications technology is vital to our lifestyle and economy .
I realized that in a very practical way this week : the television monitor in my office was not working when I arrived .
Indeed , it did not work at the last Strasbourg part-session either , despite the efforts of the services here .
Finally , yesterday evening , the picture and sound were restored .
At last I could see where the meetings were that I was supposed to attend , and I could even see the news on BBC World , giving details of that most important election - the Conservative Party leadership .
But while the equipment did not work , I felt severely handicapped .
I reflected that the equipment was supplied by a nationalized company in a country which still has to address the imbalance of an economy where too much is in the public sector and protected from the pressures of competition .
It is common ground that this sector - ICT - is one of the most dynamic growth industries in the world .
Opening up the telecoms market to competition has contributed a great impetus to growth and innovation in the UK and will do the same for Europe as a whole from next year .
In this report there are calls for Member States to coordinate their policies better , as well as calls for the Commission to develop a new ICT policy .
Why ?
I say : go with the forces of competition and innovation , do not try to second-guess the market or pick winners , because it does not work .
It is better perhaps to focus public resources on identifiable challenges , such as planning for the enormous change and cost of introducing the single currency , or , even more important , finding a solution to the so-called millennium time-bomb of computers that will not recognize the year 2000 and then crash .
On second thoughts , the markets could find solutions to the single currency issue , as we found in September 1992 .
I hear of enterprises in the UK already offering solutions to the date challenge .
We live in interesting times .
That is my speech .
I now embark upon an exercise in Dutch-English cooperation .
My colleague Mr van Velzen apologizes for not being here and I speak to his notes , so please make allowances for my Dutch-English .
The EPP Group supports the main line of this report .
We in the European Union can draw lessons from the United States .
That does not mean that Mrs Cresson must write a book about ICT , but that the European Union should play an active role in developing ICT .
The question is : what should this role be ?
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel gives some answers : better internal market rules , priority for ICT in the fifth framework , priority for ICT in the cohesion policy and better conditions , better priority , for investment in ICT .
Yet , Mr van Velzen misses one thing in the Plooij-van Gorsel report : coordination .
There is a risk of incoherent policies in Member States and the EU .
This report covers nearly every aspect of policy .
Mr van Velzen wants to make one suggestion , and that is on the division of competences within the Commission .
Why not appoint one Commissioner responsible for ICT policy in general but , above all , for general coordination between the different directorates-general ?
If we can organize our ICT policies well , this could give us an important competitive advantage because we will have integrated European information and communication technologies .
Mr van Velzen awaits the Commissioner 's response with interest .
That concludes my second speech .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the report by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel returns to the theme of the information society , its applications and the development of the market .
It is a balanced document , rich in ideas , which takes up virtually all the suggestions we made in the Committee on Research .
I will dwell on just two points .
My view , and I would also say my experience of the growth and spread of the information society , is that the most important limiting factors which need to be dealt with are essentially the cost of access to on-line information and the cultural factors .
I will try to explain that better .
On the cost side , I think the costs of equipment and services may come down thanks to the liberalization of telecommunications , but while it is true that computers are costing less all the time , I have yet to see significant effects on telephone bills .
The gap to be made up by comparison with the United States in terms of the cost of services is really huge .
As regards the cultural barrier , applications for direct purchasing of software , electronic commerce , are now appearing on the Internet , but these applications are essentially American .
The gap is increasing because of the language problem , and it now seems difficult to surf the Internet without knowing English .
Too little is still done in Europe about teaching so-called foreign languages in school , and not enough is being done to overcome the language barrier by using the technology of the information society .
Too little is also done on use of and familiarization with the computer in schools .
My son started school in the United States and when we returned to Europe he received letters from his 9 year-old American schoolfriends , all written on computers .
Those little boys found it easier to use a keyboard than a pen .
European schools are not giving our young people the best opportunities in this emerging world of telecommunications , and I fear this will prove an important strategic disadvantage .
European governments must respond decisively and urgently .
Mr President , as far as this excellent report by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel is concerned I would just like to stress seven points very quickly in my short minute .
First , IT must be used more in the peripheral regions of the EU .
It is extremely important and it is also those living in these regions who will benefit most from it .
Second , IT must also be used to support the elderly population .
Young people have already mastered IT and communication technology very well .
But it is elderly people who can also draw great benefit from the technology for example when they are unable to go out and shop and can instead order food via their computer at home .
Third , we must concentrate on small companies .
Large companies already have enough computers .
Fourth , IT must be user-friendly so that the majority of the population can use it .
Fifth , we must , as Mr Chichester has mentioned , find out what is going to happen in the year 2000 ?
What will happen then ?
Sixth , bureaucracy in the EU programme must be reduced .
Seventh and last , the European Parliament must set a good example .
It is a disgrace that we do not make better use of IT communications in this House .
Things cannot get any worse than they are currently , only better .
I hope that things will be much better in the future .
Mr President , this report deals with a deeply interesting and fascinating subject .
It clearly shows how far the European ICT sector has fallen behind its non-European competitors , especially those in the USA .
I hope this report will rouse the Commission to action , because it will be an important function of the EU to take specific steps in this precise area and make selective use of resources to ensure that Europe remains competitive .
To single out a few important points : concentration on new products and vertical market segments , such as telemedicine , voice processing or distance learning , special consideration for SMEs , especially those in the tourist sector , for which additional market conditions and booking facilities are being opened up and in which jobs can be created with the aid of modern communications technology .
The necessary positive motivation and favourable attitude can best be achieved by making greater use of information technology in the education and training sectors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this European Parliament owninitiative report comes at a particularly timely moment for recalling the acceleration of the information and communication technologies , in particular concerning the economic and social dimension of their impact .
The Commission is fully aware of that and I should like to quote some examples .
First of all , recent communications on the information society and the action plan , now in its second version .
Secondly , the activities that I have initiated in the field of education and which have been discussed by several Councils of education ministers , in particular the programme on learning in the information society , aimed at making available to schoolchildren the necessary multimedia resources , based on examples already existing in certain countries , especially in Scandinavia , initiatives that are now becoming more widespread .
We insist very much on this point . Most of the Member States have now worked out school equipment programmes but the question of educational software is also posed .
I have set up a task force on educational software programmes , bringing together producers , users , authorities and specialists .
We have made a lot of progress on this over the last two years .
The tools provided by the information and communication technologies , such as Multimedia and the Internet , are to play a vital role in daily life .
In all our programmes , especially the local development ones , we are giving enormous help to local authorities using these arrangements in order , for example , to facilitate access to employment , and disseminating information needed by our fellow citizens .
The fifth framework programme of research and technological development was transmitted at the end of April 1997 .
I am waiting for the European Parliament to issue its opinion very shortly , at first reading . A swift reply would show the Council on Research the importance that it attaches to research .
For that , we must stick to the codecision timetable for the fifth framework programme and the ' Research Council ' must reach its common position by its November meeting at the latest .
Research plays a vital role in advanced technology and industrial competitiveness .
This is especially true of information and communication industries .
One of the three themes of the fifth programme is related to information and communication technologies , while the other two substantially refer to them .
I should just like to mention the key actions that we have taken such as products , processes and organisations and key actions such as ' New prospects for aeronautics ' or ' Tomorrow 's cities ' .
In all these sectors , we call on advanced communications technologies .
Piloting programmes and actions , in accordance with their economic and social impact , are inscribed in the very structure of the proposal relating to the fifth framework programme .
The European Parliament 's message in its report is a clear one .
The approach to ICTs must be comprehensive and it must be adequately effective .
The Commission shares this view point .
The development of an information society , far from creating a two-speed society , can provide the means for narrowing the gap between different social groups or between developed and less favoured regions .
The first experiments under way have shown that the gap can easily be narrowed between urban and rural areas , in terms of education and even health , and that these are instruments that can enable less favoured categories and regions to gain access to certain services .
The Commission goes along in particular with the final recommendation in the report , i.e. the need to see to sustainable , environment-friendly development and social well-being , alongside economic growth .
Those are exactly our aims and you have taken the words out of our mouths .
I should like to conclude by saying that the Commission welcomes all your recommendations , in particular those addressed to it , and will pay special attention to your report when carrying out those actions in this field for which it is responsible .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Research and sustainable development
The next item is the second report ( A4-0170 / 97 ) by Mr Marset Campos on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on the Community policy for research and sustainable development .
Mr President , there are three starting-points to my report :
First , the decisive will expressed in the Treaty on European Union and the current proposals on revising the Treaty , in favour of sustainable development .
In other words , the European Union is proclaiming its unequivocal support for the sustainable development model , including respect for the environment , and expressing inter-generational solidarity .
Secondly , the fact that , despite all the declarations of good intentions , development in Europe and the world is that of growing consumption of energy resources and prime materials and growing pollution and a subsequent exhaustion of natural resources .
Thirdly , the fact that market forces , left to free competition between supply and demand , do not guarantee by themselves the introduction of a model of sustainable development but require a conscious action by society which is decided voluntarily and democratically .
It cannot be claimed that a miraculous technical discovery or a fiscal measure will solve the problem .
The people 's awareness needs to demand the set of values required by the sustainable development model .
For those reasons , the report analyses the Commission 's concerns at the consequences of the current model of economic growth and makes 13 practical proposals in three main blocs .
First of all , in relation to the need to conceive the transition to the model of sustainable development from the current social and economic model of unsustainable growth , it is felt that that transition will only be possible thanks to a broad social consensus , which in its time brought about the creation of the welfare state .
In that sense , research can contribute by analysing the interconnections between social and economic processes and new forms of using resources , energy sources , etc .
Secondly , in relation to the revision of the Treaty on Union , incorporating the aims of sustainable development decisively into all significant areas : convergence criteria , functioning of European institutions , the relevant chapters and articles ( VI , XV and XVI ) .
Thirdly , in the research and development policy - the fifth framework programme - through the following points :
First , proposals to promote research teams in the areas of production , distribution and eco-sufficient consumption , in various countries .
Secondly , carrying out research into scientific and social areas of sustainable development such as lasting or biodegradable materials , climate change , sea and ocean deterioration , deforestation , social and economic analysis , ecotaxes , financial flows , etc .
Thirdly , research into the function of the citizens , municipalities and local authorities in a proactive participation in the sustainable development model , energy saving , the efficient extraction of prime materials , use of renewable sources , optimal use of distribution systems , non-intensive farming , etc .
Fourthly , research into the possibilities of global models for the use of energy .
That is why it is necessary to pay more attention to energy sources distributed extensively and uniformly , permitting rational and responsible use by citizens in each location , together with democratic levies and new values .
These are the main lines of the report which the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy is presenting to the Chamber so that , if it wishes to approve it , it can be converted into a more precise proposal for the Commission , the Council and ourselves to bring about a fairer society with greater solidarity , a society that is economically eco-sustainable and above all better for future generations of Europeans - our own children and grandchildren - who are the ultimate targets of all our concerns and intentions .
Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteur , Mr Marset Campos , has done us a service with his own-initiative report by prompting a discussion on the concept of sustainable development . This discussion , of course , is in its very early stages and will take up a great deal of time yet .
That , of course , is inherent in the philosophy contained within the concept of sustainable development , a philosophy which calls on us to view all our actions and political decisions in the particular context of their future complex effects and side effects .
An unending process of consideration and reconsideration !
The rapporteur provides some of this service by rightly identifying the present economic model as detrimental to sustainable development .
But from that point on our interpretations begin to drift apart , for example when we come to assess advanced technologies in the light of their consequential effects .
Our debate will and must continue .
One positive point , at least , is that sustainable development has emerged as a guiding principle of one of the thematic programmes in the fifth Research Framework Programme .
We in this House will be alert and vigilant to see whether genuinely clean and intelligent products and processes are going to be promoted under this heading , whether intermodal transport and renewable energy sources really are given the opportunities they deserve , and whether the inner cities with their obvious problems become a focus of intense attention , together with the tragic deterioration of the state of marine resources and the much quoted greenhouse effect .
At virtually every sitting in this House we have an opportunity to demonstrate , in the specific decisions we take , that this subject really is in the forefront of our thoughts .
Furthermore , we politicians are responsible for the public debate on what we are supposed to want politically .
I thank the rapporteur for facing up to this responsibility .
Mr President , Commissioner , a development intended to provide sustainable security for social and ecological needs is to be welcomed .
This report , of course , goes far beyond matters of R & D , representing an unworldly attempt to replace the Western social market economy with a green planned economy in which the European Parliament would have the necessary powers of implementation and control .
But the kind of sustainable development we imagine should not be based on Utopian models but must take account of global reality .
It can only be achieved , then , if the present situation is reformed .
A revolutionary change in the economic model , which is what the report calls for , involves incalculable risks and is therefore irresponsible .
The report postulates a dichotomy between technological progress and sustainable development .
Yet one is impossible without the other .
Sustainable development , then , is not synonymous with ' back to nature ' ; that would simply be a romantic whimsy , divorced from reality .
Moreover , the rapporteur must acknowledge that the change of model for which the report calls is already taking place , though through a process of reform rather than radical action .
The report also fails to take account of the fact that environmental protection measures can only be financed by a functioning economy .
Environmental protection demands great economic efforts .
Another point that seems important to me : for the countries of the EU and other industrialized States , the concept of sustainable development encompasses economic and social aspects as well as ecological ones .
The most urgent problem of the present time - high unemployment - therefore requires particularly careful attention .
But jobs can be created only where a policy of sustainability can be pursued without sacrificing economy .
The report underestimates the benefits research and development can bring to the employment market and the welfare state .
Similarly , it is not realistic to hold science and technology responsible for wrong turnings in industry and society .
This standpoint has long been recognized as outmoded and misguided .
In actual fact , the position is that science and technology offer opportunities that can only be realized through political , social and economic decisions .
There are many other points I could make .
Overall , the report contains a wealth of errors and inaccuracies .
Also , lengthy passages of it are couched in very general terms and confined to Utopian demands remote from political and social reality .
Insufficient account is taken of the global character of science , technology , economics and environmental protection , and many of the proposals , if implemented , could actually be significantly disadvantageous to the EU without achieving that sustainable development at which we are all aiming .
Consequently , our group cannot vote for the report in its present form .
Mr President , Mr Marset Campos ' report is a response to a real need , the need to include considerations of sustainable development in our basic thinking on research and on energy policy .
This approach finds wide support amongst public opinion and in the European Parliament .
Some passages in the report are balanced and we support them , but we oppose a certain number of passages , and only if these fall will we be able to vote for the report .
I agree with the report on the interconnection between social factors and the environment , where it is difficult to act on one point without influencing another .
If I may digress for a moment , that view from space of the earth as a ship always remains with me , a Noah 's Ark on a voyage through the cosmos where all the onboard systems must remain in equilibrium , including those which produce oxygen and those which produce carbon dioxide .
But , turning to the report , I think our role should not be to regard technology with suspicion , but if necessary to establish rules guaranteeing universal access to new opportunities , rejecting public monopolies and exclusive positions .
So I do not support some of the rapporteur 's ideological statements which sometimes tend to demonize science and technology as consumers of resources and producers of social dislocation and risk to the very survival of humankind , all the more so because , instead , technology continues to be the driving force in communication , development , and the production of material and non-material goods which improve the duration and quality of life .
Mr President , the rapporteur rightly emphasizes the importance of a European sustainable research and development policy .
Europe 's R & D policy must not only be based on economic growth but must also be based on ecologically and socially desirable principles .
The Liberal Group therefore applauds this own initiative report on this subject .
However , the wording of the resolution presented to us is unacceptable for my group .
It gives off an atmosphere of the traditional struggle between labour and capital and old class wars .
The market economy is referred to as a model for smug individualism and Keynesian theories are rejected as incorrect .
But , ladies and gentlemen , let us be clear , we owe our well-being in the European Union above all to the market economy .
My Group therefore cannot support recitals A , D and F. If the amendments tabled by the Liberal Group on these paragraphs are not approved , we shall then be forced to vote against the whole report .
Given the current relationship , if the Liberal Group votes against the report , it will not be adopted .
My Group attaches considerable importance to the conclusion of this report .
I took a constructive attitude to the committee of inquiry , and I hope therefore that we are going to be able to vote for it .
Mr President , the Marset Campos report examines an extremely important subject .
Now that we want sustainable development to be given a leading place in the new Treaty , there will be a legal base for the purpose of this report : research serving sustainability .
It is therefore useful to anticipate it .
I am positively against the intentions of this report .
We support the practical recommendations .
It is necessary to increase research in fields such as recycling , climatic change and ocean pollution .
However , the report still presents me with a problem .
The concept of ' sustainable development ' means something different for everyone .
The rapporteur offers a reasonable representation and it is quite clear .
He wants to create a new model of society .
But this is only one vision among many others .
And it is a radical one .
But the rapporteur is not very practical , at least it does not seem so in the Spanish footnotes which have not been translated in our version .
There are still considerable divergencies of opinion on a number of major questions .
Mine concern , in particular , the three following points .
First of all , at what rate should changes be made ?
Secondly , who will be in charge of that ?
Thirdly , how can we make them compulsory ?
I leave it up to the rapporteur to take responsibility for his own personal ideas expressed in the explanatory memorandum .
But in my view , he is basing himself on an excessively positive image of mankind and society and expects too much of the authorities .
I fear that the necessary changes to consumption patterns will come up against people 's irresistible propensity to increase their possessions and pleasures .
As far as the draft resolution is concerned , I would criticize in particular some of the considerations made and paragraphs 8 to 10 inclusive in particular .
As far as I am concerned , the term ' social plan ' and the European Parliament 's role have been greatly exaggerated in these paragraphs .
That is why I shall be voting against the report .
I will be supporting the amendments tabled by Mrs Plooij .
As far as I am concerned , I fully agree with some of the practical recommendations made in the report , but I do not share its optimistic views .
Mr President , congratulations to Mr Marset Campos , not least for his patience and persistence with this report .
Like the previous report , this is a very timely reminder to us as we consider the fifth framework programme of the rationale for doing research in the European Union .
It is sometimes forgotten that although the main justification for research is to become more competitive at international level , even in the current Treaty we are told that we must promote all the research activities deemed necessary by the other chapters .
Those include the chapter on social and economic cohesion and the chapter on the environment .
Although the term ' sustainable development ' is only now reaching treaty - and we are pleased about that - quite clearly there is an obligation on us , under the Treaty , to take into account those other matters .
Mr Marset Campos does that .
Those are not in as an afterthought .
They were deliberately included .
It would be very dangerous indeed to concentrate simply on growth and competitiveness .
If you had a scenario where more science equals more growth , more consumption of natural resources , more unemployment for technological reasons and an increasing divergence between poor and rich people , poor and rich regions and poor and rich hemispheres of this world , it would be completely unacceptable and very dangerous .
Mr Marset Campos ' analysis is a very clear one and it contains many warnings .
But it is not doom-laden .
It is optimistic and it shows us the way in which we can make sure our work in research meets the requirements of sustainable development .
He highlights many actions .
A lot of them are present in the fourth framework programme already .
A lot of the environmental work is done .
Less work is done on the socio-economic aspects of sustainable development .
That is perhaps a lesson for the fifth framework programme .
The fifth framework programme looks promising .
It looks as though the Commission , in its suggestions , is aware of the need to include the sustainable development dimension .
Technical fixes are not enough .
It is not enough to develop technology .
You have to make societal changes as well .
Jacques Delors was aware of this when he wrote in his White Paper that environmental technologies can create jobs and , in that way , bring about a much fairer society .
The Socialist Group has some reservations about the wording of some paragraphs .
We will , therefore , be voting accordingly .
I must emphasize that we certainly support the tenor of this report and consider it to be extremely important in the opinion-forming necessary before the fifth framework programme .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by deciding last year to dedicate an own-initiative report to the issue of research and sustainable development , the Committee on Research sent an important message to the European institutions and the scientific community .
The expression ' sustainable development ' refers to one of the major challenges facing the European Union and the rest of the world at this moment in time .
Mr Marset Campos has prepared a report and I would like to make three remarks on it .
The first will be to emphasize the Commission 's full support for the idea of the need to take the demands of sustainable development very much into consideration when defining the European Union 's research policy .
Research and technological development can and must play a decisive role .
It gives us the means to devise and implement economic development that does not harm the quality of the environment or life , today and in the future .
My second remark puts the first slightly into perspective .
Placing the European Union 's research policy under the same sign as sustainable development , as Mr Marset Campos is not far from doing in his report , and proposing that the idea should dominate our research programme as massively as he suggests , would be a mistake .
The European Union must face many other challenges .
It must meet the expectations of its citizens , especially in terms of employment , and we also have other objectives .
In particular , we must resolutely put research to the service of the economy and business and help European industry to strengthen its competitiveness , a key factor of growth and employment .
Far from being opposed , these two aims mutually strengthen each other .
On tomorrow 's markets , the most competitive products will not only be the cheapest and most efficient ; they will also be the ' cleanest ' and those whose use requires the least energy expenditure , with fewer negative effects on the environment , and those that can most easily be recycled .
Europe must show that it is capable of producing and marketing such products .
It must also carve itself a niche in the rapidly expanding market of environmental technologies .
Thirdly and finally , Mr Marset Campos ' report only takes very little account of the nonetheless decisive role played by the idea of sustainable development in the proposal for a fifth framework programme of research and technological development presented by the Commission .
Yet that text quite clearly mentions it - in fact it is full of such references .
Two of the proposal 's themes , No 1 on discovering living resources and the ecosystem and the third theme on favouring competitive and sustainable growth are good examples .
In the latter case , the requirements of sustainable growth are quite explicitly combined with the imperatives of growth and competitiveness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have been given a very clear opportunity to promote sustainable development in Europe .
It consists in supporting the approach developed in the proposal for a fifth framework programme and to ensure that it can be quickly adopted during the first quarter of 1998 and implemented on time , i.e. by the end of 1998 .
Thank you in advance and I also thank Mr Marset Campos for his help .
Thanks to his report we can bear in mind the fact that the research and technological development policy must first and foremost be of service to ordinary Europeans , those of today and tomorrow alike .
Thank you too , Commissioner .
Thank you for your excellent answer , and please excuse the lateness of the hour .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
International agreement on humane trapping standards
The next item is the report ( A4-0187 / 97 ) by Mr Pimenta on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the signing and conclusion of an International Agreement between the European Community , Canada and the Russian Federation on humane trapping standards .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are dealing with yet another chapter in the long saga of leghold traps .
I should like to concentrate on three aspects : the question of animal welfare , the institutional question of the decision within the European Community and relations with the World Trade Organization - WTO .
Finally I shall refer to the question of the indigenous people and the line taken by Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan .
As regards the cruelty to animals dossier , there is no doubt that these leghold traps are cruel and do cause inhuman suffering .
That is why Parliament has repeatedly called for their abolition and that is why the European Union has had , since 1991 , a regulation in force banning them .
As long ago as last century Charles Darwin stated that the use of this type of trap and this type of killing were incompatible with civilized societies .
That was a hundred and thirty years ago !
We now have to decide whether an agreement on humane trapping standards might be a good way of reducing cruelty to animals in the world .
The answer would be yes provided we had a good agreement .
Unfortunately , this text is a poor one and does not go far enough . That is certainly not the fault of the officials who negotiated it ; they were rather , as we say in Portuguese ' bound hand and foot ' because of what their boss , Sir Leon Brittan , wanted and they had to reach an agreement at any price .
There is no shortage of examples in the text .
In the point on fatal traps the European experts proposed on behalf of the Commission a time of 30 seconds to kill the animal .
The agreement sets a time of 5 minutes .
That is a long time - a very long time to die in agony - and it is a concession which increases the Commission 's figure by a factor of 10 .
But the great problem with this agreement is that it is not selective enough in the classification of traps in relation to the standards laid down .
I do not want now to go into the type of standards , which in some cases I regard as fairly low .
To define a criterion for the approval of each type of trap - as this report does , as a function of the results , not for 80 % of all animals trapped , but merely for 80 % of the animals of the species targeted by the said trap - is an insult to the intelligence .
These traps are by definition non-selective .
They catch all types of animals which suffer equally , even though not targeted , but simply because they have been unfortunate enough to roam where they were not supposed to roam or to drink water where they were not supposed to .
But the most glaring example of the Commission 's bad faith is in the subtle amendment it made to Article 4 ( 2 ) in Annex I , where in the version agreed in January for the present agreement there is a marked difference .
I shall in fact read the January version in the original English which said : conventional steel jaw leghold retaining traps to be prohibited within four years of the entering into force of this agreement .
That , ladies and gentlemen , has disappeared from the version currently under discussion and has been replaced with unilateral statements by the countries wishing to accede to this agreement .
That is a clear concession to the United States of America !
What powers has the European Union to control the unilateral statements of the countries who wish to accede to this agreement ?
There is a lot more which could be said about the rest of the text , for example , Russia , in its unilateral statement , asks for money .
The talk in the corridors is of ECU 30 million .
We are going to buy the Russians for ECU 30 million .
There is more that could be said , but instead I shall put a question .
What about the United States ?
If the United States had not signed this agreement and took Europe to the WTO , what would we do ?
We should be in the same position as we are today .
I should like now to mention the institutional pact .
The Commission , at the instigation of Sir Leon Brittan , blocked the adoption in 1995 of the regulations implementing Regulation No 91 .
In January 1996 , by means of a letter from two officials , it advised the Member States not to apply the legislation in force .
So can one simple letter prevent the application of legislation approved by the Commissions and by the Council ?
Where is the Rule of Law , Sir Leon Brittan ?
In 1996 a new version was submitted which Parliament rejected on first reading .
The Council never re-submitted it .
In January 1997 an attempt was made at a Council meeting to pass a list of countries , including Canada and Russia , when there was no international agreement and these countries had not banned jaw leghold retaining traps , in clear violation of the European legislation .
The Council quite rightly rejected this kind of approach .
It is now time to mention the WTO . I should like to say , however , that the Commissioner stated during the ratification process , that no further European legislation was at stake with accession to the WTO , other than the legislation mentioned at the time - and I supported that .
Now it is the jaw leghold retaining traps which are at stake , the hormones in beef and who knows , Mr Commissioner , what it might be tomorrow ?
I should like now to mention the indigenous people .
From the outset I did try to obtain a regime for the indigenous people ; they are assured that this Parliament will endeavour to find a solution which reconciles our legitimate right to demand less cruelty in the world with satisfying the legitimate need of those communities to make a living .
Unfortunately , I did not find any parties to instigate social dialogue either in Europe or in Canada .
But I remain available for such talks .
Thank you , Mr President , for bearing with me ; I ask my colleagues to express their views by rejecting this bad agreement .
Mr President , the saga of the leghold trap is a sad and sorry one .
Quite honestly , Parliament feels outraged at the pathetic stage we have reached after all these years .
Let me say first of all that I do not accept the validity of this so-called agreement which is being put before us because it has been negotiated by the Commission without a mandate .
I draw the Commission 's attention to the debate in this House on 21 February this year when a great deal of passion was expended on the issue .
I suggest that Sir Leon Brittan reads that debate since everything we said on that night still holds true .
My group fully supports the Mr Pimenta 's excellent report once again which also won the support of the vast majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
This inadequate and inoperable stitch-up of an agreement is so full of holes that a pack of polar bears could rampage through it .
It does not achieve an end to animal cruelty through the use of leghold traps , in fact it allows their use for at least another four years .
It does not even reflect the position of the European Union 's own scientific experts .
We now have traps with some padding around them which are supposed to be humane .
I suppose it does not hurt so much to chew off your own leg if you are caught in one of those .
We have approval of traps which take five minutes to kill and of course these traps still catch at least 20 % of non-target species ; but that is just too bad for these animals since they are not supposed to be caught in the first place .
We have leghold traps which can be used under water and presumably these are no longer cruel .
A lot has been said about the rights of indigenous people , especially by the Canadian Government , but this agreement is actually in itself pretty flimsy on including those people in negotiations .
The deal with Russia is not even worth the paper it is written on .
It will only be implemented if we dole out lots of money .
The deadline seems to have fallen into a black hole and there are no enforcement measures and no sanctions for non-compliance .
There is no agreement with the United States , as the rapporteur has said , because they have admitted they cannot deliver anything through their federal system so their hunters can keep right on using leghold traps .
We could go on with detailed criticism of the agreement but it really is just too dispiriting .
The only sensible thing to do is to reject it and go back to the legislation that we have already agreed in this Parliament which is perfectly defendable if Canada were to take us to a dispute in the WTO .
For instance , no unfair domestic trade advantage to the European Union can be shown and , because the driving force behind the legislation is animal welfare , it can be perfectly well defended as protecting public morals .
This agreement is hopelessly bad and we cannot accept it .
I call upon the Commission to negotiate a tougher agreement and to ban the sale within the European Union of fur from animals caught in traps which do not meet standards of a new , far tougher international agreement .
Mr President , Commissioner , yet again the European Parliament is being called upon to comment on the problems of leghold traps .
We have before us the draft of an agreement which is supposed to prescribe humane trapping standards at international level .
However , the draft has its shortcomings , even though we might be tempted to welcome the fact that after years of negotiation and deadlock a draft does actually exist .
It is difficult , though , to vote in favour of this draft .
If it proves necessary to reject the agreement and introduce a European ban on imports of skins , that will damage the European fur industry and , especially , the indigenous peoples in Canada who earn their living as traders in skins .
Anyone who knows me will know that I have always taken these arguments particularly seriously .
Animal welfare , in my view , is not incompatible with sustaining the way of life and livelihood of many indigenous peoples - indeed , I believe they are mutually complementary .
Our common aim must be to strike a balance between the needs of animal welfare and the justified interests of indigenous peoples .
In the past , I believe , there were two ways by which this objective might be achieved . One was the conclusion of an agreement on humane trapping methods worthy of their name - which the present version certainly is not ; an agreement which lays down high animal welfare standards and at the same time takes due account of the justified concerns of indigenous peoples .
Alternatively , if that is unworkable , an independent marketing system could be set up for the skins of animals trapped by indigenous trappers . I believe that a result could have been rapidly achieved here if the representatives of the indigenous peoples had been involved in the negotiations .
Should the draft of the agreement be rejected , these points must be borne in mind during further negotiations . Following my contacts with representatives of indigenous peoples in Canada - and I did have such contacts , Mr Pimenta - I know that leghold traps must be abandoned ; indeed , they are being abandoned in Canada .
In addition , the right conditions exist for independent marketing channels . But , in the long term , indigenous trappers and animal welfare organizations must work closely together and be jointly involved in the search for new , humane trapping methods .
Finding a substitute for leghold traps is the main task that will confront us in the coming years , even without a framework agreement . One way of solving the problem is to improve the selectivity of traps , in other words to develop traps that can only catch particular animals .
This , of course , means providing trappers with better training . Here again , and once again , I can only urge the advisability of taking advantage of the experience of the indigenous trappers .
Finally , there is one more question I would like to put to the Commissioner : what is the status of the ban on leghold traps in the European Union ?
According to my information such traps are being laid only a few miles from where we sit - I don 't know why .
Did this fact influence the basis for the Commission 's negotiations with the countries concerned ?


Mr President , Mr Commissioner , first of all I want to explain that I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Baldi , who could not be here this evening and has given me her notes , because she has followed this dossier .
Personally I just want to express my sympathy with Mr Pimenta , who is so enthusiastically committed to this cause .
After a long series of obstacles and uncertainties , an international agreement on humane trapping standards was reached last December between the European Community , Canada and the Russian Federation .
The agreement was the result of major efforts by Canada and Russia , but it did not satisfy the Council , which asked for a series of improvements .
The Commission has therefore restarted the negotiations and has drawn up a new proposal for an agreement which will be presented to the Council of Environment Ministers of the European Union on 19 and 20 June .
As Mr Pimenta did not consider the text satisfactory , we find ourselves faced with a report which is ahead of its time , which contests an agreement the Council has not really approved yet .
It is true that the United States has not initialled the agreement , so it is a partial agreement , a compromise , but it is a compromise which , according to Mrs Baldi , signals progress .
Our group therefore believes the agreement reached should not be rejected .
Mr President , it seems as if the debate on leghold traps will never finish .
I could easily repeat what I said a year ago and two years ago .
But one thing is certain : commercial interests are more important as far as the Commission is concerned than the well-being of animals and democratic principles .
Along with a large majority of the ELDR Group , I think that it is quite deplorable that the Commission should not have kept to its word and is now imposing an optional agreement on trapping methods .
That is tantamount to emptying European democracy of all meaning since there was a Council regulation dating to 1991 and we wanted to stick to it .
The Commission has decided to delay by one year the ban on imports of fur from countries using leghold traps and this is the second time that a one year delay has been decided upon . It is very annoying for Commissioner Bjerregaard that Commissioner Brittan should be here .
You have won .
Your commercial interests have won the day over Mrs Bjerregaard 's animal welfare .
I must congratulate you , but I profoundly regret it .
I find unacceptable any agreement which does not ban leghold traps in the short-term , and I fully agree with Mr Pimenta who said that that disagreement is quite inadequate and ineffective and that is why it should be rejected and I think that we should ban imports at once .
Mr President , I find this whole business quite incredible , for two reasons .
First , because we have a regulation dating from 1991 , which was supposed to apply from 1 January 1995 .
That date was put back by a year to 1 January 1996 , and then again to 1 January 1997 , and now , suddenly , we have nothing at all .
This so-called agreement you have the nerve to present to us is just an insult .
For a start , there is no such thing as a humane trap .
Try catching your finger in a car door - whether it has a rubber lining or not , it will still hurt just as much . And if an animal has to endure its death in agony and die a dreadful death in a trap that we describe as humane , that makes no difference to the animal .
In any case , an animal will be unable to read where it says that a trap is suitable for this or that particular animal , and if it is a protected species , it won 't be able to read that either .
But what I find most incredible of all is this sentence , which I quote verbatim from the Official Journal : ' The welfare of animals will temporarily be reduced to a very low level in killing traps . '
Do you believe in resurrection ?
Who would have thought a killing trap might , temporarily , reduce welfare to a very low level !
Are you trying to make fools of us by publishing stuff like this in the Official Journal ?
This is a total mockery of animal welfare as a whole .
We are going to support Mr Pimenta 's report , and we are not going to tolerate cynical performances of this kind .
I regard it as an insult .
First you overrule regulations and the wishes of Parliament , making a mockery of democracy , and then you have the effrontery to publish material like this .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group and as president of Parliament 's Inter-Group for Animal Welfare and Conservation , I want to say that I strongly support Mr Pimenta 's report and hope it will be adopted by Parliament .
I can remember sitting here six , seven and eight years ago , talking about these issues .
We thought we had got somewhere when we got the Council Regulation of 1991 , disappointed though we were that it was going to be five years before it was implemented .
Now , two years after that date , we are still waiting for something to happen .
Today , in June 1997 , the Commission is asking the Council to endorse a very inadequate and unsatisfactory agreement with Canada and Russia and nothing at all with the United States .
The substantial derogations that have been accepted , the lack of convincing enforcement measures , the lack of sanctions for non-compliance all cast doubt on whether the small commitments made by Russia and Canada will in reality achieve anything .
This means measures fail totally to tackle the whole question of animal suffering .
We must reject them as they stand .
It seems that the Commission fears a challenge on the GATT to freedom of trade and that there would be an adverse decision by the WTO on this issue .
That need not be the case .
After all , we were promised when the GATT agreement was supported by Parliament that there would be proper provision for the protection of the environment and animal welfare .
Personally , I never put much faith in those promises , which is why I did not vote for the GATT Agreement .
I did not think they were adequate , but we were told they were .
If they are , let us challenge the WTO if they give an adverse decision .
Let us challenge them strongly .
If we cannot win that then we must look at reform of GATT to ensure that trade , important though it is , does not take precedence over every other consideration such as animal welfare , protection of the environment and the wellbeing of our peoples .
Mr President , the debate on the prohibition of leghold traps is the unending story of animal suffering , animal misery , human cruelty and political incompetence .
Once again , we have an EU regulation which has been in force since 1 January 1996 and it is simply not being implemented !
Now we are served up with an agreement which is no such thing .
Leghold traps are to continue to be permitted for several years .
Death need only occur within 300 seconds - 5 long minutes of mortal fear , death agony , appalling pain !
Nor does the agreement make any provision as to how trapped animals may or may not be killed .
Many animals , Commissioner , are killed by being crushed , the trapper simply standing on the animal and treading on it until it dies .
We Europeans want nothing to do with leghold traps , well and good .
But apart from leghold traps all other traps are permitted in Europe , irrespective of what injuries they inflict or how slowly they kill .
We have a great deal to do , not just in Canada but in Europe too .
I hope that , tomorrow , Parliament will support Carlos Pimenta and reject the Commission 's proposal .
If the Council of Environment Ministers does the same on 19 and 20 June , then we shall have won .
If it doesn 't , that will not be the failure of this House , but the failure of the Environment Ministers .
Mr President , we all understand the depth of feeling on this issue that has existed for many years .
However , what we have to ask ourselves is whether the latest agreement represents an unprecedented advance in international trapping standards which , if adopted , will improve the welfare of animals and alleviate the threat to our relations with our Canadian and Russian partners .
I have absolutely no doubt whatsoever in saying that the welfare of animals will be significantly advanced if this agreement is implemented and if it is not and if a ban is imposed of a kind that the Members who have spoken in favour of it want , then nothing will be done to advance the welfare of animals , because it would be a great mistake to believe that if that were to happen the countries concerned , faced with that prospect , would simply adapt their laws and change things in the way that the Members of Parliament want .
That is wholly and totally unrealistic .
It is for that reason that I agree with Mr Malerba that this agreement represents significant progress .
I am pleased to hear that yesterday the Committee on External Economic Relations adopted an opinion which clearly recommends the approval of this agreement .
Things have been said about the mandate and the objectives and the purposes .
Let us be quite clear that the regulation on leghold traps provided for two distinct options for countries wanting to avoid restrictions on the import of fur : either they could forbid the use of leghold traps or they could use trapping methods which comply with internationally agreed humane trapping standards .
It was never the intention that both alternatives should be applied .
In the absence of any agreement on trapping standards , obviously , the implementation of the fur embargo was provided .
However , the regulation itself made it quite clear that an option - and , I would suggest , a preferable option - was for there to be an agreement on trapping standards .
The reason why that option was put in was because such an agreement would secure an improvement in animal welfare , whereas a ban would totally fail to do so .
That is why we make no apology for the fact that we have negotiated with Canada , the Russian Federation and the United States . Reference has been made to the United States .
We do not have an agreement with the United States and , therefore , what we are talking about now is the agreement with Canada and Russia .
Negotiating directives were issued and the agreement obtained was consistent with those negotiating directives .
Although that is not in any way reflected in the Pimenta report , which does not in any way give any credit to the fact that after the Council of Ministers asked us to do so we continued negotiating and obtained significant improvements in the agreement with Canada and the Russian Federation .
The Commission reported the revised agreement to the General Affairs Council of 2 June , which welcomed the improvements achieved .
The revised agreement has now been formally transmitted to the Council for its approval , along with a list of third countries eligible to export furs into the European Community , which includes Canada and the Russian Federation , but does not include the United States .
The European Parliament will of course , as procedures provide , be formally consulted on this revised agreement before its final ratification .
The improvements achieved in the last round of negotiations are significant and I am sorry that they have not been fully considered in the resolution proposed by Mr Pimenta .
Parliament 's report does not take into account or give credit to the substantive improvements which are being negotiated .
The agreement will now apply to all mechanical restraining or killing traps used for the trapping of 19 species for any purpose .
Traps that do not meet the standards contained will have to be phased out by the parties within a clearly defined timeframe .
Thus it is far more comprehensive than the regulation which deals with only one type of trap and covers for its external aspects only 13 species .
It will relieve animal suffering , both in the Union and in third countries to a much larger extent than would be the case if a ban was imposed .
The standards have been set at a high level for the protection of animals , taking into account the scientific and empirical evidence that is currently available .
To go beyond that could lead to a situation where most trapping methods , including those currently used in the European Union , would not meet the standards .
Reference has been made to the killing time limit of 300 seconds .
Of course , it would have been better if we could have achieved more than that .
But nonetheless that represents a significant step to improve killing trapping methods , including those currently used in the Community .
Moreover , the agreement foresees that this 300 second limit shall be reviewed within 3 years in order to be lowered to 180 seconds .
Technical and safety considerations have to be taken into account .
To kill an animal quickly a trap needs to be powerful and that can become dangerous for the trappers themselves or for any other person or pet that could set off the trap by mistake .
The agreement envisages a phased implementation which progressively tightens its provisions .
A first revision of the standards is scheduled three years after the entry into force of the agreement , which will take into account research carried out by the parties .
It therefore represents a first and ambitious step to establish internationally scientifically-based performance standards which currently do not exist .
The International Standardization Organization worked for almost ten years to define such standards without success .
If it had achieved standards , they would have been voluntary .
This agreement is binding under international law .
The binding nature of the agreement has been reinforced in the revised text since it is now specified that the rulings of the Arbitration Tribunal are binding on the parties .
Derogations for indigenous populations have also been clarified and their scope further limited .
Last , but not least , one of the main achievements of the new round of negotiations was to reinforce substantially the commitments of Canada and Russia concerning an accelerated calendar for the phasing out of certain types of leghold traps .
It is all very well to pour scorn on the fact that they are not being phased out instantly , but I have to tell you , in the absence of this agreement , even if there were a ban , there would be no phasing out at all .
For Canada there would be a ban on the use of all jaw type , leghold restraining traps for 7 of the 12 relevant Canadian species as soon as the agreement enters into force .
For the remaining 5 Canadian species , the use of conventional steel-jaw leghold restraining traps will be forbidden at the end of the third trapping season after conclusion of the agreement by the Community , in other words , by 31 March 2000 , if the Council approves the agreement before 1 October 1997 .
Of course the other types of leghold traps , and indeed every other mechanical trap , will also be banned according to the schedule set out in the agreement if they are shown not to be in conformity with the standards .
Whereas I understand the focus upon leghold traps , let us not forget that there are other traps and what this agreement provides is a method of testing those traps and banning them if they fall foul of the agreement .
For the Russian Federation , conventional steel-jaw leghold restraining traps , which are the only type of leghold trap that is used in Russia , will be forbidden for Russian species by 31 December 1999 if adequate financial assistance is provided to replace existing traps .
I hope that Parliament , concerned as it is about these matters , will use its influence to help us obtain the finance to do that .
It is simply not true , as has been said during the debate , that if no financial assistance is provided the traps will not be replaced because there is a commitment in the agreement that if there is no financial assistance provided the traps will in any event be phased out , at the latest four years after the entry into force of the agreement .
The key question when assessing this agreement should be : what is really the best option for improving the welfare of trapped animals in Canada and Russia ?
For us there is no doubt that the approval of the agreement is the option that will substantially improve the welfare of animals and preserve the wider interests of the European Union .
There is no conflict between trade and animal welfare .
This agreement is one which advances animal welfare while , at the same time , protecting legitimate trade .
For the first time ever an international agreement will establish binding rules to control trade on the grounds of animal welfare .
I would appeal to anyone who is fair-minded and prepared to listen to the arguments that that is a remarkable step forward .
The importance of such a precedent should not be underestimated .
This is literally the first time that an international agreement will establish such binding rules on the grounds of animal welfare .
An embargo on furs would achieve nothing , and certainly have negative economic , social and political consequences both within the third countries and in the European Union affecting indigenous communities , but not only indigenous communities .
As I have said the situation with the United States is different .
We do not yet have an agreement with them .
There is no alternative to envisaging the full implementation of Regulation 3254 / 91 on furs from the United States .
But I hope that a more satisfactory solution with the United States can still be found .
I have no doubt that the best way of securing that , and therefore the welfare of animals in the United States , would be to obtain the approval of this agreement with Canada and Russia .
It is reasonable to place this issue in the wider context of our policy on international trade , the environment and animal welfare .
I do not believe that the multilateral trade system runs roughshod over the interests of the environment .
That is quite mistaken and it overlooks the enormous efforts that the European Union has made , and indeed has taken a lead , in developing work on the environment within the WTO .
I would have liked the WTO Committee on trade and the environment to have been able to go further but it was not because of the reluctance of the European Union , still less because of the reluctance of the Commission , to urge and to press in the direction of the environment that we failed to make that progress .
It was because of the failure of the rest of the world to follow our lead .
We have nothing to be ashamed of .
In this light any attempt to use this issue to create controversy within the WTO overlooks our honourable efforts and jeopardizes the steady progress on international trade and the environment which we all hope for and which would almost certainly lead to self-inflicted defeat and loss of credibility of the EU within the multilateral disputes settlement procedures , if we follow another route .
Those are the reasons why I strongly commend , as the Commission does - and efforts to divide the Commission will not succeed - that a positive attitude should be taken towards the agreement with Canada and the Russian Federation .
I urge the European Parliament to take the latest text into account when expressing its view on this delicate and important issue .
Mr President , I wish to address Sir Leon Brittan directly because it is the first time he has come to a debate on this subject in this House in at least the last two years .
You read out your written speech .
Unfortunately you did not answer me , Mrs Pollack , Mr Eisma , Mr Flemming , Mr Schnellhardt .

We raised substantial issues on selectivity , on lack of sanctions , on what would happen if the US took us to WTO etc .
It is too late to go into detailed articles .
But when President Santer came to the House to ask for approval for his team and programme , he undertook as President of the Commission to give serious consideration , even outside the legalist codecision procedure , to the opinion expressed democratically by this House .
When the House voted on this issue in February this year , the vote was 85 to 3 .
If we adopt this tomorrow by more than 75 % of those present , will you accept that we have the legitimate democratic right to disagree with your opinion ?
And even if you believe every word you said , would you , if we - the representatives of 15 countries of Europe , from all political parties - reject your opinion by a huge majority , have the humility to accept that you are not the only soul on this earth and that you could be wrong ?
Mr President , many thanks for giving me the opportunity to pass on a brief bit of information .
I am the spokesman for the PPE Group in the Committee on External Economic Affairs .
Yesterday evening , by a great majority , we actually approved the Commission 's proposal on the grounds just put forward by Sir Leon Brittan , which are the same arguments that were put forward by Mr Malerba in this House on behalf of Mrs Baldi .
We know that the debate on traps is always a difficult problem .
But we believe that the Commission was right to decide in favour of a gradual progression towards more humane trapping methods .
We voted in favour of the Commission 's proposal by a large majority , including the votes of Mr Ilaskivi and members of other groups though not the vote of the draftsman of the opinion of the Environment Committee .
I know that this position may be a minority one even within my own group , but I should like to point out that in giving our support to the Commission yesterday we acted with the best of intentions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 00.25 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , concerning the voting list and the contentious paragraph 4c of the IGC debate , in our group I argued vigorously that we should be voting for this .
However , when it came to the vote , it was one of those embarrassing moments when Mr Harrison , Mr Donnelly and myself voted against when should have voted for .
To correct that we gave a statement in writing to the secretariat asking that it be corrected to show that we had voted for 4c .
In the record it still shows that we voted against and I am asking if it could be corrected .
I would refer you to page 14 of the English Minutes where it says Mr Wynn , Mr Donnelly , Mr Harrison and Mr Elchlepp had intended to vote in favour .



Mr President , I refer to a mistake in the Spanish version of the joint motion on the free movement of goods in the European Union .
My name and that of Mr Alonso Puerta and Mr Jové should have been included as signatories to the motion on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , as in the other versions .
We will have it checked out and get it corrected .
On Tuesday I raised the matter of Norwegian salmon and the need for the Commission to make a statement to this House .
As a delegation from the Norwegian Parliament is here today ...
Mr McMahon , we are discussing Wednesday 's Minutes .
Tuesday 's Minutes were approved , as is usual , the following day .
Mr President , I would like a mistake in today 's agenda to be corrected .
In the joint motion on the disruption of the internal market ( B4-0488 / 97 ) , my name is missing .
By some error , the list of signatories to that joint motion omits my name . Please could it be added .
We will make sure that is corrected .
Mr President , you have drawn our attention to page 14 of the Minutes .
I notice that 40 Members had to correct their votes yesterday .
Is this a failure of the Members or the system we use for voting ?
It seems absurd to have 40 corrections of vote from one voting session .
I would suggest to you that it is both a failure on the part of Members and a slight hiccup in the voting system .
I seem to recall that particular vote was out of the normal sequence and that was why some Members were thrown .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , on Tuesday when I raised the matter of the need for a statement on Norwegian salmon from the Commission - the European Parliament being the only body Sir Leon Brittan has not consulted - the President said he would pass the matter on to the Commission .
I would like to know if Sir Leon Brittan is prepared to come out of his cloister in the Commission and communicate with Parliament the terms of the agreement he has signed with the Norwegian Government .
Under the rules of the Treaty the Commission is duty bound to consult with Parliament on the aspects of this Treaty .
Today a parliamentary delegation from Norway is visiting Parliament and wishes to discuss the matter with us .
Mr McMahon , you have made your point and it is one that has been made every morning this week .
I understand the seriousness of the issue but , as I said on Tuesday when I was in the Chair , the Conference of Presidents has the right to request the Commission to come to this House and make a statement on any matter .
If you so wish you should raise this matter with your group leader and other Members with theirs so that it can be raised in the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , during the last part-session here in Strasbourg , I asked a question at the beginning of the Monday sitting about a call for tenders for the supply of canteen furniture for the new Parliament building and the rules to be applied .
I put the question orally , but the President , Mr Gil-Robles , said I should put it in writing , which I did the very same day .
So far , however , I have not received an answer to my question .
I should therefore like to ask if and when I can expect a reply .
I do not know when you will get a reply but I will pass your remarks on to the services and ask them to respond to your question .
I call Mr Macartney but if it is on salmon I warn you I shall cut you off right away .
We have dealt with the issue .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Under Rules 37 and 95 , the European Commission can propose at any time that it wishes to come and make a statement to this House .
The President in the Chair can propose a change to the agenda at any time .
I am now going to mention the word ' salmon ' and if you want to cut me off , do so , but the point is that this House has Rules and the Commission has Rules .
I totally support what Mr McMahon said .
We are entitled to hear from the Commissioner .
Sir Leon Brittan was here last night .
He is avoiding the issue and it is high time he came and spoke to us .
I am well aware of the sensitivities of the issue and the strength of feeling in the House but the Commission has not requested permission to make a statement . That is the position we find ourselves in .
European voluntary service action programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0182 / 97 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing the Community action programme ' European voluntary service for young people ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0610 - C4-0681 / 96-96 / 0318 ( COD ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the action proposed today by the Commission under the title of ' European voluntary service ' and for which I have the honour of being rapporteur , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , is not an isolated initiative .
It is part of a more global context , that of implementing a genuine youth policy , something that the European Parliament has always called for with insistence .
More than ever , young people are our best allies for constructing tomorrow 's Europe .
But for that , Europe must be a living reality for them .
They must be able to circulate , study and work in European Union countries without coming up against , as is still often the case , sadly , obstacles of all kinds ; we must step up cross-frontier cooperation between schools and universities so that they can benefit from fruitful exchanges ; they must be helped to complete their vocational training , with the added bonus of a European dimension , and in the end facilitate integration into working life at a time when unemployment is , alas , for a good many of our young people , an inevitable drama and a seed of despair .
Those are stepping stones towards the acquisition of an active European citizenship , which cannot be decreed but which is fashioned day by day and by a series of actions .
In the proposal for which you have taken such a timely initiative , Madam Commissioner , to offer young people aged 18-25 years the opportunity to gain experience in another country by means of an action of practical solidarity , we find the best of these ingredients and I should like to congratulate you and your colleagues - but yourself in particular , Madam Commissioner - because I know that you have invested your talent and your heart in this project .
Our committee has appreciated this initiative .
It strongly encourages it and the amendments that I am submitting to the European Parliament on its behalf - make no mistake - are aimed solely at ensuring that this European voluntary service will be as efficient as possible .
With you , we are concerned that the European voluntary service should be accessible to all young people without exception .
That means better tailored information .
That means that solidarity associations should be closely linked to the processes that determine which young people will be involved .
Like you , we want to optimize the chances of success of the European voluntary service which means paying special attention to the quality of that service .
That quality will depend on the degree of motivation , both of the young people and the reception structures .
Similarly , linguistic and cultural preparation of the young people and monitoring measures will be decisive factors .
The Commission has specified very clearly that the European voluntary service does not replace the national military or civilian services .
We agree entirely .
Nevertheless , we think that the activities of the European voluntary service could easily and appropriately be made compatible with national civilian services so that those Member States so wishing could integrate these activities into the framework of their national services .
The conclusion of agreements between the European voluntary service and national civilian services could turn that prospect into a reality , and that is what we wanted to cover in our amendments .
We also insisted on an aspect that seems essential to us and which is dear to our hearts , that of a European status of young volunteers .
It is still too vague .
That status must guarantee young people conditions of social protection , tax exemption and equivalent legal coverage in all countries of the European Union , or else the project would risk remaining a dead letter .
Our committee took a long and hard look at the aspect of opening up to young people from non-Community countries .
From that viewpoint , it has taken on board the excellent conclusions drawn in the report for opinion of the Committee on Development , presented by our colleague , Mr Dimitrakopoulos .
Our committee also examined the budgetary prospects for the project as presented by the Commission .
We have fully adopted the opinion issued by Mrs Ghilardotti , but it seemed to us that the resources earmarked so far are not up to the expectations and the need to reach a threshold of critical mass in order to create dynamism , impetus and a rubbing-off effect on young people .
Our proposal to raise the whole budgetary amount to 80 million ECU is based on that concern , a concern that would only guarantee that this excellent initiative would be as widely publicized as possible .
Mr President , allow me first of all to pay tribute to the Vice-President of the European parliament , Mrs Nicole Fontaine , for her splendid work on the subject of voluntary work .
I should also like to commend the Commission as well .
Its proposal is important because it endeavours to bring order and system to the voluntary work sector which plays a substantial role within the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is natural that in the Committee on Development we should have looked not so much , or rather not only , at voluntary work within the European Union itself , although we support that wholeheartedly , of course .
We have endeavoured to look at voluntary work in the light of the Commission 's proposal and with due regard to Mrs Fontaine 's observations concerning the Union 's relations with third countries , relations which are presented as coordinates in the wake of the new policies .
Hence the proposals that the Committee on Development has discussed and is presenting refer to all of the area encompassed by the Lomé Treaty and to the area encompassed by the new Mediterranean policy , to mention just two examples .
We are hopeful that these proposals can provide a perspective for voluntary work in the future , regardless of the fact that at this early stage , as a new policy on voluntary work is being commenced , they may encounter certain practical difficulties that will require study .
And we think that the provision of a specific framework within which voluntary work will operate in the future is of great significance , both for the young people who will be the first to volunteer , and who always are the first , and for those who will be the recipients of the voluntary work .
Of course , as we have said many times , voluntary work cannot be a replacement or a substitute .
It is complementary , and for that reason - and , Mr President , this is our very firm view - the Commission 's proposal establishes an important beginning in that it presents the way in which this complementary endeavour is to be framed .
Lastly , given that we focused , as I have said , on the external aspect of voluntary work , I consider it very important that the delegations of the European Union in other countries should also take account of this very good proposal that we have before us .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Fontaine on her excellent report . I am also grateful to the Commission , and in particular Mrs Cresson and her staff , for their communication and for presenting this programme .
I would point out that the idea of a European voluntary service originated partly from a European Parliament initiative which , by introducing a line into the 1996 budget , enabled the pilot phase to be launched with a sum of ECU 15 million earmarked for 1996 and ECU 10 m for 1997 .
The basic aim of the EVS , as Mrs Fontaine has reminded us , is to give young people some experience of voluntary work by setting up projects in various sectors which are at the very heart of the EU 's priorities : environmental protection , the social services , cultural activities , heritage conservation and combating drugs .
I believe , however , that above all else the EVS is a significant means of enabling young Europeans to develop a European identity , a sense of belonging and an awareness of their European citizenship , of which there is now so much discussion .
In 18 months , the current pilot phase , which involves 2500 young people , has shown the merits of the decision taken by Parliament and the Commission : it has proved that this project is a viable one and really can help to foster a sense of European identity in young people , as well as equipping them better educationally for their future life .
The Committee on Budgets says as much in its opinion and considers that , in order to improve the implementation of the programme , it should be managed with maximum transparency and be as broadly based as possible within the Member States . We call on the Commission to ensure that this is the case .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are all painfully aware that Euroscepticism is very prevalent among our population at the present time , and we must take effective action to combat it .
Young people can be our allies in this mission , because they have a great capacity for learning , they are enthusiastic and are hungry for the new experiences that can be theirs when they spend some time in other countries .
Young people are the future of our society , which is why I firmly believe that we should involve them as much as possible in the construction of a united Europe .
The European voluntary service can be a means to that end .
I therefore welcome the idea , but I agree with Mrs Fontaine that the Commission proposal has several defects .
The most important issue , to my mind , is that of the legal framework .
The mobility of young people is impaired by major legal obstacles , which must be eliminated by all Member States cooperating to define a common status for voluntary workers .
Every Member State must take the necessary measures to enable young people to take part in the programme without let or hindrance .
The main measures are the granting of a right of sojourn for the duration of the voluntary service , maintenance of social security entitlements and the exemption from taxation of expenditure allowances .
Clear rules will have to be formulated on these points ; those in the proposal are far too generalized .
Moreover , the Member States must be called upon to coordinate the activities of the European voluntary service with those of the civilian service organizations that exist in individual countries .
The decision as to whether these national organizations can be incorporated into the structure of the European voluntary service on the basis of agreements between the two will remain a matter for the national legislatures .
Despite these defects , I am delighted that the voluntary service initiative is finally taking shape .
I believe that this service can make a substantial contribution to increasing the mobility of young Europeans , which is still rather too restricted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur , one of Parliament 's Vice-Presidents , on her excellent work .
The Florence European Council of 21 and 22 June 1996 put forward the idea of European voluntary service with a view to involving students and young people , in particular graduates and the unemployed , in practical projects which could bring these youngsters closer to the building of Europe , through social initiatives to help people in need , combat drug dependence and enhance our cultural , artistic and sporting heritage .
This plan to integrate young people within Europe , on the basis of humanist values , requires them to be mobile , and that is why the initiative needs economic support in the form - so I hope - of increased funding .
The EVS cannot take the place of either compulsory military service or national forms of civil service , and the Member States have to bear that in mind .
However , it is important to allow these young European volunteers access to national infrastructures , and to help integrate and combine transnational activities with national voluntary work by examining the possibility of establishing a permanent Community instrument , endowed with legal and financial resources .
The Member States have already expressed interest in the EVS , and several of them are beginning to devise national initiatives .
The Commission therefore needs to show how this programme can make an additional contribution in terms of citizenship , through a balanced set of costs and benefits to the Community budget .
The Union 's aim is to support high-quality , transnational projects in the long term - six months or a year - or the short term - three weeks to three months - thereby enabling young people under 29 who are resident in a Member State to participate in a variety of social , cultural and environmental activities , some of them in third countries .
Such work is of tremendous value , since it will broaden the youngsters ' horizons and , very importantly , bring them into contact with other young people both in Europe and in third countries .
Mr President , I am delighted to be able to speak on behalf of the Liberal Group in support of Mrs Cresson 's initiative and Mrs Fontaine 's well- prepared and lucid report .
The Community action programme ' European Voluntary Service for Young People ' has excellent objectives .
It should give young people mainly , aged between 18 and 25 , the opportunity to obtain valuable work experience in various areas of public service in another Member State .
The aim is to help particularly disadvantaged young people to obtain international experience and language skills as well as to learn civic responsibility through work .
When one thinks how difficult it is for millions of young Europeans to find work on leaving school and to find their place in the world , it is clear that there is a need for activities of the kind covered by the term ' voluntary service ' .
Of course , it may be wondered whether the objective of this programme is too ambitious in relation to its resources , since many people will have to be disappointed .
The relationship of this new voluntary service programme to the important Youth for Europe programme , and its influence on that programme , is as yet unclear .
The Commission should give an overall account of the Union 's youth policy and should consider the need to create a comprehensive youth framework programme .
Within this framework it would be possible to coordinate efficiently the allocation of funds from the different programmes in such a way that they complement each other and take a variety of different groups into account .
At the same time it is possible to simplify administration , reduce bureaucracy and ensure that the resources earmarked are really used to benefit the participation of young people .
One thing which also hinders participation is the lack of a definition of the legal position of young volunteers .
Matters relating to social security , the employer-employee relationship , taxation and accommodation should be dealt with in a uniform way so that the conditions for freedom of movement can really be secured .
The recipient organizations also have a heavy responsibility to create an effective framework for voluntary work .
The tasks to be done must be meaningful and challenging , and a European certificate must be awarded immediately after participation , describing the skills obtained by the participant through voluntary work .
I would hope that the age limits could also be flexible .
The Commission should pay particular attention to evacuations , which must contain quantitative indicators as well as those for content and quality .
Mr President , I agree with the Fontaine report and think that a few good ideas should be picked out from it .
This proposal could help young people to take part in European construction , so that they can feel that they are the subjects and protagonists of that construction .
Today most young people do not take part in European construction .
It could also help them to have a vision of tolerance and cooperation by taking part in voluntary work in the European Union , through linguistic and cultural preparation that most young people do not have .
The rapporteur points out in her report that this should not be directed at a few elite youngsters who already have all that information and all those possibilities , but at a wide group .
There must be a sufficient number of young people taking part in a project with these features , working on public utility actions but not charity work or amounting to social dumping .
These are the most interesting ideas set out in the Fontaine report .
The conscientious objection services in Member States must complement these European services .
Both the report and the Cresson proposal make it quite clear that this proposal should not replace compulsory military service or conscientious objection .
However why could it not be possible at a given moment for countries like mine , where there are hundreds of young conscientious objectors without any prospects , for them to do this European voluntary service and thereby fulfil their national service requirements ?
That is a possible suggestion . In my country there are some young people - whether or not you agree with them - who are in prison for avoiding their military service because they refuse to be labelled conscientious objectors .
I am quite convinced that their choice should at least be respected .
It is far easier to be a conscientious objector than spend 28 months in prison .
In the future - not yet - a public cooperation service outside one 's home country , working for peace , might replace military service so that young people could opt for that instead of going to prison .
Mr President , on behalf of the Green Group I must , like the other speakers , commend Mrs Fontaine for this excellent work .
The report is good because it is about young people ; there are not that many issues in this Parliament which concern young people and voluntary service .
So it is good that the emphasis is being placed on projects both within the EU and outside , for example in Eastern Europe and the third world .
Voluntary service creates the kind of understanding and knowledge which cannot be gained at a school desk .
The report is particularly interesting because it is about the environment and social areas which we know are areas close to young peoples ' hearts and which are very interesting to work with .
But I do have one problem here which could be the result of translation .
Amendment No. 12 says that young people with the greatest problems should be given the opportunity to participate in the programme .
At the same time in amendment proposal No. 25 it says that it is necessary to have good or adequate knowledge of languages to be able to participate .
I think that these amendment proposals are somewhat contradictory , but I will check with the English language version to see if there is a mistake in the Swedish .
Then I would say to the Commission that as it is to give a lot of money to space research and buildings for the Commission , it can surely afford 20 million ECUs for the young people of the EU to fund this excellent project .
Mr President , first of all , we must welcome the creation of this European voluntary service programme and thank Mrs Cresson for taking this initiative . We must thank the Commissioner and Mrs Fontaine for the quality of their work .
This transnational programme will enable young people aged 18-25 years to go on training courses in another Member State or in non-Community countries , in a spirit of solidarity .
This should help us to find new creative forms of work .
If this project is to succeed , it seems nevertheless worthwhile recalling the need to insert into the Treaty on Union a new article on youth , integrating this service , while maintaining the voluntary nature of the service based on a specific legal and financial status .
This voluntary service cannot replace the compulsory or other military services , while the various activities would have to be made compatible and complementary .
That also means close cooperation between the various organisations concerned in the European Union .
It is vital to earmark an individualized , specific budget .
This collective activity , by means of the diversity of learning courses and social or even vocational insertion that it might propose , should be likely to develop a better awareness of European citizenship among the young people concerned .
At present , the programme consists of a pilot action affecting barely 2500 young people but there is already the problem of the financial envelope and the validation of the courses involved .
It would be interesting to deliver a certificate that could become a sort of European label certifying the trainee 's knowledge , including linguistic skills .
It is obvious that at a later stage the legal framework should be specified and we shall need a proactive and concerted strategy for a European youth policy .
Finally , I should like to remind you of something that is perhaps quite obvious but which I think should always be borne in mind by the young people who are flocking to us , showing their interest in this project - something that they do not always bear in mind .
All young people should be concerned , including the less favoured young .
On the other hand , this programme targets young boys and girls .
That goes without saying but I have noticed that there are far more boys asking us for information than girls .
These young trainees need quality training .
This should lead to a real openness .
The voluntary service meets genuine expectations and it would be a shame to disappoint all these young people who are now applying to take part .
Mr President , much as I admire the rapporteur as a person and as a Vice-President of Parliament , I am unable to endorse this report .
I do not believe that we need voluntary service organized at European level , unless it is meant to be yet another small step , using the famous technique known in French as la tactique du voleur chinois , towards a more centralized and federalist Europe .
For example , the fact that the report claims that the Union is entitled to deal with youth policy because Article 126 makes some very low-key references to education is a typical example of this .
I think that we , as Members , must bear in mind that the money we allocate for all these pro-European propaganda activities - in this particular case ECU 80 million , the equivalent of about BFR 3200 million - is not simply conjured out of thin air , but has to be paid for by the taxpayer , who is already the victim of fiscal terrorism .
To be quite blunt , if we had to find the money for these things from our own pockets , we might be slightly less inclined to play Santa Claus .
I am only sorry that I do not have more time to describe the 20 or so other objections I have to this initiative .
As the French say , et c 'est pourquoi votre fille est muette .
Mr President , firstly , may I refer to the remarks that Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez has just made about military service .
Whilst I accept her comments and would fully support opposition to military service in any country , the right to be a conscientious objector and , of course , the aims of peace , it is terribly dangerous to link the voluntary service with military service and we have opposed this all the way through the negotiations .
It is a diversion and not what the programme is about .
This is an exciting programme - and I congratulate everyone involved - but it has a much broader dimension : Europe is about more than the movement of money , capital and goods or a single currency or the Economic Union , it is about people .
It is about giving young people opportunities to experience life and work in other countries , to study and to travel .
That is why we must make absolutely certain that there is no link to compulsory military service and using this as an alternative , laudable though it might be .
Europe must be for the people ; it must be about the real issues that concern people .
That is why my Group has been pushing the questions and arguments about fighting unemployment across Europe .
These have been highlighted in the recent elections , not just in the United Kingdom but in France .
Young people across Europe are open-minded and are looking for opportunities that this programme provides .
We can use this programme properly to help counter the very powerful forces that are there underneath the surface but will , if unchecked , lead to racism , fascism and nationalism .
By travelling to other countries in this project , young people can learn about the partner countries and different ways of life .
That is why I fully support it and I hope that it gets a good vote later on today .
Mr President , for my generation the outstanding politician in the post-war years has to be the American President Kennedy .
He is still a household name across the world .
The European founding fathers , whilst rightly revered in this House and whose achievements are undoubtedly as great if not greater than Kennedy 's , are less well known .
What is Kennedy remembered for ?
His support for Berlin during the Cold War , his inaugural address : ' ask not what your country can do for you ' , but also for the Kennedy Peace Corps .
In that idea he lent his name to a scheme that has channelled the idealism , the energy and the desire to be of use that thousands of young Americans have shown across the world for 30 years .
Young Europeans today have that same idealism , energy , enthusiasm and desire to help .
It is only a minority who are vandals and hooligans , although they seem to capture most of the headlines .
That is why I strongly support the European voluntary service .
It would help young Europeans channel their efforts on a broader level than just national .
Mrs Fontaine 's excellent report makes a number of important points - apart from the obvious that good projects always require more money .
There must be follow-up after the experience gained : the programmes must be properly evaluated .
We must exempt volunteers from taxes on their expenses .
There is no idea that is so good that it is not capable of being wrecked by the taxman , so we must order them to get their hands off it right away .
To return to the Kennedy Peace Corps , we need to give the European voluntary service a popular name and , as a British Conservative , I propose that given the connections of Mrs Cresson and Mrs Fontaine we link this support to one of the greatest Europeans of this age , François Mitterrand .
Give it a name and give it a guiding spirit !
This is a very good report by Nicole Fontaine , as we have come to expect .
We are another step closer to a people 's Europe , a Europe of young people , young European volunteers working together for other people instead of just for themselves .
The Liberal Group would prefer to apply a number of conditions , however .
Firstly , voluntary work must not be seen as a substitute for regular paid work , in other words there must be no European equivalent of ' Melkert jobs ' , as we call them in Dutch .
Secondly , there must be an even spread of participants , not just an élite and not just those who have few opportunities .
Thirdly , there should be equal numbers of male and female participants .
Fourthly , the ECU 60 million earmarked under the Interinstitutional Agreement is quite sufficient , as far as the Liberal Group is concerned .
Fifth , there should be cooperation with other programmes and , sixth , there should be follow-up and annual evaluations .
I visited the pilot project in the Molenbeek district of Brussels , and found that to be an excellent example .
Young people there were able to see further than the ends of their national noses , as it were , and were working together to meet one of the greatest challenges of the 21st century : that of living in harmony and understanding with each other and with the many cultures from outside the European Union .
It is a good programme : let us set the ball rolling .
Mr President , I too commend both the Commissioner , Mrs Cresson , and our rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , on their excellent work .
I believe that the Commission 's text , combined with the work of the Committee on Culture , the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the Committee on Women 's Rights , brings together all the elements needed for this major proposal to take shape and be carried through .
I also think it is vital for the right link to be established between European civil service and national forms of civil service , especially in order to solve the problems regarding the service performed by conscientious objectors .
It has not been possible to tackle these problems until now because of the situation in Greece , where no civil alternative to military service existed ; as from this week , however , that problem too has been resolved - albeit in a somewhat questionable way - with the adoption of a new law .
I believe that it is important to update the information which is available in the various countries and from NGOs , and to remove all obstacles to the participation of young people of either sex .
This will help to foster among young people and the European citizens of the future that sense of European citizenship which we are so eager to cultivate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not against the rapporteur personally but I am going to be very critical .
This report is overflowing with good intentions but demagoguery too ; we could well ask whether there is not a hidden political agenda behind this since it has been clearly said that these young people must be the ' allies ' of a certain type of European construction .
It is a gimmick , in terms of resources , which is not very serious because , if we were really to apply the principle of subsidiarity , we would hardly see the use of this European initiative .
The budget is very small , of course , and will only benefit a minority of privileged young people ; the mass of young people will obviously be excluded .
I am afraid that the real aim of this project is to make us forget mass unemployment provoked by a European deflationary policy and the unbridled opening up of our borders .
We are offering voluntary work , financed from taxation , whereas the demand for company jobs is insufficient .
The money to go into this luxury project will be taken out of the genuine fight against unemployment .
That is an insult to unemployed people and those on low incomes and they will realize that .
Mr President , the European voluntary service for young people is an important step towards a Europe for the people .
There are many decisions taken in this House but few are important for the individual citizen of the Union .
But when we talk about voluntary service , I am anxious to underline its importance .
It gives personal development , experience and new skills to the most important resource society has , our young people .
So I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine for her excellent work .
She has openly listened to and accepted various proposals from those of us in the committee for culture .
I would also like to thank my party colleague Mr Vecchi .
We all know how important he has been as an instigator of voluntary service .
There are many positive points in this programme .
But I would personally like to underline the mutual exchange with third countries .
The development of the EU is not only governed by those of us who live in the Union , but is also influenced by those who live outside .
So it is important that young people from third countries have the opportunity to come to us and experience the culture in different parts of Europe .
This will be particularly important if we do expand Eastwards .
Young people are the future of Europe .
They must be given the opportunity to meet because when people meet diplomacy is created .
This is one way of combating the ' fortress Europe ' mentality .
Mr President , I do not wish to repeat what the other speakers have said , but I would agree with many of them that the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , is to be congratulated on the substance of her report and on the speed with which she has produced it .
I should also like to congratulate the Commissioner , Mrs Cresson , on showing such dynamism in putting forward this proposal , although she is probably going to face tremendous problems in obtaining funding for it .
As many speakers have said , this programme is clearly of vital importance for our young people , who in turn are clearly of vital importance for the further construction of Europe .
This means that what we are dealing with here is an absolutely crucial element in Europe 's overall policy of integration .
It also means that we have no right to talk about this programme as if it were some kind of hobby-horse of Mrs Fontaine or Mrs Cresson , or of the Committee on Culture .
This is a vital component in Europe 's policy of integration .
Why do I say this ?
Because I very much fear that we are going to have to fight for a budget for it , and that many of our colleagues , wearing their budgetary authority hats , will say that there are so many programmes already and that the Committee on Culture has to show a little restraint , or else the Council will say that Parliament needs to show restraint .
We have recently had some very bad experiences with the Council over important cultural programmes , and this is why I would urge that we should not launch this programme until we have an adequate budget , so as to ensure that all the young people for whom it is intended are given the chance to take part , rather than just the small group who know how to gain access to it .
We cannot dangle a carrot in front of young people 's noses and then snatch it away as soon as they try to bite .
It would do nothing but harm to European integration , and we would simply be spreading disappointment instead of hope .
Mr President , we can only welcome the proposal for a Community action programme ' European voluntary service for young people ' , which originated in an idea from the European Parliament , I would point out , and was launched during Italy 's last presidency .
This initiative is in fact a means of enabling the leaders of tomorrow to grow up in a context which is no longer national but , at long last , European .
We agree with the substance of the programme and with the proposals from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and are grateful to the rapporteur , who is proposing an increase in the funding and an extension of the age range for participants from 18 to 29 , rather than 25 .
The internationalization of the market will in fact bring both risks and opportunities to those currently going through school or university and who will be entering the world of work in the near future : they must therefore be in a position to understand the new working environment and the opportunities it presents .
We should simply like to ask the Commission to draw up a strategy document which keeps the other programme , ' Youth for Europe ' , on the front burner and carries forward these two complementary initiatives in step with one another .
Finally , we would emphasize that the most appropriate sectors for this new voluntary work scheme are environmental , sporting and cultural activities : these social values above all will help young people get to know each other and grow together .
Mr President , I wish to compliment Mrs Cresson and the author of this important report .
It must be possible to achieve the goal of citizenship in a responsible way , and this proposal to establish a European voluntary service will , in our view , involve young Europeans in community life , providing them with an opportunity to gain useful work experience .
Funding is of course an important issue , and we feel that an effort should be made to increase the resources that are available . Likewise , it is important to provide the young volunteers with full information as regards their rights and duties , and to ensure that the EVS is compatible with national service and fits in with governments ' plans to combat the crisis of unemployment .
We should also like there to be guarantees of the young volunteers ' rights in terms of social security cover , and to see them exempted from paying tax on their earnings throughout their period of service .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Fontaine for her excellent work on questions relating to the action programme ' European Voluntary Service for Young People ' .
This is a substantial and important youth policy programme which , if it succeeds , will have a significant multiplier effect on the mobility and employability of young people all over Europe .
However , the implementation of the programme is being held up in a number of Member States .
Particularly serious problems have arisen in connection with social security and taxation .
The case of my own country , Finland , illustrates the seriousness of the problems with the implementation of the programme .
The concept of voluntary work is foreign to Finnish employment legislation .
In practice , this means that a young volunteer pays in Finland more tax in respect of voluntary work than he or she receives in allowance .
This problem , which relates to national decision-making , makes it impossible to apply the principle of reciprocity between Member States .
We Finnish MEPs , at least regardless of party allegiance , should actively work in national forums to eliminate these problems .
Intervention is needed immediately because before these undesirable situations will lead to arbitrary discrimination in the treatment of voluntary workers in different Member States , thus endangering the future of the project .
Finally , I should like once again to express my support for the committee 's view that the Commission should submit before the end of next year to Parliament and the Council a report commenting on the main priorities of the Union 's youth policy in the next millennium .
The Commission should include without fail in its report its opinion on the future of the Youth for Europe and ' European Voluntary Service for Young People ' programmes , and on the possibility of a Children 's Europe programme in future , as proposed by organizations for the under-15s .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to congratulate Mrs Fontaine and the Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , voluntary action has now been turned into one of the basic instruments of action in social areas in civilian society .
A European voluntary service could undoubtedly help to overcome the cultural and social divisions that exist , especially fostering the promotion of tolerance , peace and international solidarity .
Our main aim is to switch from isolated experiments , without any coordination , to a broader programme , that would enable a larger number of young people to exercise an activity of general interest in a multinational framework .
That is why I firmly support the amendments tabled by the rapporteur to the Commission proposal on a budgetary increase for the programme and the need to recognise a legal status for European voluntary service .
It is right that this service should offer social protection , recognition and remuneration .
Given the complex rules in the Member States , very often many young people who carry out voluntary services receive no payment at all when they get back home .
If this service is to make any progress , as has been said , the volunteers need to have their condition recognized , so that all the young citizens of the Member States can enjoy the same payments .
I am especially concerned that the voluntary service should not be used incorrectly or exploited in order to solve unemployment problems .
The framework of a European programme must consider the desired guarantees in terms of free movement , residence rights and social security .
Acquired experience should also be consolidated and that can only be achieved if we have a clear and practical legal framework and status .
In Europe we must put a stake in our future and our young people , especially when they are willing to take part generously in our society .
I think that it is our obligation to help and support them whenever it is possible for us to do so .
Mr President , Commissioner Cresson has just made a most interesting statement .
She promised Parliament a new publication from the Commission to accompany the Community action programme for European voluntary service and intended in principle for all young people in the European Union .
She said that it was to be published in three languages : French , English and German .
Are we therefore to conclude that the Commission has no respect for the demand expressed by the House and enshrined in the Treaties that all the official languages of the Union deserve and must be given equal treatment ?
I should be grateful for an answer on this point .
These documents are not addressed to all young people ; they are , as I said , targeted at members of parliament and national bodies .
If I understood you right , Mr Vanhecke , you want us to save public funds .
We are therefore trying to do things quickly .
I think I understood that you , like your colleagues in the same Group here in the European Parliament , are opposed to this idea and the development of a European voluntary service .
We do not have all that much money to begin with .
We have to be attentive .
Of course , everything that is found on the Internet tends to be in a very few languages .
This brochure is being distributed to the Member States and national bodies which can , of course , make local translations and distribute them locally .
We shall do all we can to help them .
You cannot say , on one hand , that it is too expensive and then tell us off for trying to save as much money as possible .
This is just the beginning .
Perhaps one day we shall be able to publish this handbook in all languages .
For the time being we have decided to make a start and this is something that is not secondary - and I do not say that it is not important for everyone to have the handbook in their own language - but this is just the beginning and we do not have much money as you yourself said .
We shall do our best to ensure that the handbook is available locally in as many languages as possible .
Mrs Cresson , how quickly do you believe it will be possible for the domestic legislation on tax exemption for expenses and the necessary insurance provisions to be put in place ?
This , of course , will also have a bearing on any prediction as to when applications relating to this programme can realistically be submitted .
I do not think that the fact that we find ourselves today in a still highly unsatisfactory situation has held up development , since the number of demands easily outstrips the possibilities for receiving young people at present .
The problem you refer to is a major one .
It does not only concern young volunteers but also researchers , whose grants are absurdly taxed in certain Member States and , for example , apprentice exchanges .
You know that we have set up revolving apprenticeships , another very interesting system of education and training : you do your apprenticeship in another Union Member State and you are paid a small amount and , of course , you have to pay tax in the country where you are doing your apprenticeship .
We have also published a Green paper to be debated by Council .
I should like the subject of obstacles to youth exchanges to be dealt with as a whole , and that would mean dealing with young volunteers , young apprentices and young researchers finishing a doctorate for example .
Mr Monti , the Commissioner in charge of the single market and with whom I cooperate on this subject , is dealing actively with this idea .
We hope that we can persuade the Member States as quickly as possible .
To that end - and here too I am not only tackling the enormous obstacles to mobility found in the voluntary service but also those found among all young people concerned - I would like you to take appropriate steps in your Member States ; the amount to be paid by the Member States is derisory since the payments in question are minimal .
It is usually the interior ministries that control the young people entering the country .
We have not only made Europe for capital and goods .
We have also made it for the movement of people , especially the young , and I would therefore be very grateful if you could help us with this operation of convincing the Member States of the utility of this programme .
Once again , it is a question of subsidiarity , which concerns several ministers within each Member State : finance , interior , social affairs for social welfare issues .
That is the problem : four or five times fifteen ministers to deal with .
The horizontal side is far harder than the vertical side .
That is why we need the European Parliament 's help in this matter .
SOCRATES ' action programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0188 / 97 ) by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision 819 / 95 / EC establishing the Community action programme ' SOCRATES ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking today about the Socrates programme .
We are not undertaking an evaluation of the programme today ; it was simply agreed during the conciliation process back in 1995 that we should meet at this time to establish whether or not the funds we assigned to the programme for a five-year period in 1995 would prove sufficient .
Nevertheless , let me say a few words on the programme and its extraordinary importance .
This programme was not created to hamper the work of Member States but to demonstrate everywhere the added value that European education can bring and to promote the European dimension within education , thereby bringing the European Union closer to its citizens .
The achievements of the programme in boosting European cooperation have come to encompass quite new sectors of education .
As you will be aware , in the part of the programme known as Comenius we have been dealing with school twinning , and for the first time we have also addressed adult education , a subject that was especially prominent last year , the European Year of Lifelong Learning , and have begun to consider open and distance learning . You will also be aware that another part of the Socrates programme , namely Erasmus - another of the fruits of this Parliament - has been one of the European Union 's great success stories , enabling students to undertake courses of study abroad that will be recognized in their own countries .
Lingua , which promotes the acquisition of foreign-language skills , is also part of the programme .
So I believe it is a programme that appeals to infinite numbers of people , from six-year-old children to pensioners attending adult-education centres in order to find out more about Europe and to see Europe in a new light .
In this programme we have also created the opportunity in the 15 Member States to add an extra European dimension to the curriculum , especially within initial and in-service teacher training .
After all , how can we expect our children to develop into European citizens if their teachers are Euro-ostriches ?
Teachers too must be moulded into real Europeans in their initial and in-service training , so that they can pass this on to children , adolescents and students .
This is an extremely good programme , and it accurately reflects the spirit of Article 126 of the Treaty .
It helps to ensure a high quality of education throughout the entire Community .
To all those who object to it I have to say that it is not a matter of our undermining subsidiarity .
We are only doing what the Member States are not willing and sometimes not able to do .
Let us get on at last with what we can do well !
This programme has one serious problem , namely a shortage of money .
I do not wish to go into any further detail on its content .
All I want to say is that the programme was set up in 1995 for twelve States .
Then along came three more Member States and all the EEA countries .
And now we have taken a political decision , which Parliament supported , that the associated countries are to take part .
We want young Poles , young Hungarians , young Czechs , young Slovaks , young Romanians , Estonians , Latvians and Lithuanians .
We want to include them all in the programme , because this is a way in which we can spread the European ideal more widely in those countries .
But now we are left with no money .
We only have the funds that were allocated to us in 1995 .
That , of course , is insufficient to meet even the target we originally set ourselves .
At that time we told the Council that our consent to the result of the conciliation process was wholly dependent on our coming together again after two and a half years to consider whether the money would suffice .
It will not suffice !
We should need at least ECU 165 million for two years to come anywhere near meeting our own target .
However , we are moderate in our demands and are only seeking ECU 100m , since we can more or less get by on that .
But if we go along with the Commission and the 50m I proposed - the Commission could not ask for more than that , because of the other constraints upon it - we shall actually have less in real terms than we had planned on the basis of twelve Member States .
That is why I believe we shall be doing ourselves no favours by economizing on this programme .
We shall be doing ourselves no favours , and we shall be denying our own principles .
If we listen to politicians , they are always saying that Europe is a people 's Europe .
And it is those people of Europe , in all walks of life and at all ages , who benefit from this very programme .
We , however , shall have to turn round and tell them we have no money to give .
Please back the European Parliament in its struggle with the Council , so that a better result can be obtained in the conciliation committee .
To that end I need a convincing vote from this Parliament .
Mr President , this is of course , as everyone is aware , a very important programme and I remember vividly the lengthy negotiations we had in 1995 over the conciliation process which is obviously part and parcel of where we are today , looking at the funding .
Mrs Pack has already spoken eloquently about the value and importance of this programme and Mrs Cresson also spoke earlier .
This programme is important because Europe must be , and is , more than just big business and capital , moving money about Europe and people getting richer and richer .
It is about people , it is about young people .
It is about involving schools and educational establishments across Europe , and giving them the opportunities to interlink with one another .
Socrates has been a great success .
People are talking about the programme and they often write to me to find out more about it .
It is already four times over-subscribed .
We could find plenty of students for every place .
Students who have been on those programmes or schools that have been involved in exchanges have tremendous experiences that they will remember for the rest of their lives and they build the foundations for the Europe that we want to see .
This is only a small budget increase we are looking for .
I wish it were much more than that because this is a really useful investment .
The European Parliament and European Union provide subsidies for tobacco farming , breeding bulls for bull-fighting and , if we are to believe the press reports this week , breeding beetles in Italy for alcoholic drinks colouring , and yet we seem to be balking at or objecting to a small increase in the project .
I wish it were a larger increase but we have to argue for this for the young people of today and tomorrow .
Mr President , the young people of Europe can be proud that they are represented by individuals such as Mrs Pack , who has moved heaven and earth to promote this programme and to obtain the extra budget for it .
It is quite scandalous that such tremendous efforts should be necessary , because as Mrs Pack said , it was agreed that we would eventually review the budget , and the programme has been so successful - indeed , it risks becoming the victim of its own success - that there is every reason to extend it to many more countries .
As chairman of the Committee on Culture , I have been bombarded with requests from various countries claiming that we promised that they could participate in the programmes and that they have projects ready , but are never given a chance .
Here again , as I said about the other programme , we are spreading disappointment instead of promoting the idea that young people are the future , and that Europe needs young people for its future too .
This is a very dangerous thing to do .
If we look at the Union 's information policy - and it is something we need to talk about , it is such a disaster - there is little point in allocating more money for improving information in general if , in disseminating information about this programme , we just end up bringing disappointment to so many young people .
It would be counter-productive , and it simply means that both we in the House and the Council have no choice but to accept that this programme is successful , that it serves to promote European integration and that it should be extended to all the countries involved in European integration .
So if the programme is to be made accessible to all , the budget for it also needs to be increased .
This is what I would call compulsory expenditure , although I know that the term is given a different meaning , because we simply must not cheat people .
If we give rights to people - young people - then they must also be allowed to exercise them .
So there should really be no question of debating whether we need to increase the budget .
We have offered people something , and neither we nor the Council of Ministers can now afford to tell them that it is only available for the few , and the rest get nothing .
I would end by urgently calling on the Commission to join Parliament in campaigning for a decent budget increase for this programme , now and in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by adding my own congratulations to Mrs Pack to those offered by other speakers .
I wish to remind everyone of the great success which the SOCRATES programme is enjoying within the Union , especially in promoting higher education through ERASMUS and language learning through LINGUA .
SOCRATES has given a tremendous boost to the mobility and exchanges of students , teachers and assistants , as well as the creation of cooperation networks .
The number of inter-university cooperation programmes has so far reached 2673 .
The success of SOCRATES has led to a rise in applications to participate in the various actions covered by the programme , in particular since 1995 , from students and teachers alike .
Across the European Union there are in fact some 60 million school pupils and 11 million students .
The Commission has proposed increasing by ECU 50 million the funding already set at ECU 850 m by the Council for the period 1995-99 .
This sum , which is much less than the ECU 1005 m initially proposed for 12 Member States , is now woefully inadequate for the present 15 Member States , plus the EFTA countries , the CCEEs and Cyprus , which have been included in the programme .
The fact is that in 1998-99 , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and Cyprus will be participating fully in the programme ; with the help of the PHARE programme , the CCEEs will be contributing some ECU 70 m , but if this participation is to be meaningful , that effort will have to be reciprocated by the Member States to the tune of some ECU 70 m .

The demand is therefore far outstripping the financial scope of the programme .
So it is clear that if we really wish to give a boost to European education through information and communication campaigns for our citizens , carried out by the EU , the necessary funding must be found .
Otherwise , we shall lose credibility in the eyes of the citizens who wish to build the Europe of tomorrow - those young people who are expecting not just words or promises , but practical action from the Union - especially in times like the present , when ideals are under threat and culture has to play its rightful role .
Mr President , my warmest congratulations to Mrs Pack on her fine report and her energetic work in defence of the Socrates Programme .
The Socrates Programme is really a European success story which is coming to a sad and untimely end just as it was gaining speed , at least as regards its objectives .
This will at any rate be true if the programme does not immediately obtain the ECU 100 m it needs in additional funding to meet the increased needs .
And even this increase will not be enough to meet the growing needs and expectations of the present Member States , since this amount of additional funding will be needed just to launch this programme properly in the CEECs .
The ECU 50 m which the Commission has proposed is therefore not enough and the Committee on Culture has been quite unanimous in stating that at least ECU 100 m are needed .
It is not necessary to increase the whole budget by this amount : the resources could be taken from somewhere else , for example the EU 's appropriations for information .
Activities of the type of the Socrates Programme amount to much better and more positive information work than hastily completed information campaigns .
The varied educational cooperation to be carried out in the framework of the Socrates Programme is also the best preparation for closer EU cooperation and membership .
For this reason , the gates of Socrates should really be opened to the associated countries .
In the same way it would be irresponsible to state coolly to the young people of the current Member States that Socrates is an elite programme for a chosen few , in which the number and level of grants does not even begin to meet requirements .
However , a great deal of positive and promising developments have been achieved under the Socrates Programme in terms of in terms of improving the quality of education in the whole of Europe .
In my opinion , it is particularly important to continue work on the further education of teachers and on developing and broadening language teaching , for these are the real prerequisites if we are to achieve that vital ' European added value ' .
In the EU , there is justified concern that citizens do not feel the EU 's activity relates to or is meaningful for them .
With that in mind , we cannot afford to weaken the credibility of this programme which is so important to our citizens and works so well .
Mr President , we Greens believe that in order not to compromise SOCRATES , which was originally designed to meet the needs of only 12 Member States , it is now essential to increase the funds allocated for its implementation .
The growing number of applications under the programme and , above all , the involvement of 11 new countries as from 1998 , require an increase in the budget in order to ensure reciprocal mobility between the European Union and the associated countries .
The Commission 's proposed budget increase of 5.9 % is utterly inadequate and takes no account either of real demand or of the extension of the programme to cover the associated countries .
We would not wish the success of SOCRATES to be jeopardized ; nor would we wish it to benefit only those who can afford to foot the bill for their stay in the host country .
For this reason , the Greens strongly support the request by Mrs Pack : we are calling for a substantial increase in funding , so as to send a positive signal to the educational community and to public opinion .
Mr President , really , the resources that the European Union puts into its youth policy are at the heart of this morning 's debates .
That is the problem of the Socrates programme : everyone recognizes its positive qualities and the need to enhance its activities .
But that desire will be useless unless the budget is considerably increased .
That is why we must support the aim of 100 million ECU as proposed by our rapporteur , Mrs Pack , whose work I must congratulate .
Let us not forget that , during conciliation , the European Parliament only accepted the 850 million ECU , far below the initial proposal , on the condition that those aims should be revised after two years .
The association of certain central and eastern European countries in these programmes , to take place very shortly , even if cofunded by the Phare programme , will make certain adjustments necessary .
This is just one example , but it shows that if we want the Socrates programmes to meet its legitimate expectations , it will have to be given a larger budget .
Mr President , although the EU was originally founded as an economic union , it is increasingly developing into an educational union .
In view of the fraught situation in the labour market and competition from cheap but poorly trained workforces , Europe 's best chance lies in a high level of education and training .
That is why we regard the development of Community action programmes in the educational domain as a wisely chosen and effective means , albeit in the medium term , of combating unemployment in Europe and why we consider the Socrates programme to be an important investment in the future of our continent .
Although the replenishment of the programme budget certainly merits our support in principle , the extra funds must be found by means of internal reallocations so as to avoid additional strains on the Community purse and to prevent any increases in national membership contributions .
In addition , we consider it indispensable that strict controls and complete transparency be required of the executive bodies for each of the supported projects to prevent the disbursement of any unwarranted aid .
With regard to the inclusion in the Socrates programme of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which we also very much welcome , we would insist that substantiated needs assessments be drawn up with a view to identifying the actual financial requirements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is high time that the question of replenishing Socrates was put into a far broader political context .
It is , as we know , an excellent means of promoting the construction of Europe , because it creates , through encounter and exchange , an enduring basis for international understanding and helps to promote both the mobility and the qualification of young people in the education process and in their working lives .
But since an ever smaller number of applications for assistance can be approved and since the grants are sometimes embarrassingly paltry , which tends to make the programme socially exclusive , the case for replenishment is actually irrefutable .
I congratulate Mrs Pack on her report and her comments , including those on the funding target , and I should like to say that it is highly desirable that the States of Central and Eastern Europe should be fully involved in this programme at last .
If , however , the funding is not replenished , the exchange programmes in the countries of Western Europe will inevitably be curtailed .
Another reason why we need more resources - and I must emphasize this - is to alleviate the social shortcomings of the programme .
For example , more young people from small and medium-sized businesses ought to be given exchange opportunities .
To that end we shall have to devise a new structure for the awarding of grants .
Scarcely any of these young people will take part in exchange programmes on their own initiative and at their own expense .
The youngsters undergoing vocational training also need to encounter the cultures of their European neighbours as a practical exercise in tolerance and openness .
That is important if we really want to strike at the roots of the intolerance and xenophobia that are once more rearing their heads in Europe .
We must have scope , for example , to organize a greater number of exchange programmes within the framework of town-twinning arrangements .
Foreign languages are important in an increasingly internationalized world .
At the same time , the fact that just below one per cent of all students on vocational courses have taken part in such exchanges is unsatisfactory .
An increasingly global economy demands the globalization , in other words the internationalization , of the education process .
Our training standards are in competition today with those of other parts of the world .
This is where we Europeans shall have to win our spurs .
Education , mobility and job prospects are becoming ever more closely linked in a chain of cause and effect .
In that respect Socrates is also a contribution to employment policy in Europe .
Mr President , let me begin by expressing my sincere congratulations and thanks to Doris Pack for her sterling effort .
We all know from our own countries how well the Socrates programme is working and how popular it is .
I am sure that each one of us knows at least one student who has studied in another European country on an Erasmus scholarship or a school class that has organized an exchange through Comenius .
And despite this positive feedback we want to cut the funding of Socrates .
No , that is unthinkable !
Socrates is one of the bestknown Community programmes ; its activities are right in line with the needs of our people and directly touch their lives .
The programme has numerous achievements to its name , including an increase in mobility within the European Union and progress towards mutual recognition of degrees .
We cannot keep on talking about closeness to citizens and then fail to guarantee the future of such a successful programme .
Moreover , I believe that greater importance should attach to the aspect of adult education within the Socrates programme .
Only by topping up the programme with at least another ECU 100m can we make sure that the loudly proclaimed motto of lifelong learning is effectively put into practice .
Socrates can and must make a contribution to this and other innovation processes if the European Union wants to remain true to its educational aims and to demonstrate that it is at one with its citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the first few years of its application , the SOCRATES programme , which is aimed at promoting the European dimension in education and in particular at bringing the Union closer to its citizens , succeeded beyond all expectations .
It has enabled young people and adults to learn far more than they could in the past about the reality of Europe , its languages and its culture , and this , we believe , is crucial to greater and more effective unity on our continent .
Once in a while , we are unanimous in expressing our approval of an initiative and a wish for it to be supported and continued in the future .
There is , however , a problem of funding .
Initially , as we know , the Commission proposed an overall sum of ECU 1005 million for 12 Member States .
The final decision , adopted two years ago , allocated only ECU 850 m to the programme for a total of 39 countries - in the meantime , the Member States had grown to 15 , and then there are the 13 EFTA countries , the ten CCEEs , and Cyprus .
So , while entirely understanding the Commission 's financial reasons for proposing an increase of only ECU 50 m for this programme , I share the view of the rapporteur - whom I would compliment - that this project must receive additional funding of at least ECU 100 m .
I am also a member of the Committee on Budgets , and I know that it would not be impossible to transfer these resources from other headings .
To give just one example , I think that a Parliament and other EU institutions which are faced every day with the excessive costs of the premises in which they operate must be able to find a way of funding this major cultural initiative .
The rapporteur spoke about the importance of Socrates as an instrument of education policy .
But I should like to reemphasize this political aspect that has already been touched upon .
We lament , do we not , the ubiquitous reawakening of nationalist tendencies , especially among young people .
Then the European Union creates an excellent means of combating these inclinations by making the idea of Europe come alive for hundreds of thousands of students , whereupon we start trying to curtail this programme right , left and centre , thereby rendering it ineffectual .
There are two things that must not happen .
First of all , these financial restrictions must not mean that only students from wealthy backgrounds can afford to engage in such programmes .
Even now it is difficult for students to survive on these grants in a foreign university city .
Secondly , it would be an act of political folly to extend this programme to Eastern Europe and then be unable to fund it .
That would be absolute political madness .
For that reason , I support the bid for replenishment and , incidentally , consider it essential that the whole issue of EU assistance be thoroughly reviewed .
We can see in the present case that the Union is getting its priorities wrong .
Education is a very important aim , and I hope it is an aim that we shall achieve .
Mr President , the second most important decision in a person 's life is the decision to pursue a particular career .
The most important decision is the choice of a marriage partner .
I believe that both of these decisions have to be well thought out and carefully examined , and it is important that more information about future career opportunities should be provided in school , so that pupils ' education can be structured accordingly .
The Socrates programme addresses this very point with its research activities and its initial and in-service teacher training measures .
I believe that Socrates assures us that future educational requirements can be met , that the education system will not disregard market needs and that parents , teachers and pupils will be well aware of the educational qualifications which will be demanded in the future .
We have politicians who believe that an additional article or law can create jobs .
I believe that jobs can only be created if people are taught how to produce the goods or provide the services that consumers want .
This means that in vocational training and in businesses we must teach people how to manufacture products , how to supply products and services that consumers will buy .
The Socrates programme , with its very sharp focus on in-service training , has a huge amount to offer here , as does the Leonardo programme .
They can quite simply teach people what they need in order to be able to meet the demands of the future .
Forthcoming projects such as the introduction of the euro and our eastward enlargement are also important steps for which we must educate our teachers , our pupils and our adult citizens .
That is why lifelong learning , and hence Leonardo , is of vital importance to our future and must therefore be given absolute priority .
Mr President , with new socialist governments coming in across Europe , the emphasis on a people 's Europe is very important .
No programme demonstrates a people 's Europe more than SOCRATES - except perhaps the voluntary service which we have just been discussing .
Thousands of students and pupils across the European Union have the possibility of participating in exchange programmes and getting to know their fellow citizens .
That is why , two and half years ago , we were not happy with the amount of money proposed by the Council and , during the conciliation process , we negotiated a return at this point to look again at the finances .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media feels very strongly that in order to do justice to the programme , a substantial increase in funding is necesssary .
Since 1994 , not only have we seen an increase in the number of EU Member States and their right to apply for funding , but only now will the full impact of the information campaigns conducted in 1995 and 1996 be felt .
Only now will certain areas within the programme become fully available for the first time .
In addition , there is increased demand under the various projects because of partnerships developed as a result of the European Year of Lifelong Learning , which was very successful across the European Union .
Nor should we forget the recommendations of the final report of the taskforce on educational software and multimedia .
All that money has to be found now out of the SOCRATES programme .
What happens if we do not find the funding ?
Theoretically , there is available a maximum grant of ECU 5 , 000 per year per student , but if all the eligible students received the money they applied for , this would in reality amount to no more than ECU 75 per student per month .
That is unacceptable .
There will certainly be no problem spending the money .
The programme is oversubscribed four times and is constrained in the budget guidelines where it is a priority .
It will certainly remain at the top of our agenda .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe will not have any future unless it treats its younger generation very carefully .
The single currency , freedom of movement and common security will be as nought without people who want to and who know how to build upon that foundation a world of peace and a better life .
SOCRATES is a programme which , supported by the indisputable success of the ERASMUS university exchange visits , is enabling an increasing number of students and lecturers to exchange experience and to compare knowledge , thus creating a European Community of the spirit and of the heart .
We know that it is neither healthy nor sustainable to have a single world superpower .
Europe must accept the challenge and take its proper role for the benefit of the equilibrium of this new globalized society .
The Union cannot continue another day as an economic giant and a social , political and cultural dwarf .
We therefore need not only to retain but to step up exponentially , year by year , the SOCRATES programme and the new European voluntary service which is its natural counterpart .
Those are the only means by which we can change people 's mentality and attitude .
Those are the only ways to reverse the dangerous trend towards isolationism , individualism and consumerism , which are destroying us and discrediting us .
SOCRATES , Mr President , is a success story .
What blindness has led to a proposal for a zero growth rate in the budget for 1998 which had to be forcibly extracted by our courageous rapporteur , Mrs Doris Pack ?
I feel tempted , Mr President , to make a proposal for a special SOCRATES programme for political decision makers .
Perhaps thereafter we would see more clearly the priorities of this Europe which we say we love , but which we do not know how to build .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank the European Parliament for dealing with this proposal so quickly - it was only adopted less than three months ago .
That shows just how committed you are to this programme .
When it was adopted , just over two years ago , the programme benefitted from the European Parliament 's firm support .
I should like to thank Mrs Pack , in particular , for her excellent report , and Mrs Dührkop Dührkop for supporting the issue at the Committee on Budgets .
The Socrates programme is essential for the construction of the so-called ' union of knowledge ' that we fully support .
Of course , it would be better to speak in a quieter chamber , where everyone is seated .
Please be quiet , ladies and gentlemen , so that we can hear Mrs Cresson 's explanations .
As you yourselves have recalled , Socrates enables us to approach the Union of all citizens , and I am thinking in particular of the 70 million or so young people in the Community , 4 million teachers , 11 million students and all adults in training at present .
On the eve of the Amsterdam European Council , which we are trying to involve all European citizens in , Socrates will be an exemplary demonstration of European construction at the service of individuals .
It also plays a decisive role for developing human resources , a key to the recovery of lost jobs , economic competitiveness and growth .
It is also a major element for the process of enlarging the Community , since it opens up to Cyprus and the countries of central and eastern Europe associated in the programmes , preparing their citizens and their institutions for accession .
It should also be emphasized that these results are obtained at extremely low cost .
Even with the increase in the budgetary amount earmarked by the Commission , Socrates accounts for only 0.2 % of the Community 's 1998 budget .
That is why , given its importance , the Commission and the European Parliament , as it happens , can only regret the financial amount voted on two years ago and , as you recall , it was a 150 million ECU reduction over our initial proposal .
The experience of two years demonstrates that the Commission 's initial proposal was not only realistic but was the bare minimum .
The programme has received a particularly enthusiastic reception in educational circles throughout the Member States .
It is one of the most popular programmes and there is not a Member State where the teachers , young people , students and schools have not heard of the European Union 's education programmes .
In proposing an increase in the budget , after these two years of developing the programme , the Community intends to meet the high expectations shown by ordinary people .
Examining the amendments tabled by the European Parliament ...
Excuse , but I have the feeling that you are being greatly disturbed by the background noise .
Please , ladies and gentlemen , be quiet .
It is very unpleasant to speak when there is noise .
You all know that as you have all experienced it .
Thank you .
Examining the amendments tabled to our draft decision by the European Parliament , it seems clear that they mostly strengthen the Commission 's arguments in favour of increasing the budget , something that we have unerringly defended at the Council .
I can only welcome that support .
It is the case of the first amendment which draws attention to the White Paper and the Green Paper and the budgetary priority that the European Parliament gives to the education programme .
Of course , we can accept that amendment .
We also take on board the second amendment , strengthening the Commission 's arguments concerning the consequences of maintaining the financial status quo or too small an increase that would steadily reduce the amount of support granted .
This amendment will therefore be accepted , with a slight change in order to balance the analysis of the impact that a rejection of the increase would have had .
The same is true of the third amendment .
In its explanatory memorandum , the Commission drew attention to the budgetary impact for Member States ' establishments if Socrates is opened up to the associate countries of central and eastern Europe and Cyprus .
The amendment will therefore be accepted with a slight alteration in the wording .
I would also add that the countries of central and eastern Europe can already benefit from the Phare programmes .
If the costs directly linked to the participation of these new countries are also met by their own contributions , cooperation with those countries might lead to further major costs for the institutions of the Member States .
The amendment will be slightly altered in order to take into account the fact that the opening up of the programme has not yet come into effect , something scheduled for the second half of 1997 .
As for the fourth amendment , the Commission feels that the arguments set out in it are already sufficiently taken into account in amendments 2 and 3 and it will therefore not be taken on board .
The fifth amendment introduces a pertinent reference to the budgetary context enabling the funding of the increase proposed in the draft decision submitted by the Commission .
It will therefore be accepted with a slight alteration to the wording .
On the other hand , while noting that it strengthens the arguments in favour of a budget increase , the Commission cannot at this stage accept the sixth amendment on an increase in the additional amount .
It feels that , given the current budgetary situation , it would be difficult to propose such a large amount .
In 1998 , the Commission has proposed an 11 % increase for Socrates over 1997 and that 11 % should be set alongside the increase in internal policies of only 0.5 % .
In other words an 11 % increase for Socrates compared with only 0.5 % for the internal polices , also compared with a mere 6 % increase for education , youth and training policies as a whole .
It is not perfect but the figures show that we want to make progress with Socrates .
Of course , I am aware of the disappointment that this might raise among members of the European Parliament who have fought , along with us , for this programme to have a budget more in line with its future prospects and the expectations of our fellow citizens .
I can , however , assure you that the Commission will pay considerable attention to the outcome of your debates .
Your support for the Community programme in the education fields will have considerable impact on the Socrates programme in its current form and will continue to have effects as we develop our activities beyond 2000 .
This is the time for beginning to devise the next generation of Community programmes and those responsible for that work will largely take your suggestions into account .
I should like to stress how crucial this moment is , since this work is taking place at the same time as the preparation of new financial perspectives .
Your commitment to strengthening the resources of the Socrates programme is a very clear commitment and political message as to your priorities for European action in the future .
I take this message as a very strong sign of encouragement and thank you for that .
Our applause demonstrates how attentively we all listened to you , Commissioner .
Thank you .
The debate is closed .
We now proceed to the vote .
VOTES
Ladies and gentlemen , we now proceed to the votes .
As you can see , the situation is quite difficult .
We have a lot of votes to get through .
The votes contain thirty or so pages of text .


Either we vote until 1.30 p.m. or postpone the Fontaine report until this evening , an idea not opposed by the rapporteur even though it contains a legislative proposal .
Report ( A4-0173 / 97 ) by Mr Sturdy , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural development , on the proposals for 16 Council regulations on the prices for agricultural products and related measures 1997-1998 ( COM ( 97 ) 0089 - C4-0114 / 97 to C4-0129 / 97-97-0087 ( CNS ) to 97 / 0089 ( CNS ) , 97 / 0091 ( CNS ) to 97 / 0094 ( CNS ) - 97 / 0096 ( CNS ) to 97 / 0102 ( CNS ) , 97 / 0905 ( CNS ) and 07 / 0906 ( CNS ) )
Madam President , perhaps I can ease the pressure somewhat with the PPE Group 's motion on the Sturdy report .
On behalf of my group I should like to move a postponement of the vote on this report .
Let me explain the motion in three sentences .
In its vote on the Sturdy report the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted a balanced package on agricultural prices .
The package , however , entails additional costs of around ECU 170m in total .
This , of course , is a problem , not least because of the present budgetary constraints upon the entire Union , ourselves included .
Parallel to these votes we have the ad hoc procedure for the 1998 financial year , and there are signs that this procedure could yield a compensatory amount which would far outweigh the ECU 170m .
To spell out the fiscal neutrality of this measure , we had tabled amendments 31 to 46 - one for each legislative resolution - but these were declared inadmissible for formal reasons .
In view of these circumstances , we should like to propose that the vote on the Sturdy report take place with the report on the ad hoc procedure . This would also ensure that the budgetary integrity of the House is upheld .
I request your consent .
Mr Böge , if I understand you right , you want Rule 131 to be applied .
Does anyone oppose that ?
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for your massive vote in favour of my report .
The day before yesterday , Madam President , Commissioner Fischler declared that he was refusing to take into account 20 of our 22 amendments to his very watered-down proposal .
The two amendments he accepted are purely formal ones .
My initial reaction to this attitude , royally ignoring the proposals we adopted here two and a half years ago in favour of direct aids to save European bee-keeping , was to ask for referral back to the Commission .
But as you have just massively adopted my report , and in order not to waste more time with pointless discussions with the Commission , in the light of its attitude , I turn to the Council of Ministers and hope that it will not ignore our proposals , proposals that the European Parliament has thought long and hard about for 12 years , and will follow them up .
Madam President , it is in this spirit that I ask you to adopt the legislative proposal .
( Applause )
Very well , Mrs Lulling , I will put the legislative resolution to the vote but first would turn to Mrs Cresson to find out whether , by any chance , Commissioner Fischler has done any thinking over night .
Unfortunately , I have not had the opportunity to meet Mr Fischler this morning to find out whether he has done any thinking over night , but if I have any new information , I shall inform you .
No doubt you will pass on to him the displeasure of the European Parliament .
I also , of course , regret the Council 's absence .
I now put the legislative resolution to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I have no amendments on this motion but I do have a request for a correction , moved by Mr Jarzembowski , and an oral amendment to paragraph 4 , to be moved by Mr Cornelissen .

Madam President , we have agreed to do these two things jointly in order to save time .
The correction I request is the deletion in recital D of the reference to the meeting of the Tourism Council , since it never took place .
So that is a technical matter .
If nobody in the House objects , we ask that in point 4 the words ' to take into account ' be replaced by ' to adopt without further delay ' .
That is our oral amendment .
Are there any objections to Mr Jarzembowski 's proposals ?
No .
Then I put the motion for a resolution thus corrected to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I am just taking the floor briefly to point out that the Green Group and many other Members tabled amendments once again this year to mark the fact that , through its farm price support for the beef sector , the European Union is continuing to fund bullfighting .
Since we feel that this is totally at odds with the spirit of the Treaty , and with the sensibilities of most members of European society , we feel that we cannot go on subsidizing such a cruel form of spectacle , which has a coarsening effect on those who go to watch it and is cruel to the animals involved .
For these reasons , the House spoke out against this activity last year , at least in the form of a recital , leaving it to the Commission and the Council to take appropriate action .
Nothing was done .
That is why similar amendments have once again been tabled , and on behalf of the Green Group , I express my support for these , even though the House has unfortunately not seen fit to follow our approach .
We are abstaining from voting on this report because we think that the Common Agricultural Policy must undergo fundamental reforms .
The current tightly regulated agricultural policy is bureaucratic , ineffective and unjustifiably politically divisive .
We hope that agricultural policy will be drastically reformed in 1999 and will do all that we can to see that this happens .
With regard to amendment proposal No. 9 concerning fully grown cattle , it was with great disappointment that I noticed that the European Parliament did not approve the amendment proposal on bull fighting .
I cannot understand how the European Parliament can approve the use of EU agricultural aid for animals which are used in bull fighting .
This mad , barbaric manner of treating animals should not , in my opinion , be given any economic support .
I personally supported the amendment proposals on this without hesitation .
The European Parliament has to consider sixteen regulations setting 1998 agricultural prices .
The background for this annual - but today especially gloomy - agricultural mass can be summed up in three dates :
1999 the single currency and the ' year III package ' on five-year budgetary programming ; 2000 the opening of negotiations at the WTO ; 2002 the beginning of enlargement to the East .
These three dates , three violent upheavals , give the Commission grist to its mill in its accountant 's view of a policy of austerity and rationing .
That explains why 1998 farm prices have been frozen , with a reduction in compensatory aids and a lowering of cereal and oil-seed prices , together with a reduction in set-aside premiums - the 1998 setaside rate was already around 10 % , with a threat of a basic rate of 17.65 % .
This rationing is justified given the levels of overproduction and excessive stocks .
Brussels is showing one of those early 1990s disaster movies , threatening us with stocks of 58 million tonnes of cereals in 2005 , on the pretext of a good harvest of 202 million tonnes in 1996-1997 , 60 million in France alone .
Yet the Commission obviously omits to state that world stocks are at all time lows , only 40 consumption days of stocks .
So much so that , in order to maintain stocks on the European market , a 15 ECU per tonne surcharge is being levied on exports .
It seems that we have gone back to the Ancien Régime , when cereal shortages were arranged to benefit a few people .
In other words the real solution would be to abolish both ordinary and extraordinary set-asides .
The ' prices package ' stems from the draft EAGGF-Guarantee budget .
Whereas the guidelines provided for an expenditure ceiling of 43 , 267 million ECU , the provisional budget for the next year is only 41 , 009 million ECU , a 0.5 % increase over the current agriculture budget .
Most of the Member States are imposing very strict spending limits in order to meet the convergence criteria provided for by the Treaty on European Union and conditioning participation in economic and monetary union .
Farmers are therefore contributing 2.258 million ECU to the achievement of EMU , taking into account only the EAGGF-Guarantee Budget .
The Commission is therefore proposing a prices package that could be summed up by a prices freeze and a reduction in aids ( reduction in monthly premia for intervention prices in cereals , rice and sugar stock recovery ) .
In its proposal the European Commission specifies that the measure proposed in the prices package are to be taken along with its previous proposal to change the payment of aids for arable crops , providing for a 7 % reduction , and a reduction in set-aside payments in terms of land that is not set aside .
The aim is to save 1400 million ECU out of the 1998 agriculture budget .
Instead of this tight financial approach to farming , the European Commission should take a social approach to the countryside for which farming is the backbone .
In terms of social issues , 1996 was disastrous for the farming world : 600 000 farms disappeared , 230 000 full-time jobs were slashed .
In addition to these alarming figures is the fact that farming-related rural jobs were also lost , in the trade , crafts and public services sectors .
Our Group supports the amendments tables and voted in committee .
Mr Tillich , the budget rapporteur general , has said that he intends to reject amendments that would ' cost ' 140 million ECU out of a total budget of 41 , 009 million ECU , the EAGGF-Guarantee budget , for the sake of budgetary rigour and for introducing the single currency .
We hope that the Council will take on board the Commission proposals in order to enable a maximum number of farmers and farm workers to preserve their working tools and their jobs in a Europe where unemployment is increasing at an alarming rate ( now more than 12 million unemployed ) .
Funk report ( A4-0176 / 97 )
We have chosen to vote in accordance with the European Social Democratic Group line and go along with the Commission 's proposal to reduce compensation payments for agricultural crops .
We think that this is the most that can be achieved at the moment .
But our basic opinion is that agricultural subsidies must be reduced much more than is implied in the Commission proposal .
We shall vote for the Funk report since it rejects the bases of the Commission proposal on a system of production aids for certain arable crops .
In fact the Commission was planning to release funds intended to finance the BSE emergency plans by postponing advances for oilseeds and reducing aid for cereals and set-aside - measures which will become permanent and irreversible into the bargain .
The BSE hearing concluded that the financing of the various consequences should be covered by the budget and / or charged to the Member State principally responsible for the spread of the disease .
The Commission hoped to obtain this financing from the savings made from cuts in agricultural aid .
The Funk report earned our vote by rejecting that Commission proposal .
It is right to stress , however , that neither this present Commission proposal nor this report form a suitable backdrop for analysing any possible changes for the future re-shaping of the Common Agricultural Policy , such as the ( welcome as far as we are concerned ) changes to aid for these crops intended , by means of increasing aid to small-scale producers , to boost the lowest incomes , or incomes where there is no alternative to farming or where farmers are working in less-favoured regions .
The BSE crisis led to a drop in beef consumption and a huge drop in beef prices .
Given the responsibility of the European Commission , as highlighted by the report of the ad hoc committee of inquiry , it is normal that the European Union should compensate farmers .
Out of solidarity with farmers , the Commission made an initial proposal and contemplated 3 proposals .
The first presented measures to help the beef sector . The second funded aids by means of markedly reducing aids to large farms and the third measure was structural .
Against the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , the European Parliament has decided only to adopt the measures to help the beef sector and to reject the other proposals .
The Funk report on which we have to give our opinion has therefore had two proposals for regulations cut from it as they were rejected on 17 September 1996 .
Our Group is in favour of the amendments presented and voted on in the Committee on Agriculture , because they deleted or modified certain recitals and articles contrary to French and European farmers ' interests .
The budgetary savings proposed mean it would no longer be possible to compensate aids to beef farmers , but would make it possible to save 2.4 billion ECU from the farming budget ( cf .
Sturdy report on prices package ) .
The I-EDN Group rejects this exclusively budgetary approach which is aimed solely at enabling certain Member States to meet the constraints linked to the introduction of the single currency .
We deplore the fact that the debates have been organized in such a way that the Sturdy and Funk reports were debated together and thereby linked by budgetary considerations .
Aids to farmers have been financed thanks to an under-estimate of prices and aids , of over 1 billion ECU , and we cannot accept the 12.2 % reduction in the level of beef aids as provided for in the preliminary draft budget for 1998 .
Many farms are now in a difficult situation and we need an agricultural policy that can help the countryside recover rather than a budgetary restriction budget .
Farmers are expected not to benefit from the introduction of the single currency if ever it happens . That would be especially unfair since they are funding its introduction .
Baldarelli report ( A4-0189 / 97 )
We are abstaining in the vote on this report because we think that the Common Agricultural Policy must undergo fundamental reforms .
The current tightly regulated agricultural policy is bureaucratic , ineffective and unjustifiably politically divisive .
We hope that agricultural policy will be drastically reformed in 1999 and will do all that we can to see that this happens .
The Commission was hoping , by means of a proposed amendment to Regulation 1765 / 92 , to introduce maximum guaranteed areas ( MGAs ) for the production of durum wheat which , in the case of Portugal , was only 35 000 ha .
The Baldarelli report proposes that the MGA should be increased in Portugal to 90 000 ha , which is more than the traditional production area of approximately 70 000 ha , whilst still below the potential production area ( 100 000 ha ) .
The amendment is much more positive than the Commission 's proposal .
In addition the Baldarelli report allows for a 5 % margin for excess in relation to the MGAs intended as an incentive to bring young people into farming .
That is why we support it .
Before outlining the I-EDN Group 's position , it should be recalled that the production of durum wheat was badly handled by the 1992 CAP .
European durum wheat production areas dropped by 12 % between 1991 and 1992 ( two year average ) and in 1995-96 because of set-aside and the lack of support in non-traditional durum wheat areas .
Production plummeted by 35 % over the same period because yield drops were added to surface area reductions .
Climatic conditions , lower production in non-traditional areas with higher yields and ' extensification ' linked to a high level of direct aid in the product / ha of traditional areas are the main reasons for the drop in European cropping .
The European Union went from being a net exporter of 2 million tonnes of semolina and pasta to having a net deficit .
Our amendments adopted in committee should make it easier to make the machinery for managing individual references in traditional areas more flexible , which should increase the area effectively in production and should also increase ceilings of areas benefiting from reduced aid in non-traditional areas . That should ensure supply safety for the European processing industries , especially in northern France .
The inter-regional approach that we have proposed should satisfy French producers in traditional areas and non-traditional areas , while limiting European imports of durum wheat from non-Community countries .
In order for aids to be put to good use in the traditional areas of southern Europe and to bring about a good qualitative adaptation of durum wheat to the needs of user companies , it is vital to demand quality seed .
On that specific point , we have also proposed an amendment that was also adopted in committee and which would make it possible to ensure the direct production of certified seed by producer associations .
Old traditional varieties must be preserved - they have always been used regionally - in particular to preserve biodiversity .
Generally speaking , the use of quality seed should favour the development of the durum wheat seed industry .
Resolution on set-asides
For obvious reasons , so that farmers can decide how to prepare their soil for sowing , they must know by 30 June each year the set-aside rate for the following year .
They have to organize their soil plans and order the various products - seed , fertilizers , pesticides , etc .
That is why our Group supports the oral question put by the Committee on Agriculture , and has co-signed the joint motion for a resolution .
Our Group has also tabled two major amendments aimed at limiting the compulsory set-aside rate to 5 % and to abolish the extraordinary set-aside rate in the case of excess area use during a given year .
I am very happy to see that the European Parliament has followed our Group 's initiative and adopted by a clear majority the limit on setasides to 5 % as we proposed .
Worldwide , a rapid analysis of the year to be decided by 30 June shows that forecasts of production and prices are weakened by the facts .
On 25 July 1996 , the International Cereals Council forecast a world harvest of 560 million tonnes and it turned out to be 580 million tonnes .
The European Union had to revise its forecast upwards by 7 million tonnes .
All the experts had predicted a steady drop in world cereal production from this Spring onwards .
In fact , world prices have increased considerably and the Commission was obliged to set an export tax , to guarantee internal supplies in the European Union as of 14 May .
This export tax , set by the Commission , is 15 ECU per tonne on wheat , durum wheat flour and semolina , 20 ECU per tonne on wheat flour and semolina and 10 ECU per tonne on durum wheat .
It is highly regrettable that the Commission should not only impose this export tax but also add further obstacles to cereal exports .
Like exporters we regret the fact that every time we approach zero repayment and head towards the tax , Brussels blocks exports and submits exporters to special certificates , which is not dissuasive .
In this specific case , exporters do not know in advance whether Brussels will make a repayment or impose a tax .
It is certain that when repayments apply they will not receive any money whereas when taxes are imposed they are definitely levied .
In early May the ICC - International Cereals Council - reduced from 583 to 578 million tonnes its forecast for the world wheat harvest in 1997 .
The drought is going to limit European Union production while the frosts in Kansas cut winter wheat production there by 3 million tonnes and floods in Dakota delayed spring sowings .
It is therefore likely that world stocks will be further reduced and prices will go up again .
Against this general background of higher world demand for cereals and the prospects of a poorer harvest in the northern hemisphere in 1997 , we must have the lowest possible set-aside rate and limit the ceiling to 5 % and no more this coming year .
It is vital for farmers , whose prime function is to produce farm products , not to have to bear a higher rate than 5 % against a world context of greater demand and smaller stocks .
Pack report ( A4-0188 / 97 )
. ( DA ) One of the aims of the SOCRATES Programme is to promote the ' European dimension ' in education , while at the same time it represents a ' clear contribution to achieving the objective set out in Article 126 of the Treaty ' , as the report puts it .
The so-called European dimension is an attempt to ' EU-ify ' training courses , heedless of the fact that there is a world outside the EU to which pupils or students might have a particular interest in devoting their efforts .
The concern is to introduce education in EU history and EU culture , instead of education in European history and European culture or , for that matter , world history and cultures in other parts of the world .
We feel that this narrowing of the perspective is dangerous and mistaken . We have therefore chosen to vote against the Pack report on the SOCRATES Programme .
Stockmann report ( A4-0130 / 97 )
For several years , the European Community has been looking into the promotion of the combined transport of goods , the only alternative to jammed roads and the only environmentfriendly solution .
In 1992 , the PACT programme on pilot actions for combined transport , came into effect for 5 years .
It had a fairly modest budget and funded feasibility studies and direct measures .
This programme has now been promoted to regulation rank and I welcome that .
A more operational approach has now been taken on project eligibility .
The Member States will play a filtering role for presenting financial competitions .
That means that a given region will have its own logic for major projects .
On the same lines , it would have been desirable to introduce complementarity into the financial contribution , which might also have drawn funds from other sources , such as the ERDF or the R & D framework programme .
Recognizing the work of my colleague , the rapporteur , I should like to go along with his thoughts on the budgetary amount earmarked for this future regulation - 35 million ECU over 6 years - and wonder about the real political motivation behind the promotion of this type of transport .
The development of intermodal transport must be one of the priorities of a European transport policy .
Intermodality offers an interesting solution based on replacing the road-only approach , enhancing the use of other types of transport whose infrastructures and capacities are sometimes underused .
It is now urgent to revitalize railways in Europe and all forms of navigation , especially short sea routes or rivers .
The expansion of combined transport lies at the heart of the redeployment process and the new development of transport .
In order to strike this new balance , the Member States need a strong incentive from the European Union since equal competition conditions are needed for each type of transport .
For that , the Member States need aid to improve the economic competitiveness of sea , river and rail transport .
That is why I came out in favour of the Stockmann report on the granting of Community financial support to actions on combined goods transport .
The development of the PACT programme heads in that direction and I welcome , in particular , in the proposal for a Council regulation , the implementation of arrangements for :
improving the competitiveness of combined transport in terms of prices and service quality vis-à-vis road transport ; -promoting high technology in the combined transport sector ; -improving access for combined transport companies , regardless of their size.These arrangements prefer innovative and practical measures to the launch of prior studies .
Another very important element are the PACT pilot actions launched since 1992 . They are being extended and expanded as part of a genuine five-year programme as of 1997 .
This programming is accompanied by an increase in the resources in the PACT budget to 35 million ECU over six years .
In the coming years , these resources must be further increased .
I shall pay particular attention to this myself in the course of the work of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Lulling report ( A4-0191 / 97 )
Apiculture is an important business .
It takes place on a decentralised basis throughout Europe .
It is of particular importance to the local economy .
The EU 's agricultural policy must be reformed .
The many types of aid must be reduced together with the regulations and subsidies associated with them .
From this perspective it is wrong to introduce new subsidy and regulatory systems for another type of agriculture .
Instead , we should increase co-operation in research , on the environment , on technical aid and on pests .
This should take place primarily via existing branch organisations .
The crumbs left over from the budget proposed by the Council regulation for honey marketing and technical aid to health action of quality improvement bring the matter before a European Parliament which , on 20 January 1995 , already drew attention to the difficult situation facing the European bee-keeping industry .
European bee-keepers are disappearing - there are only 3000 full time bee-keepers left in France - yet 126 000 tonnes are imported at around 7 francw per kilo when it costs our bee-keepers 14 francs just to produce it .
That is unfair and I am not even speaking of the fraud of producing honey by feeding bees with maize or rice syrups .
Failure to respect Community preference , profiting Chinese honey that now accounts for 30 % of world production or Mexican or Argentine honeys , requires compensation in the form of a premium to make up for that situation .
Bill Clinton 's United States have not thought twice : they have imposed a 151 % tax to protect their honey .
We are the world 's leading importer of honey .
The European Parliament also asked for a pollination premium justified by the work done by bees , especially in pollinating fruit-trees . One bee can work on 2700 hectares , a radius of 5 km .
Instead of these two premia , which are justified in a fifteen member European Union where 50 % of the honey marketed in the world is imported , 80 000 tonnes imported into Germany and 10 000 tonnes imported into France , the European Commission is only granting a budgetary credit of 15 million ECU , 11.6 million for combating varroa .
For a country like France , that means 14 million francs in aid , 10 francs per hive ( there are 1 434 000 ) .
That is not enough to balance the books of the 100 000 part-time and full-time bee-keepers in the country who produce 30 000 tonnes , 25 % of all Community production , 3 % of worldwide production .
No !
The European Commission really does not like bees , or at least European bees .
The European Parliament approved unanimously , in its resolution of 20 January 1995 on the Commission 's communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the situation of European bee-keeping , the setting up of certain direct support measures for honey production ( pollination premium , the payment of a compensatory premium for loss of income due to the lack of Community preference ) .
Despite these important , necessary proposals for the survival of European and French bee-keeping , the Commission is now only proposing a few one-off measures , to pacify its conscience .
It plans to offer technical assistance to bee-keepers to improve the quality of honey production , to fight to Varroa and linked diseases , to improve transhumance and to set up honey analysis laboratories .
None of the measures proposed by the Commission meets the economic difficulties facing bee-keepers .
Production costs are regularly rising , the number of hive constantly dropping and imports from non-Community countries rocketing .
Our Group is in favour of the 22 amendments adopted in committee and we very much regret the statements by Commissioner Fischler refusing nearly all those amendments , apart form too harmless ones .
For example , in order to mobilize all financial provisions in favour of positive actions for the bee-keeping industry , we demand that the investment needed to fight zoonoses , such as varroa , should be made part of the European Union 's veterinary policy .
The Commission must propose a promotion policy , but above all a policy for introducing common marketing standards for Community and imported honey .
Give the systematically obstructive attitude show by the Commission , our Group turns to the Council for its wisdom and asks it quite firmly to take the initiative and introduce effective measures to help a trade that is now threatened by ageing and a product that plays a vital ecological role .
If there were no more bees , most plants would no longer be pollinated .
That would lead to a real ecological disaster , which would cost far more than the Lulling report and its proposals .
Joint resolution on tourism ( B4-0458 / 97 )
Those of us who have for years , since the beginning of this legislature , been insisting against hell and high water on the need to include tourism in a chapter of its own in the revised Treaty are once again asking for that to be done , as Mr Papoutsis also did when he fist appeared before the European Parliament , before his investiture .
A joint amendment tabled by myself and Méndez de Vigo introduced that request to the Bourlanges-Martin report on the IGC , whereas many of those who have expressed astonishment today at the absence of tourism from the revised Treaty then voted against it ...
Fortunately , only wise men correct their mistakes and we hope that the new Treaty will now do justice to one of Europe 's major industries , namely tourism .
I am of the firm opinion that there is no need for EU regulation of the tourist sector in the EU Treaty .
In line with the principle of subsidiarity , it is up to each country to make decisions for this sector .
Of course , tourism is of great significance for employment but I think that it is important that these issues are determined at a local or regional level .
So I have voted against this resolution .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on tourism or the motion for a resolution on tourism by Mr Simpson on behalf of the PSE Group .
The motions contain a number of positive elements .
There is a need for a policy on tourism in the EU .
A tourism policy geared to quality and competitiveness can contribute to growth and employment in the EU .
Tourism policy calls for a high degree of coordination in the Commission , and the focus should be on a decision-making process with maximum transparency , but tourism policy should not have its own legal basis in the Treaty .
Tourism policy is such a broad area that giving it its own legal basis would open up the possibility of bringing in much too wide a range of concerns under this legal basis .
Tourism covers such a diversity of fields that an individual legal basis would not be practicable .
Spencer report ( A4-0193 / 97 )
For the most part this is a good report .
But we do not think that the EU and the WEU should be integrated .
Nor do we think that majority voting should be used generally for issues of common security and foreign policy .
Allowances must always be made for a Member State to veto an issue which is considered a vital security matter for the State concerned .
So we have voted against the text in points 15 and 19 .
Federalist thought in terms of European external policy can be summed by a few simple phrases , repeated ad nauseam for years now , in every tone and every form : ' If Europe had not been powerless , Yugoslavia could have been avoided .
Therefore , in the future , Europe must be able to speak with one voice abroad , determining its positions by majority voting ' .
Yet we have never been told what more Europe could have done , in practical terms , in the case of Yugoslavia , if it had been united .
For good reasons : the policy conducted by the Member States was in the end a fairly wise one .
I am not even sure , as it happens , whether the European Union , by wishing to determine a single European position at all costs , might not have transported the conflict within its midst , which would of course have delayed our rescue operation as we would first of all had to resolve the differences between us !
Let us hope that they would not have worsened too much because then we would have had two conflicts to deal with instead of one , not that far fetched when you consider the history of our continent this century .
So , in the end , it is just as well - felix culpa - that we avoided that because of our powerlessness !
It is all the more curious that nobody calls into question the federalist dogma that we have before us , every day , the results of that system in a particular area , that of our external economic relations .
The European Union speaks with one voice , the Commission 's , and the Council decides , by majority voting , i.e. the exact arrangement sought by the federalists .
Yet that system does not work .
Worse still , by reducing our policies to the lowest common denominator , weakening the Council vis-à-vis the free trade initiatives of the Commission , it is the main culprit behind our successive back-offs in international trade negotiations and contributes to the devastating unemployment now destroying Europe .
Given the results of that system , should that system really be extended to the rest of our external relations ?
I conclude , for my part , by saying that it is quite necessary , for the very good of Europe , that States maintain their national foreign policies .
If our interest and aims coincide on a given point - and I hope that that will often happen - then of course we can work together .
Nothing is more legitimate than that .
I would only recall the example of the French-speaking countries : how can you believe for one moment that if we had a single European foreign policy that the interests of the French-speaking community in the world would be defended ?
How can you believe for one moment that , with a foreign policy determined by majority voting , that the special relationship between France and Quebec would have any weight compared with so-called ' global ' European interests ?
Anyone with any doubts about that should refer to the Euro-Canadian declaration signed last year .
As a consequence , we demand with insistence that the Heads of State and Government firmly stick to a European foreign policy that expresses an alliance of sovereign states .
That means in particular that : 1. we must maintain decisions by unanimity on all questions of principle , with the possibility of specifying , if we want , that abstentions cannot prevent decisions from being taken ; 2. if we agree to take decisions by majority on secondary points , we must reassert , at the same time , the Luxembourg compromise as clearly and simply as possible , without any procedural complexity ; 3. we must refuse inclusion in the Community budget of any operational spending on a common foreign policy , or we shall be committing ourselves to federalism .
The cost of these actions must be shared by those States taking part , according to a yet to be determined coefficient , such as GDP ; 4. we should refuse to grant the European Union legal personality as that would be used to support the idea that there can be a European foreign policy different to that of the States .
It would also be used by the Commission to propel itself on to the international arena , and it would explain that it should represent the European Union for the purpose of reaching legal agreements ; 5. we must reform the procedure of international trade negotiations by restoring the Council 's authority over the Commission 's ; in particular we must not accept the inclusion of negotiations on services and intellectual property in Community processes as that would mean that national parliaments would no longer have anything to say , anything to ratify , especially when it comes to international trade .
That prospect seems quite repellant to us and we wonder how it can even be included in the preparatory documents for the Amsterdam European Council .
. ( DA ) We cannot support this report for several reasons .
We do not share the rapporteur 's burning desire to create a common foreign and security policy and hence also his criticism of its lack of effectiveness .
The implementation of a common foreign and security policy will require an EU capable of acting , with a common foreign minister , common defence and a common attitude to third countries .
We do not want this .
The consensus in the Nordic countries specifically is not in favour of the creation of a new military superpower in Europe , on the contrary .
And the lack of action compared with Council declarations , which the rapporteur deplores , is another sign that neither the Member State representatives on the Council nor the populations of those countries are prepared to endorse a common political profile on foreign policy and security matters .
This is yet another example of the eagerness of this Parliament to move more rapidly towards a United States of Europe than the populations of the EU Member States wish .
We voted against the Spencer report because , instead of being the expected clarification exercise , it merely took the same old ideological approach as its predecessors .
It would , however , have been vital to state that the European Union 's external action is now , first and foremost , the projection and defence of its own policies : a common trade policy ; a common agricultural policy ; a common fisheries policy , etc .
It is , therefore , both dangerous and artificial to separate the external economic action from a CFSP that would have a ' purely ' foreign policy scope .
On the contrary , we should bring these two inseparable aspects together under the Council 's authority , which should very strictly determine all trade negotiations to which the Union is party .
External economic defence is a prerequisite for any CFSP .
If the European Union is incapable of defending its members ' common trading interests energetically vis-à-vis their external partners , it is useless going any further and speaking of a common external policy .
It would also have been vital to specify , secondly , that a foreign policy is appreciated in terms of its effective influence on the ground .
A common policy whose only object is to seek identical positions systematically on all subjects , without any concern for their operational character , would not deserve the name of CFSP .
It would lead to minimalist consensuses making the European positions thus expressed quite insignificant .
We can see the derisory and pernicious nature of all the resolutions blithely adopted by the European Parliament on every subject of foreign policy under the sun where the absence of professionalism vies with the lack of political sense .
We should head in the opposite direction , relying on the great diplomatic traditions of the Member States which offers a precious capital for the Union as a whole .
We should not try and build a CFSP that demobilizes , demotivates or amputates national diplomacy : they are now the special channel of expression for European interests in the international arena .
We must also remain strictly attached to the principle of unanimity in terms of foreign and defence policy .
The aim sought by the Member States is that of a common external policy , not a majority external policy .
It is unthinkable that a State can be forced into a minority in areas as sensitive as foreign and defence policies .
We really must include the spirit of the Luxembourg compromise in the treaties .
To apply the classic communitarization approach to the vital area of foreign and defence policies would shut Europe into a particularly dangerous cul-de-sac .
Neyts-Uyttebroeck report ( A4-0179 / 97 )
The report gives a good analysis of the problem of democratic control over EU institutions .
For the most part the report is good but there are two points which I cannot agree with .
First , it can be said that political debate in the EU Member States is concerned with the activities of the respective national governments .
It is the respective National Parliaments which have the greatest legitimacy dependent , in some respects , on the turn out in elections .
There are no specific ' European issues ' which may be separated from the National debate and raised up to a ' European level ' .
The growth of political debate at a European level is further complicated by the fact that there is no common media and because language , tradition , culture and political concepts differ so much between the Member States .
An enlargement Eastwards will also bring with it serious problems with regard to the democratic representation of the European Parliament .
How is it possible for a European Parliament with 700 Members to properly represent approximately 500 million citizens , with all the different political groupings , different social groups and linguistic minorities .
How , for example , can they achieve a reasonable age-spread which corresponds with the citizens of the EU .
It is our conclusion that it is the opinions and controls of national parliaments which must be strengthened within EU co-operation , not the European Parliament .
The second point concerns points 10 and 11 in the report proposal where it is proposed that the European Parliament 's co-decision procedures in the budget sector should be broadened by removing the difference between obligatory and non-obligatory tasks .
It is our view that the EU budget for agriculture and regional policies for example , should be determined by means of negotiation between the EU Member States , represented by their respective governments .
EU co-operation must be built on co-operation between independent states not through supranational government by a federal Parliament .
We are abstaining in the final vote on this report for the above mentioned reasons despite the fact that the report does contain a number of good proposals .
The role of the national parliaments is a fundamental criterion of the type of Europe that we want .
In a Europe of nations , the national parliament is the higher assembly which may delegate certain precise powers to the European Parliament , each time that it ratifies a modification of the Treaty .
In a federal Europe , on the contrary the European Parliament would be the higher assembly , and national parliaments would only retain local and subordinate powers .
Today , we are still in theory in the former system , but the quantity of powers delegated to the European level has become so great that we would only need a slight push to topple over into the second .
That shows the extent of the tactical skills , subtlety and even seduction that the European federalists are obliged to deploy if they are to succeed in making national parliaments give up critical powers of their own accord .
The Neyts-Uyttebroeck report that we are examining today will not disappoint them since it manoeuvres with finesse , in an endeavour to disarm preventive actions by stating , for example , that the national parliaments and European Parliament should no longer quarrel or compete with each other , but on the contrary should complement each other in the greatest harmony .
It is a little more up front , however , when it says what that complementarity should actually consist of : the European Parliament should control the Community institutions , and the national parliaments should only control their respective governments .
The main defect of this presentation is obviously deliberate and it leaves out the essential point : the two orders are not just complementary but there is also a hierarchy .
The national parliaments do control the national level , but their duty , in ratifying the Treaty , is also to determine the rules of the European game and general relations between the two levels .
The European Parliament , albeit elected by universal suffrage , never enjoys any powers other than those delegated to it by the different nations and their parliaments .
These questions are not theoretical .
If Europe is now a victim of disillusionment and is suffering from the so-called democratic deficit , it is because too much ground has been given to the federalist conception of it , depriving the ordinary people of their natural framework of expression , their national institutions without that being replaced by a living participation in a European democracy .
That leads to the total opposition between our proposals and those of the federalists ; they want to subordinate the national parliaments and we want to revitalize them ; they want Brussels to control the nations ; we want the nations to control Brussels .
It is not surprising in those conditions that the IGC , where there is a majority of governments in favour of the federalist approach , has only been willing to throw some crumbs to the national parliaments ; the ' right ' to be informed in good time of the Commission 's legislative proposals ; the ' right ' to the six-monthly conference bringing together their representatives ( COSAC ) , to submit to the attention of the Union institutions suggestions , modestly entitled ' contributions ' , in particular in the areas of the third pillar or subsidiarity .
And that is all .
The NeytsUyttebroeck report , for its part , says hardly any more .
These microscopic proposals reflect very well the federalist spirit according to which the national parliaments should possess barely more than the right to information or make the odd suggestion when it comes to European matters .
That is not our opinion .
The Europe of Nations Group wishes to restore the national parliaments ' prime role , in a framework of a Europe founded on national democracies .
In such an association of nations , Brussels would have no intrinsic superiority .
On the contrary , the national parliaments , when voting every year for their Community contribution , would verify whether the Brussels instrument is rendering them a good service and would reform it if not .
Furthermore , the national parliaments , representing the peoples , should be the ultimate judges of the proper employment of the delegated powers ; they should retain a right of veto over questions of subsidiarity and a right to ratify the judgments of the European Court of Justice , according to a procedure to be determined when these decisions lead to an extension of the delegated powers .
In those areas where European cooperation should be strengthened , without communitarization being desirable , however , the national parliaments should be able to organize a network to take faster decisions than according to the classic intergovernmental procedures .
For example , it might be possible to imagine ' European days ' for national parliaments , when those assemblies , meeting in their respective capitals , would debate the same subjects at the same time .
This type of revitalization of national parliamentary controls appears to us , at this stage , to be vital for the survival of a genuinely democratic Europe .
There are parts of the report which we agree with .
We particularly refer to the analysis section where it states , for example , that the transfer of decision making competence to the EU has not been accompanied by a corresponding increase in the powers of national parliaments .
We also refer to the emphasis on openness in the legislative work of the Council , public access to documents , better minimum time limits for EU legislative documents and so on .
The report is partially an acknowledgement of the importance of national parliaments .
Despite difficulties and shortcomings in the national parliamentary system it is here that democratic legitimacy develops .
It is only at a national level that citizens with the help of the ballot paper can demand accountability from their elected representatives and can elect new members who , in their turn , can institute new laws .
The European Parliament will continue to be lacking in such legitimacy for the foreseeable future .
In Sweden , for example , only half the number of citizens participated in the election to the European Parliament compared to the national election .
The lack of a common language and common media in the Union restricts the opportunities for political and democratic dialogue before a decision is taken .
The gulf between elector and elected will increase further as the EU expands .
Broad swathes of the population will be completely unrepresented but still subject to the legislative powers of the Union .
This can lead to high levels of tension .
But , faced with these problems , the report does not come up with an answer .
Instead it repeats the traditional proposals from the Parliamentary majority of increased power for their own institutions , despite the obvious lack of popular and democratic legitimacy .
But there are alternative solutions .
Such a contribution containing 23 points was presented by critics of the Scandinavian Union in the David Group when the report by Martin-Bourlange was accepted on 23 May 1995 .
It was based on giving national parliaments real power , for example , and the right to take the initiative in drawing up laws , and on increasing the influence of groups and popular movements rather than bureaucrats and lobbyists .
Despite the serious criticism above , we think that there are sections in the report which could start the thought process required to find a solution to the Union 's fundamental democratic dilemma .
So we have decided to abstain in the final vote .
The report contains a good analysis of the ' democratic deficiency ' in the EU .
It also contains a number of good concrete proposals for strengthening the role of the National Parliaments .
But the fundamental problem concerning the lack of legitimacy for the EU and the European Parliament ought to have been developed further .
The report should have been formally sent to national parliaments with a request for comments within a defined period of time before being discussed by the European Parliament .
The report is a move in the right direction , so I have voted for it .
McMillan-Scott report ( A4-0198 / 97 )
China , the world 's biggest demographic power , for a long time totally inwardlooking , is now being called upon to play a leading role in the international arena .
Relations between the European Union and China cover areas as varied as cultural exchanges , the development of trade relations and the questions of security and political stability in south-east Asia .
The Europe of Nations Group welcomes , in particular , the fact that China has now signed up to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty .
The McMillan-Scott report rightly emphasizes the need to deepen interparliamentary relations between Europe and China in order to achieve greater mutual understanding .
Our Group can only welcome the desire to pursue and extend European human resource development programmes in China , including one action in the field of legal cooperation .
This desire for cooperation could also be expressed in areas where European standards are a universal reference : the respect of environmental standards , information technology , law , insurance and banking .
Quite rightly , the report notes that economic relations should go hand-in-hand with a desire to remedy environmental deterioration , the result of booming industry in the country .
Trading issues are closely linked to the question of the respect of human dignity .
That respect must be guaranteed even if it is not for us to import into China our model of political and social organisation .
The return of Hong Kong and Macau to China must take place in the respect of the political , social and economic freedoms that characterize the status of those territories and the political traditions to be found there .
Despite the demand for an inquiry made by the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs to the Commission , the report says nothing about the unfair competition imposed on European companies by Chinese companies using millions of badly paid or even unpaid workers to produce at very low costs .
The question of dumping practices is extremely important here : the existence of these practices can be deduced from a comparison between the normal value of products and their export prices towards the European Union , which are far lower ; that is prejudicial for European producers , as shown by an increase in imports from China , the increase in the country 's European market share and their low prices which have seriously affected the financial situation facing Community industry .
The dumping margin reached 110 % on persulphates for the textile and chemical industries in 1995 which , at the time , obliged the Commission to set a provisional anti-dumping levy of 83.3 % .
The same problem arose with shoes with textile uppers , video tapes , handbags , bicycles , ring-binders , etc . These measures have still not put a stop to dumping .
European efforts should also be directed towards improving the way in which the Chinese services market is opening up , in particular concerning financial and banking services , insurance , press and information agencies , etc .
In this area China should be made to apply the same transparency and constraints as those imposed on WTO member states .
Proper thought can only be given to China 's joining the WTO once these urgent problems have been settled .
The rapporteur , Mr McMillan-Scott , is to be congratulated on the way in which he has drawn together the prevailing views in the European Parliament to produce a most interesting blueprint for a European policy towards China .
The report reflects Parliament 's criticisms regarding China 's human rights record , as well as its development towards a free market and its measures to protect the environment .
It expresses in the clearest possible terms Parliament 's demands that the freedom and rights of Hong Kong and Macau should be respected .
Parliament continues to feel concern at the occupation of Tibet , and at the strained relations with Taiwan .
To repeat , the rapporteur has set out some useful guidelines for the Union 's future policy in this field .
Burenstam Linder report ( A4-0196 / 97 )
This is a good report .
We would just like to clarify Amendment No. 5 .
We think it is obvious that the European Union should be open to every European country , and that includes Russia as well .
But we do not think this report is the place for such comment and have , therefore , voted against the proposal , although we essentially agree with this view .
Another issue which we do not think belongs in this report is the question of the Baltic States ' potential membership of NATO .
This report concerns the relationship between the European Union and the Baltic Sea region and not the position that this region has with regard to the expansion of the NATO military alliance .
. ( DA ) The Commission 's Baltic Sea Initiative , put forward at the Baltic Sea States Summit in Visby , does not contain sufficient new initiatives for the Baltic Sea Region , which possesses considerable potential for political and economic development .
We therefore welcome the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy on the Commission communication , in which the committee insists on the need for the implementation of policies on reforms , growth , integration and stability in the region .
The three Baltic States have finally recovered their sovereignty and freedoms after fifty years of Soviet occupation .
Today , nobody denies these three countries ' natural vocation to enter the European Union .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations can only approve the initiative described by Mr Burenstam Linder , to step up cooperation links with the Baltic States and the rest of the Baltic world .
The challenges of this cooperation are many since they concern cultural exchanges , research , the economic development of countries weakened by fifty years of imposed communism , the fight against organised crime and the consolidation of the political stability of this region of Europe .
We are particularly sensitive to the Commission 's concern and those of this report to repair the damage to the environment by fighting mass pollution and managing the difficult problem of nuclear power stations .
We go along with the demand for an inventory of nuclear waste and other sources of radiation in the region .
We wish to highlight the need for practical and effective cooperation respecting freedom - so dearly bought - in those countries .
This cooperation , freed of the pressures of supra-nationality , must conserve its effectiveness throughout the process of accession about to be embarked upon .
Encouraging the Baltic States to carry out the reforms needed for their integration into the European Union is laudable but nevertheless insufficient .
It is vital for the European Union to respond to the high hopes of the peoples of eastern Europe with a language that is far more encouraging than convergence criteria and simple incitations .
This is the vital challenge facing the IGC and history will judge us by our success or failure .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions :
( B4-0472 / 97 ) by Mr Gasóliba i Böhm and Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the threats to the free movement of agricultural products in the Union ; - ( B4-0488 / 97 ) by Mr Galeote Quecedo and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the restriction of the internal market caused by acts of vandalism in France against food products from Spain ; - ( B4-0500 / 97 ) by Mr Novo Belenguer and Mr González Triviño , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the restriction by French farmers of the free movement of Spanish goods in the European Union ; - ( B4-0507 / 97 ) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the V Group , on attacks on Spanish fruit lorries in France ; - ( B4-0544 / 97 ) by Mr Jové Peres and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the free movement of goods in the European Union ; - ( B4-0558 / 97 ) by Mr Colino Salamanca and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the free movement of fruit and vegetable products in the European Union .
Madam President , the repeated attacks by groups of French farmers persistently blocking the free movement of goods , a basic principle of the Union , has reached a situation calling for energetic action , as it has not only threatened lorry drivers physically but has actually threatened their lives .
Neither the persistence of these attacks nor the laisser-faire attitude of the French authorities is comprehensible .
Nor can we understand how , after years of transgressions , the Commission and the Council have failed to find an appropriate means of dealing with this situation .
Images of the attacks are the best school for converting those who believe in the European Union into sceptics .
While we are working to deepen the Union , others are savagely boycotting it .
That is why I am demanding firm and energetic action by the French authorities - and let us see if there is a change - to prevent any further attacks .
Both the Commission and the Council must act promptly , urgently and efficiently to have the principle of the free movement of goods respected and avoid any further transgression , which is intolerable in any civilized society , and we think that the European Union is and should be a civilized society .
Madam President , this week Commissioner Monti has had the opportunity to discuss on repeated occasions the internal market action plan that he plans to present at the European Council in Amsterdam , but the day before yesterday there was a hearing at the Court of Justice on a case presented by the Commission against France , on actions that took place in 1995 and that country 's failure to take appropriate measures to avoid violent acts on its territory against fruit and vegetables from other Member States , thereby infringing the provisions regulating farming COMs and Article 30 of the Treaty .
This is a continuous infraction that has been going on for more than 10 years .
The incidents concerned are the subject of this request , but similar events have taken place in 1996 and this year , since the violent protestors want to break up the single market .
It is clear that we cannot speak of completing or achieving the single market if one of its main planks , the free movement of goods , is not being carried out .
It is vital to introduce into the reformed Treaty the possibility for the Commission to impose immediate financial penalties on Member States , institutions or sector representatives who break the rule on the freedom of circulation .
We cannot make progress if we have the feeling that these people are getting away with it and our public opinion will not accept that .
Madam President , what use is it for each of the members concerned to speak out for one or two minutes on the subject of these attacks on the free movement of goods ?
What use is it for the European Parliament to manifest its revulsion , as does the Committee of the Regions , as do the regional parliaments , as do the national parliaments of the Member States , and even town halls across the continent ?
I think that we must make an effort to overcome the testimonial value of that revulsion and send a message in two directions .
On one hand , to the Governments , letting them know that this cannot be tolerated or be repeated and , on the other , to the ordinary people , so that they can see how seriously the European authorities and institutions are taking this as they are unwilling to allow these attacks to go on , as they have done now for fifteen years , against farmers , transporters , property and people in general .
It is a problem that needs to be dealt with very seriously because there are now threats to block other borders and take revenge elsewhere .
I am still sincerely confident that the European Parliament 's opinions are not just paying lip-service to our revulsion and that the Commission and the Council as a result will act fairly , energetically and rapidly , to put an end to these attacks which are repeated , year after year , in spite of the lamentable passivity of the Commission , the Council and above all every French Government .
Madam President , if free trade and the internal market mean that anyone can dump his surpluses , his overproduction , the fruits of his rationalization , cheap labour and chemical fertilizers , on other countries , this selfsame problem will keep coming back to haunt us .
Overturning lorries will not help . Nor will sanctions achieve very much .
We must rather embark upon a development in which local produce is marketed regionally , with producers catering for their own population , on the basis of the slogans we created : ' Our internal market is our local weekly market ' or , if you prefer , ' A region needs many internal markets ' .
If we can achieve a stable relationship here between producers and consumers , we can then produce class instead of mass ; we can then supply strawberries that people will enjoy .
I , at any rate , need have no fear that the strawberries we grow at home will be supplanted by any Spanish or French strawberries , because these strawberries are bought by my consumers and are bought at a fair and reasonable price , and I can tell you , Madam President , that they taste good - I shall bring you one sometime .
Madam President , one of the regions suffering most from these unjustifiable attacks on Spanish lorries carrying fruit and vegetables is Murcia , for three reasons : the number of its lorries and drivers , the size of its fruit and vegetables production and because exports and marketing are a major activity in the region .
This is therefore having negative effects on our region .
That is why we must defend at all costs the wealth of a large part of Spain , all of Spain , all of Europe , so that they can produce , and therefore two issues seem vital to us :
The first is to guarantee , in the European Parliament and the Commission , that appropriate compensation is paid for the direct and indirect consequences - loss of goods - for what has happened in France and should never happen again .
The second question - and I think this is dealing with the problem in depth rather than tickling the surface - is to tackle the cause of all these events .
We have to acknowledge that something is wrong with the CAP when this type of event takes place and we should get to the heart of the matter , as I said earlier , and try to reform the CAP properly and also overhaul the fruit and vegetable COM so that all Europeans - French , Spanish and Italians - see Europe as our common homeland , something in which we are all involved , including the GUE / NGL Group , and so that the European Union serves all Europeans , workers and farmers alike , so that Europe is a place of solidarity and not the opposite .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is like a vicious circle . Just one year on and the European Parliament is again denouncing attacks on Spanish lorries and goods in France , attacks on people , because those lorries do not drive themselves but are driven by Community citizens , attacked directly by other Community citizens , just as we are about to share the same currency , no less .
One more year and we are attacking this serious attack on a basic principle of European construction , the free movement of people and goods .
Someone just said that the basic problem has to be discussed here and it is simply a matter of whether or not we accept the free movement of people and goods in the European Union .
Something as simple as to accept or reject the fact that there is a single market .
Who is going to pay for the damage and the loss of markets , and how is it , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , representative of the Commission , that once again we are witnessing manifest passivity by those who should be stopping these criminal acts - since they are criminal acts , they are not purely administrative acts .
A year ago , more or less to the day , I said that I wanted to know one name of someone who had been found guilty in France and condemned for these crimes .
A year later and , perhaps I have not found out about it , but to my knowledge , nobody has been condemned for attacking people and goods from other European countries that have to go through France .
If ordinary people , European parliamentarians or civil servants , attacked a lorry outside here in the street , what would happen ?
I think they would at least be taken into detention .
They would be tried and would be sentenced to some kind of punishment .
How come then that those who attack goods , lorries and people in France escape any kind of punishment ?
It is important that at last we stop condemning these acts with words alone .
I know that the Commission 's powers over this are limited but I have the impression that people think that the Community authorities are not doing enough .
Local markets must be defended - as another member said - but we cannot deny the need to win over local markets by the exports of products produced in any Member State .
Let us hope that next year there will be no need for an emergency resolution on attacks against lorries , goods or people from one European state in another European country .
Madam President , I am convinced that all members of the European Parliament will agree , once again , on repeating our condemnation of the attacks by uncontrolled groups of French farmers , on lorries transporting farm produce from Spain and the people transporting those products .
I am equally convinced that we shall agree to demand , as we are asking in the resolution , the payment of compensation promised by the French Government and that that payment , as we demand , covers all types of damage caused .
But the European Parliament , faced with a flagrant attack on the free movement of goods and one of the pillars of European construction , must demand that the Council and Commission , once and for all , take measures to stop these regrettable events taking place year after year .
Although the Commission admittedly lacks powers on this , these violent acts cannot go on unpunished and a way has to be found so that European citizens - and our farmers , in particular - no longer have to go on facing a problem affecting and seriously harming them and which , above all , increasingly separates them from the project of European construction .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this afternoon we are debating recent acts of vandalism by French producers against Spanish fruit and vegetables .
Of course , we can only denounce these acts of violence and vandalism .
I shall therefore refer to the form rather than the basis .
For example , in respect of tomatoes - the subject of the most recent clashes - on St Charles market , in Perpignan , in April supplies of Spanish tomatoes hovered around 800 tonnes per day , compared with 100 tonnes for French produce .
Suddenly , on 9-12 May , Spanish imports doubled and reached 1700 tonnes per day , which led to a price collapse - from 600 to 114 francs per tonne , just about covering transport costs .
This type of dumping is inadmissible .
These figures show that we can understand the anger of French producers but certainly not their acts of violence .
Similarly the calls to boycott our products from Spanish farmers across the Pyrenees to respond to the attacks by French farmers are no more excusable .
This conflict is not just a Franco-Spanish one .
There are far more deep seated reasons .
This shows that certain fruit and vegetable COMs are just not working .
The Commission should re-open this thorny issue .
It must ensure the regulation of production and prices and avoid any unfair competition between Member States , preventing products from being put on the market at prices lower than their production costs and more seriously controlling mass imports from non-Community countries .
Our duty in the Commission , European Parliament and Council is to reconcile all of our productions so that European producers can live in harmony .
I am convinced that we shall succeed .
Madam President , we can only condemn the acts of violence perpetrated against Spanish lorry drivers .
But it would be dangerously reductive to discuss the matter only in terms of the free movement of goods .
It is an agricultural problem and it has to be recognized that , in a way , this violence reveals the depth of the discontent among fruit and vegetable producers faced with a loss of markets , a disastrous drop in prices and dumping practices .
We must avoid at any cost being sucked into a spiral of clashes between producers .
The interests of French and Spanish producers are not opposed : they are the victims of the same ultra-liberal policy , making a priority of competition at the greatest profit for major distribution companies and international commerce .
That is why we propose the immediate opening of consultations between the French and Spanish Governments and between producers ' organisations , to avoid confrontations , lessen tensions , open dialogue and find solutions to allow producers on either side of the Pyrenees to do their work properly .
Given the deterioration of the fruit and vegetables sector , we must improve the market machinery and bear in mind agreements with non-Community Mediterranean countries , especially when it comes to productions and improved revenue .
In order to avoid this excessive competition , which may be made still worse by enlargement of the European Union to the east , we must accelerate the harmonization process in an upwards direction in terms of the wages and social protection of farmers and farm employees .
Madam President , once again we are dealing with a problem that we face every year at around this time of year .
I think that this is an important subject for all Union citizens as , although today it is Spanish products that are affected , on another occasion it could be others .
It is not just a problem of the CAP or one of the fruit and vegetables COM , as we have just been told , nor is it one of lower or higher prices , or dumping .
It is a problem related to Article 35 of the Treaty on Union which guarantees the free movement of goods and all Member States are obliged to guarantee that right .
We are now in the thick of the IGC and I should like to ask the Commission to make sure not only that something comes of these denunciations but also to urge the Government concerned to make sure that these acts do not go unpunished . The Commission must ensure that sanctions are imposed and that those responsible are brought to justice as quickly as possible because , as we know , delayed justice is no justice at all .
Madam President , this piece of fruit lacks , in practice , the right to free movement of goods as enshrined theoretically in the Treaty on European Union .
The Commission , as guardian of the treaties , should also ensure that this piece of fruit can move freely within the European Union .
This occurs every year because certain producers want to dominate certain markets and oppose the free movement of fruit and vegetables .
Since the Commission has machinery within its powers to sanction economically , the next European Council in Amsterdam should amend the Treaty so that it can apply those sanctions to anyone who impedes the free movement of goods and consolidation of the single market .
Only in that way , next week in Amsterdam , can the Council make sure that this piece of fruit has the same right as persons , capital and other goods to move freely within the single market of the European Union .
Madam President , this week Case No 265 / 95 , the Commission versus the French Republic , came before the Court of Justice of the European Union , for failure to adopt measures to avoid violent acts against Spanish fruit and vegetables .
The Commission agent asserted that this case related to continuous action over more than 10 years and that the incidents referred to had continued into 1996 and 1997 .
Commissioner , this is a deliberate policy to apply violence on a continuous basis , tolerated by a government , on the grounds of particular changes to the strawberry market and directed against the whole Spanish fruit and vegetable sector .
The succession of systematic acts of vandalism shows that this is a perfectly planned act aimed at keeping Spanish produce out of the Community market .
The rule of law is not working in France with respect to fruit and vegetables .
The Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , is not offering sufficient compensation and it must intervene robustly or else the perpetrators will continue to get off scot-free .
Rural Coordination , the National Federation of Farm Businesses and the Movement for the Defence of Family Farms , the armed wings of the economic organisation , AFCOFEL , even before the campaign , issued demands for self-regulation of Spanish production accompanied by veiled threats .
The Commission can and must freeze aids to the French fruit and vegetable sector to put an end to this violence .
It would be absurd to contribute out of the Community budget to support a national productive sector that uses violence and violates the Treaty to prevent the free movement of goods , leading to market losses of over 25000 million pesetas a year .
Commissioner , you must also offer urgent specific Community aids to those affected and restore , by means of Community action in this sector , the conditions of free competition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of a certain inability on the part of the French authorities to control the unrest caused by a group of farmers against agricultural products from other Member States , especially Spain , the Commission would point out that , within its jurisdiction as guardian of the treaties , it was able to use the infringement procedure in order to oblige France to fulfil its obligations pursuant to Articles 5 and 30 of the Treaty .
That case is before the Court of Justice ; the hearing was held on 10 June and the Advocate-General is to present his opinion on 8 July , so it is appropriate to await the Judgment of the Court of Justice .
This is , however , no passive waiting , since the Commission , as soon as it heard of the first incident on 24 April , immediately contacted the French authorities to persuade them to use their powers in the field of public order by adopting the measures needed to prevent and suppress violence , thus preserving the right to freedom of movement for goods , which is guaranteed by the Treaty .
On the other hand , the Commission , by means of a letter from Mr Commissioner Franz Fischler dated 4 June 1997 , again urged France to take with the utmost urgency the measures needed to guarantee freedom of movement of goods in France .
In view of the above , the Commission is thinking of taking all possible measures to ensure that the French authorities comply fully with their obligations .
As regards the Common Organization of the Market , the Commission would point out that , within the scope of the reform of the COM for fruit and vegetables adopted by the Council on 21 November of last year , provision was made for the setting up of operational funds intended for producer organizations which would make it possible to have a panoply of measures in order to improve conditions for the production and marketing of these products .
The decentralized operation of these funds makes it possible , therefore , for the producer organizations to target their actions more appropriately on those sectors in greatest need .
On the other hand , both in the reform of the mechanisms for withdrawing products from the market and in measures for finding an outlet for the products withdrawn there is even provision also for free distribution .
It is also necessary to point out that , at the end of the transitional period of the reform , it is planned to draw up a report on the operation of the COM in fruit and vegetables which will cover all products , including the strawberry sector .
Finally , the Commission is at the moment making a global analysis of the situation with regard to the Mediterranean Agreements concerning the sector in question .
I should in conclusion like to add , Mr President , that it is obviously an area of great concern to the Commission , which will under no circumstances shirk its responsibilities .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following seven motions for resolutions :
( B4-0470 / 97 ) by Mr Fassa and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the coup d 'état in Sierra Leone ; - ( B4-0508 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group , on Sierra Leone ; - ( B4-0529 / 97 ) by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the coup d 'état in Sierra Leone ; - ( B4-0534 / 97 ) by Mr Hory and Mr Pradier , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the coup in Sierra Leone ; - ( B4-0546 / 97 ) by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; - ( B4-0554 / 97 ) by Mr Robles-Piquer and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the coup in Sierra Leone ; - ( B4-0561 / 97 ) by Mr Swoboda and Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Sierra Leone .
Madam President , we are naturally shocked at the coup d 'état in Sierra Leone , a country which is one of the poorest in Africa and which has undergone one civil war and three other coups d 'état in the last six years .
We at long last saw modest progress last year with the peace agreement in November and the introduction of democracy in March , but now it is back to square one .
The military has seized power and all the early progress has been reversed .
I support any diplomatic initiatives that might be taken to restore democracy and isolate the junta , and the Council must also encourage the Organization of African Unity to undertake its own initiatives .
We must prevent individual countries from abusing the work of the ECOMOG , and any military intervention must be properly orchestrated to ensure that the Union 's credibility is not undermined .
The Liberals call on the Council and the Commission to use every means available to restore Sierra Leone 's fledgeling democracy .
Breaking off cooperation under Lomé should also be an option here .
We must ensure that this small and poverty-stricken country can resume its progress towards reconstruction and development as quickly as possible .
Madam President , my feelings are akin to those of Mr Bertens .
In terms of mineral resources , Sierra Leone is one of the richest countries in the world , but it is one of the poorest in terms of the living standards of its population , and we must take action here to reinstate the democratic Government .
I do not believe we can tolerate the continuation in power of the military junta .
At the same time I wish to condemn the intervention by Nigeria .
General Abacha also came to power there by means of a military coup .
His most likely reason for intervening was to extend his sphere of influence and not to establish democracy .
It would be a fine thing if we had democratic structures in Nigeria , but we are talking now about Sierra Leone .
I take the view that our cooperation in the Lomé framework , coupled with diplomacy , can help to ensure not only that the coup is condemned but also that we are able to take practical measures for the restoration of democracy .
May I ask Commissioner Pinheiro to take the necessary steps in this direction , and I hope that Nigeria will then keep out of the conflict .
Madam President , Commissioner , back in March we friends of Africa were jubilant when a general , then governing as the result of a military coup , handed over power in Sierra Leone - a former British colony with less than five million inhabitants - to a 64-year old lawyer , a Muslim , like most of his fellowcitizens , with international experience but dressed in traditional robes .
This civilian president has now been deposed by other military chiefs who snatched power along with the gold and diamonds that are the country 's principal riches .
Thousands have died . The GDP per head is only 200 dollars , there is 70 % illiteracy , the average life expectancy is only fifty years and a fierce dictatorship , that of Nigeria , is now trying to imposed democracy , paradoxically , in Sierra Leone .
What has Europe done ?
What we always do : we have given some humanitarian aid - which is good - and cooperated in the country 's development , and the British sent a plane to rescue their compatriots , and that is all .
Humanitarian aid and cooperation in development are extremely necessary but they do not solve the real problems .
Nor would a military intervention work and it would be difficult to send our own troops as they would risk death .
But this once again shows that Europe , not just Britain or France , has no policy to deal with Africa 's problems .
Let us hope that the Council and the Commission , with the help of the European Parliament , might one day propose such a policy .
Madam President , the process of democratisation begun in 1996 by the holding of presidential and legislative elections collapsed on 25 May when the coup took place .
The military junta would like to give power to the leader of the United Revolutionary Front , Mr Foday Sankoh , with all the risks of destabilization of the region that that implies .
After all , hundreds of defenceless civilians were killed by the rebels , tortured , hacked with machetes and executed in atrocious conditions .
This civil war lasted five years and led to more than 10 000 deaths .
Vigorously condemning this coup , we call on the OAU to take the necessary initiatives to restore the democratically elected regime , that came to power in March 1996 .
Until those conditions are met , we call on the Commission and the Council to suspend implementation of the Lomé Convention and all aid to the Sierra Leone Government .
It goes without saying that humanitarian aid should continue to be given as long as it is targeted at the most vulnerable .
Madam President , obviously the Commission condemns the coup d 'état in Sierra Leone by Major Koroma .
The Commission finds it totally unacceptable that the legitimate , democratically elected government of President Kabbah which came to power just over one year ago has been overthrown so abruptly by a small group of soldiers supported by the RUF rebels .
A statement by the presidency on behalf of the European Union issued on 28 May deplored the overthrow of the elected government and urged the restoration of the democratic civilian government .
Concern was also expressed at the level of violence against locals and expatriates .
This statement reflects similar sentiments expressed by organizations and countries throughout the world : the United Nations , the Organization of African Unity , the Commonwealth , the United States , the United Kingdom , France , Japan and the countries of the region .
The crisis in Sierra Leone has resulted in de facto suspension of all aid programmes in the country .
All project personnel and Commission staff have been evacuated .
As regards the formalization of the suspension , discussions with Member States will be held in the appropriate fora of the Council in the light of the evolution of the situation .
However , the Commission believes it is important to send a strong message to the perpetrators of the coup that such action is unacceptable and will not result in any financial or other aid being provided from the donor community .
The European Union supports all efforts currently being undertaken to achieve a negotiated peaceful settlement to the conflict which would enable the return of the democratically elected civilian government of President Kabbah .
We are fully aware of the paradoxes and difficulties that may come from the intervention of ECOMOG and of the important role being played by Nigeria , as Mr Hory mentioned .
Having said that , I must say that the contacts I had personally with the Prime Minister of Guinea Conakry in this regard leaves no doubt that the countries of the region are fully engaged - not just Nigeria - in trying to prevent this coup d 'état from being a success .
Regarding humanitarian aid , for the moment all ECHO-funded humanitarian aid operations have been put on hold due to the insecurity in the country and the evacuation of most humanitarian aid agency personnel .
Security permitting , needs assessment missions will be undertaken by humanitarian aid agencies as soon as possible .
If necessary ECHO is ready to intervene in providing assistance to populations which are being displaced as a result of the present crisis .
Finally , I would like to emphasize that it is important that the OAU takes the leading role in defining a strategy to counteract the coup perpetrators and the rebel forces of RUF which are supporting them in Sierra Leone .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will not take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following 25 motions for resolutions :
( B4-0468 / 97 ) by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the abolition of the death penalty ; - ( B4-0487 / 97 ) by Mr Soulier and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the abolition of the death penalty ; - ( B4-0497 / 97 ) by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the abolition of the death penalty ; - ( B4-0513 / 97 ) by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the abolition of the death penalty ; - ( B4-0542 / 97 ) by Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the abolition of the death penalty ; - ( B4-0511 / 97 ) by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group , on human rights in Colombia ; - ( B4-0538 / 97 ) by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Colombia ; - ( B4-0552 / 97 ) by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Colombia ; - ( B4-0560 / 97 ) by Mr Howitt , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights in Colombia ; - ( B4-0485 / 97 ) by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the political situation and continuing human-rights abuses in Burma ; - ( B4-0547 / 97 ) by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Burma and Burma 's accession to ASEAN ; - ( B4-0551 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper and Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Burma ; - ( B4-0467 / 97 ) by Mr De Vries and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the return of refugees and displaced persons in Croatia ; - ( B4-0510 / 97 ) by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Croatia and the implementation of the Dayton Accords ; - ( B4-0517 / 97 ) by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the implementation of the Dayton Agreements in former Yugoslavia ; - ( B4-0531 / 97 ) by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the implementation of the Dayton Agreements in Croatia and Bosnia ; - ( B4-0548 / 97 ) by Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the implementation of the Dayton Agreements in Croatia ; - ( B4-0553 / 97 ) by Mr Oostlander and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the conditions for economic recovery and the return of refugees to their homes in the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina ; - ( B4-0559 / 97 ) by Mr Wiersma and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the development of the peace process in the former Yugoslavia ; - ( B4-0486 / 97 ) by Mr Castagnetti and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the ' Island of Hope ' in Moscow ; - ( B4-0515 / 97 ) by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the V Group , on the fate of street children in Moscow ; - ( B4-0503 / 97 ) by Mrs André-Léonard and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on elections in Indonesia ; - ( B4-0357 / 97 ) by Mr Ribeiro and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Timor and the Indonesian elections ; - ( B4-0550 / 97 ) by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Indonesia and East Timor ; - ( B4-0514 / 97 ) by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the V Group , on obstruction of non-governmental humanitarian relief organizations in Belarus .
Abolition of the death penalty
Madam President , there is wide agreement on the inhumanity of the death penalty here in Europe 's Parliament .
The matter is high on our agenda and we have firmly maintained that no country which retains the death penalty is welcome in our Union .
We can also rejoice that more and more States on our continent and in other parts of the world now refrain from executing their citizens .
Our Union , in co-operation with the European Council , has a central responsibility to speak on behalf of humanity in its contacts with the world outside .
So , Madam President , Parliament now issues a real challenge to the Council and the Commission and to our fifteen Member States . Demand a moratorium on all executions at the UN General Assembly in the Autumn as a step towards the complete abolition of the death penalty throughout the world from the first day of the next millennium .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight for the abolition of the death penalty is in keeping with progress towards a humanity that is responsible for itself .
As a lawyer I have observed not only the horror but also the shame that comes over anyone who is forced to take part in what is a human tragedy .
But today Europe faces a different type of responsibility .
Along with a few colleagues I attended a few weeks ago the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva and for the first time a resolution was voted by majority voting .
Of course , both the United States and China voted against abolition but the vote was supported by many countries , including the Member States of the European Union .
It is for Europe not only to be a commercial power but also to bear universal values and spread them around the world .
The debate is the same be it about the death penalty , the social clause or proper conduct in business .
It is an attitude towards human beings , towards mankind as a whole .
Europe should therefore set an example and send a strong signal for the rest of the world to follow sooner or later .
Madam President , I should first of all like to thank the chairman of the Sub-Committee on Human Rights for his decisive support for this motion and I should like to emphasize its possible importance for the development of the European Union .


Contrary to what it did in Geneva , not over the death penalty on which , as Mr Soulier has reminded us , it took a very decisive position , a major stance , and obtained a successful outcome , but over the question of human rights in China , over which it took a far more unfortunate position , if the Union had promoted , in the General Assembly of the United Nations , the proposal for a moratorium on executions , I am sure that it would have found a majority of Member States so that , a hundred years after the universal abolition of slavery , we could have brought about abolition of the death penalty and at least take a decisive step in that direction .
I should like to take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Pinheiro to remind him that the last two joint assemblies of the ACP-EU approved resolutions in favour of abolishing the death penalty and that it is therefore very important to reiterate , on every occasion , whenever meetings are held or contracts signed , and in discussions with the ACP countries , which are many , the importance that the European Union attaches to abolition of the death penalty .
There are other occasions , such as Amsterdam , for speaking about the issue of the death penalty .
Italy has demanded the introduction into the Treaty of an article on abolition of the death penalty .
It may seem marginal to many people but it is important as it would enable us to begin to introduce the chapter on fundamental rights .
I think that that would be a third element on which to focus the action of the European Union .
There is a lot to be done but first of all I should like to ask Commissioner Pinheiro to ask his colleagues to make sure that the Commission , which also has an office in New York , has this important question put on the agenda of the next General Assembly of the United Nations .
Madam President , of the countries of Eastern Europe , it is the new members of the Council of Europe - Russia and Ukraine - which , in spite of their promises , have taken the fewest initial steps towards creating a humane system of criminal law .
This not only stems from technical difficulties in introducing democratic legislation , in establishing courts or in providing judges with the training they require if they are to become an independent judiciary but also and above all reflects a lack of political will .
Ukraine , after all , has not complied with the moratorium and has continued to carry out death sentences .
So what about the promises given by the Commission to the European Parliament when we were discussing ratification of the partnership and cooperation agreement and when the Commission was pressing so hard for Russia and Ukraine to become members of the Council of Europe at an excessively early date ?
Where , on the one hand , is there real financial support , and to what extent , on the other hand , are we resorting to the preamble of the PCA in order to ensure that measures are taken in those two countries to abolish the death penalty in law and in practice ?
Madam President , the death penalty was always held up as the ultimate instrument for eradicating crime but it has been clearly demonstrated in countries where it has been applied that it has never led to the eradication of crime and that , on the contrary , it has had perverse effects and led to the development of crime without witnesses .
Big criminal organisations have never been intimidated by the death penalty and all that has happened is that they have made sure that no witnesses survive any crimes they commit .
The death penalty also raises another problem : that of judicial error .
How can judicial errors be rectified once the death penalty has been carried out ?
Questions like this one , the fact that errors cannot be put right and the fact that crime can actually be made worse , should make us think about the need to eradicate the death penalty in every country in the world .
I think that Europe has a culture of defending life and has therefore seen the biggest movement in favour of abolition of the death penalty .
We should set an example and bear this in mind when negotiating association agreements and ask for a moratorium on executions to be included .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , point 6 of the joint resolution proposes that countries wishing to accede to the Council of Europe should undertake to sign and ratify the second optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as a condition of membership .
I consider that to be one of the central messages of this resolution , for - as Mr Soulier has already pointed out - we did achieve progress at the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
But it cannot be regarded as progress when , for all the debates we have held here in Parliament , some of the seats in this chamber , where the Council of Europe also meets , are taken by representatives of countries who proclaim in fine words all the rights their governments intend to grant and then , when they return home from here , do not raise a finger to turn these declarations into reality .
That is one of the scandals we have to denounce here , and I must say - though it may sound somewhat provocative - that , while I have always considered the Council of Europe to be one of Europe 's great political assets , when it comes to the death penalty and the honouring of binding obligations by the new member countries of the Council of Europe , I believe that the offhand way in which this precious asset is being treated may well undermine the ideal of human rights in the European Union .
What is being put at risk is the precept that the community of States must honour the solemn , binding commitments it makes .
If these commitments amount to no more than declarations of intent , the rights to which they relate will be eroded .
In the struggle against the death penalty , that is a very dangerous development .
Let me nevertheless conclude by expressing my pride in the fact that , as the joint resolution shows , in this assembly , in this European Parliament , apart from a very few personally and politically insignificant exceptions , the overwhelming majority have continued to take a resolute stance against the death penalty . For all that may divide us , I believe that we should make a point of emphasizing something on which we are united .
Madam President , ' let the murderers begin ' .
I think that this phrase is attributed to Alphonse Karr , from the last century , in the debate on the death penalty .
Those were times when you could be humorous on the subject .
Abolition of the death penalty has become one of the central elements of what might be called European humanism and the joint resolution expresses that very well .
It is , in any case , the philosophy underlying this resolution .
In order to be integrated into the Europe that we are building , abolition of the death penalty is not a sufficient condition for respect of human rights but it is a necessary one .
We know that in criminal terms , there are other penalties , including life imprisonment , which would be nothing were it not for forced labour - as a character in a famous film says : ' There are many , many other forms of punishment ' .
I am pleased that there is a consensus in this Assembly and that nobody has tried to alter the resolution that we are going to adopt later on .
Colombia
Madam President , on the morning of 19 May , armed men entered a block of flats in the centre of Bogotá and wiped out an entire family .
A baby survived , but only because it had been hidden in a cupboard just as the men entered the flat .
The men had told the caretaker - and this is a significant point - that they were from the office of the public prosecutor .
They were typical paramilitary operators .
They escaped unrecognized , as always happens in Colombia .
The murdered couple were employees of the renowned Jesuit institute CINEP .
Mario Calderón dealt with ecology there , while his wife Elsa worked on human-rights projects .
The utter brutality of this act of violence has horrified not only the people of Colombia but the international public too .
Once more people have been killed in Colombia because they had devoted themselves to the cause of human rights , and once more , sadly , we must expect these murders to go unpunished .
For years in the reports by the Commission on Human Rights the Colombian Government has regularly been urged to protect and respect human rights and the people who promote them .
For years the Colombian Government 's stock response has been an apologetic shrug of the shoulders .
Allow me to close with a few words in Portuguese to our Commissioner :
I should like to tell the Commissioner that , unless we work together for human rights in Colombia , unless we fight together against the injustice which exists in Colombia , we shall resolve nothing .
I know also , as does the Commissioner , that the Colombian government must work for human rights .
We are also well aware that the Colombian government is not worthy of all the confidence which we , together with the Spanish PSOE and PP are placing in it .
The Colombian people deserve our aid , not the government .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we wish to express our solidarity with the victims ' relatives and our condemnation and concern .
This is not the first time that the European Parliament has expressed itself on this subject .
In February we included Columbia among the ten countries in the world with the most serious human rights and violence problems .
We trusted in the Columbian Government when the European Union and that government signed preferential trade agreements .
That confidence should also be linked with unquestionable signs of defending human rights and democracy given by the Columbian Government .
We must find those responsible and even if they are paramilitaries , this is the responsibility of the Columbian Government . If it does not try to track them down , it loses its credibility .
In the defence of democracy and its values it can count the European Union among its collaborators but if it does not defend those values it will be deceiving us and the consequences for the Government and , above all , for the country will be extremely harmful .
Madam President , a number of disquieting reports have been reaching our ears about serious human rights violations in Colombia , particularly in recent months .
It has been difficult to verify some of these allegations , partly , perhaps , because they are said to have occurred in very remote parts of Colombia .
However , as we have heard from the previous two speakers , there can be no doubt about the tragic situation which has arisen in regard to the family named in the resolution , and not only that family .
We look to the Colombian Government in the first place to make a thorough investigation and , in the absence of any other authority , we have to look again to the European Commission to ask what action it feels it can take .
We are concerned , for instance , about another person , Neftali Vanegas , whose life is said to have been in danger in recent weeks and whose organization is at least partly financed by the European Commission .
Maybe the Commissioner would be kind enough to comment with regard to that particular case .
Madam President , for nearly half a century Colombia has been afflicted by violence and vicious killings on an horrific scale .
The recent murder of three members of the Calderón family and the serious wounding of another exemplify the uncivilized savagery which has become a familiar feature of life in Colombia today .
Mario Calderón and Elsa Constanza Alvarado were killed as members of the human rights organization CINEP , which is committed to defending human beings against violence and terror and working for peace .
Their deaths and the violence inflicted on their close relatives by a squad of heavily-armed killers demonstrate the ruthless inhumanity of those responsible for organizing terrorism in Colombia today .
In the last six months it is estimated that 650 people have been the victims of violence in Colombia , including poor peasants and many others .
In fact , it is estimated that nearly one million people have fled from their homes to escape the violence which is having such a devastating effect on all aspects of life in the country .
We must deplore these killings , and call on the Colombian Government to hunt these murderers down and see that they are punished .
We welcome the setting-up of the Permanent UN High Commission for Human Rights and the contribution of ECHO in assisting displaced people .
Further than this , however , we should reflect on the fact that the European Union played a key role in helping to restore peace in Central America and is cooperating with Latin America as a whole in a bid to achieve both closer relations and development .
In denouncing the violence perpetrated in Colombia , we should be making a careful examination of the situation to see if there is any way , difficult though it is , in which we could contribute to the ending of the violence and the restoration of full peace .
That is the only way in the long run that we can really feel satisfied we are making a real contribution to end this appalling horror .
Madam President , the murder of Mr and Mrs Calderón is typical of the kind of spiralling violence which goes unpunished in Colombia .
The Colombian Government recently confirmed that the NGOs have a legitimate role to play , but it has done little to put this policy into practice .
It must at least take steps to do so .
The opening of the office of the UN High Commission for Human Rights is a positive development , and we welcome the aid provided under the ECHO programme for those in Colombia who have fled the violence and are now homeless .
What is even more important , of course , is that the violence should be stopped , and this is why we need to bring pressure to bear on the government to crack down on the paramilitary groups , to protect human rights and to strengthen the power of the judiciary .
That is where the solution lies .
But this is not the first time we have spoken about Colombia here in the House , and I fear that it will by no means be the last .
Mr President , yesterday in his address the President of the Council referred to the fact that the ASEAN conference had discussed Burma for two and a half hours , which he interpreted as an encouraging sign .
If , on the other hand , so little is heard in public of the opposition leader Aung San Sun Kyi , despite her Nobel Prize and her Sakharov Prize , it may well be that even a two-and-a-half-hour debate , which is only right and proper , has to be regarded as something of a success .
But little though the voice of the opposition spokeswoman is heard , even less is heard of the thousands of children who die as a result of forced labour and other measures .
That , in fact , is quite rarely mentioned .
So what are we to expect of the heads of government of the ASEAN countries when only one of them has voiced opposition to Burmese accession ?
On the other hand , the Malaysian Head of State even welcomed the fact that the accession of Burma meant the addition of another centrally , albeit not entirely democratically , governed State .
I should like to ask the Commission whether they see any means of enforcing the measures referred to in point 4 of the resolution and whether they are hopeful of success in such an endeavour .
Mr President , we have spoken very frequently about Burma over the past two years , and all we can really do each time is to repeat our expressions of regret and the charges against the Burmese Government .
It is still the case that elementary rights are not respected , that hundreds of supporters of the democratic opposition , the National League for Democracy ( NLD ) , are in prison .
Only recently a prominent member of the NLD , 67-year-old Tin Shwe , died in prison .
He had been held in custody for seven years .
He had a heart condition , and it was in this way , as a prisoner , that he had to end his days .
The official reason given for his imprisonment was subversive propaganda .
In this case subversive propaganda means communicating information from within the country about the dreadful conditions that prevail there .
Hundreds of people are still in prison , and I believe that economic measures , the pressure that would be exerted if no money from the European Union were invested there , if Europe did not support the regime in any way , could secure these people 's release from prison .
We also demand , as we have been demanding for quite some time , that Mrs Aung San Sun Kyi , the holder of the Sakharov Prize of the European Parliament , be allowed to move about freely .
It is always difficult to pass judgement on other States , but we can scarcely welcome the fact that the countries of ASEAN have admitted Burma into their organization under these circumstances .
I believe we should roundly condemn that and we should ensure that it remains on the agenda for our diplomatic and political discussions and economic negotiations with the ASEAN States .
This makes it all the more incomprehensible to me when I see attempts being made in the European Union to develop relations with Burma - I have to endorse Mrs Günther 's views on that subject .
The Munich Messegesellschaft - the Trade Fair Society - would like to hold a meeting at the next fair in Rangoon .
Mrs Günther , I take your appeal very seriously .
Bavaria is governed by the Christian Social Union .
I hope that its Trade Fair Company will not go to Burma .
Mayor Monatzeder , a fellow Green , has protested against the trip and has called for its cancellation , and I hope we are united behind this protest and that we can persuade the Messegesellschaft in Munich not to support the Burmese regime in this way .
Mr President , notwithstanding worldwide protests , ASEAN has finally decided to allow Burma to become a member , despite its continuing human rights violations and despite the continuing imprisonment of the elected prime minister , Aung San Suu Kyi , by the military dictatorship .
I may be being cynical , but I have to say that ASEAN seems determined to establish a reputation as a group of countries with lofty economic ambitions but little interest in democracy or human rights .
Money and goods are evidently more important than fundamental values and standards , whilst in Burma , democracy continues to be undermined and human rights violated .
In May , Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi 's house arrest was tightened so that her party , which six years ago won 80 % of the votes in the elections , was unable to hold its annual congress , and it is even being made increasingly difficult for foreign journalists to visit her .
On the human rights front , the SLORC is carrying on with slave labour , child labour , intimidation , disappearances , murders and the permanent persecution of minorities .
The European Union has ended the system of preferences for Burma , which is a positive move . But is it not time to follow the United States ' lead and ban investment ?
There is a risk that the gap left by the reduction in investment from the US will be filled by European companies , which would be extremely regrettable .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether he will put this proposal to the European Council .
I know that there is to be a meeting on this subject shortly , so I very much hope that you will do as we request .
Mr President , Members of the European Parliament have been hammering on the door of the generals in Rangoon for more than two years now , and European businesses have mostly moved out of the country , so I cannot agree with Mrs Maij-Weggen : the new investors are from another region which has much less social conscience than we do .
But it seems that the stand we have made has not achieved results .
On the contrary , the Asiatic region is closing ranks and has welcomed Burma into ASEAN .
Is this not a sign that we should review what is obviously a counter-productive approach ?
There is no point in sounding off here in the House every month for the benefit of our own supporters : the Asian tigers simply laugh at the roars they hear from our cage .
In my opinion , it is no longer feasible for the European Parliament to keep up this unilateral protest .
Can we not appoint a special envoy as we did for the Middle East and the Great Lakes , to act as a mediator for us in ASEAN and the surrounding region ?
I should like to hear what the Commissioner thinks about this .
I am afraid that a special envoy would be laughed down just as much as the European tigers . In any event , two months ago the NLD attempted to celebrate its overwhelming victory in the elections seven years before , and the military junta reacted with its usual restraint by immediately putting 300 activists behind bars .
ASEAN 's decision to allow Burma membership is a slap in the face for the international community and for the so-called universality of human rights .
Just when President Clinton announces sanctions against Burma , ASEAN does the complete opposite .
And I have to agree with Mrs van Bladel that the new investors are mostly not European firms but Asian tigers .
The Union is already taking action , and I must admit that it is quite good as far as it goes .
But we need to persuade ASEAN to change its policy towards Burma .
How we can most effectively bring pressure to bear on the SLORC regime remains to be seen , but I hope that what we say here , whether we are laughed at or not , sometimes gets through at least to Aung San Suu Kyi , so that she knows that we are still determined to show solidarity with her .
Mr President , much as I respect Mrs van Bladel , I really doubt whether we should change our approach radically .
There are such things as honour and a deep concern about human rights situations .
It goes beyond tactics and on to strategy .
I therefore welcome very much the action of the American President who has imposed economic sanctions on Burma , thereby prohibiting US persons from making new investment in Burma .
That is certainly having an effect .
I myself am not against taking economic sanctions , though I realize that this is a policy which is very difficult to sell within the European Union .
I am in favour of bringing pressure to bear on European firms to disinvest or not to invest .
That is very important .
There are a number of companies which have taken the appropriate action : Heineken , in the Netherlands , is one case ; Carlsberg is another .
I would very much like to see Club Méditerrané , among others , follow suit .
Implementation of Dayton Accords in Croatia
Mr President , none of the States of the former Yugoslavia seem to have understood the necessity of keeping to agreements , including the Dayton Agreement , and respecting human rights .
Croatia is no worse then the other States of the former Yugoslavia , but makes greater claims for being accepted as a cooperation partner of the European Union .
This they cannot be , and will never be as long as the Croatian government protects suspected war criminals and continues to allow ethnic Serbs to be persecuted and harmed and refused the right to return to their homes .
Mr President , this behaviour must stop along with similar excesses in Serbia and Bosnia .
The European Union has a duty to demand respect for human rights and for agreements concluded .
Insist on these demands , and do so with all your might !
Mr President , it is clear to everyone , I think , that the Dayton Agreement will not be implemented unless all the countries concerned comply with its provisions .
We are only too aware of the limitations of this agreement , but if the terms to which all the signatories put their names are not respected , it is quite clear that the situation could become inflamed once again .
For this reason we must draw attention , for example , to the fact that in Krajina , where 200 000 Serbs once lived , almost all these people have since been displaced , and that a temporary law adopted by the Croatian Government and Parliament has allowed Croats from other parts of the country to occupy Serbian property if the legitimate owner is absent .
According to the OSCE , at least 90 % of the Serbs returning to the region in recent months have been unable to reoccupy their homes .
The return of refugees and displaced persons is a prerequisite for peace , according to the Dayton Agreement .
We must ensure that the actions of the European Union , and hence the Commission , are geared to urging the governments of both Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina to abide by this principle , perhaps even resorting to economic means of persuasion if necessary .
Mr President , I should like to say that today 's debate is a strange and frankly paradoxical one .
The initial idea of the political groups was to condemn the Croatian Government , firmly , over its violations of human rights in Krajina and Slavonia .
Curiously , because of the way in which the European Parliament is influenced - several of whose members have been leading a real crusade against Yugoslavia and its political authorities - the common resolution has led to a priority condemnation of the Serbian Government , which is not at all concerned by the question of returning refugees to the republics previously struck by the war .
I should just like to remind you of the truth : the confiscation of Serbian property by the Croatian authorities is a crime and likely to heighten tensions once again in the region . The risks incurred by the citizens of Slavonia call for the maintenance of the S-FOR and United Nations temporary administration .
Since this debate is leaving the Croatian framework , I wish to denounce the irresponsibility of those , led by the United States , who are running the risk of massively arming the Muslim authorities in Sarajevo and setting fire again to the powder-kegs of Herzegovina and northern Bosnia .
Mr President , it has been said in this Chamber on many occasions that the European Union showed itself incapable of playing a role of any great importance in the crisis in the former Yugoslavia .
The first attempt at a peaceful approach to a conflict which has left so many open wounds came after the American intervention and with the Dayton Agreement .
The European Parliament has passed a whole series of resolutions and made its positions clear .
That is what we are endeavouring to do on this occasion on the basis of Mr Hory 's forceful observations , without any certainty that this present resolution , which has been drawn up more or less unanimously , will achieve anything either .
In a region which has experienced the first full-scale conflict in Europe since the Second World War , and in which the dead are still being counted and the tensions still exist , nothing has really changed .
The European Union will be able to intervene with credibility only when it acknowledges that it bears a major portion of the blame , firstly because of its great haste in promoting and extolling the break-up of the former Yugoslavia and , secondly , because of its delay in acting after the conflagration had started .
We are now asking for something which is self-evidently right and in accord with our understanding of justice .
The return of the Krajina Serb refugees , whose sufferings are well known and have already been described , to their homes .
The freedom of movement of people etc . , etc . , and the removal of ethnic divisions .
We are realists .
At Point B we state that insufficient progress has been made until now with the implementation of the Dayton Agreement , and elsewhere we insist , quite rightly , on its strict implementation .
Mr President , despite all of the observations that are made and the historical reservations that have been expressed , our group supports the joint resolution and will vote for it .
We believe that it is the right of everyone to return to their home and that all war criminals must be punished ; all of them , however , without exceptions .
The gulf between saying these things and any sense of optimism that the conflicts and divisions that were underscored very , very starkly in the Bosnian election results will actually be overcome and removed is very great indeed ; so great that we must redouble our efforts now and in the future .
Because , as I have said , we ourselves are by no means innocent with regard to the things that have happened in the former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , I am pleased to see that this resolution once again comes down hard on Serbia or the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia because , contrary to what Mr Hory said , the Serbian Government is posing a threat to international security and to the safe return of the refugees through its refusal to cooperate in arresting war criminals to stand trial at The Hague .
This may be because Mr Milosevic is still active behind the scenes and is next in line for investigation .
We must never forget the victims of the neo-racist inspired war in former Yugoslavia , and we must stress , as this resolution does , that ethnic politics and ethnic divisions are totally incompatible with the establishment of the rule of law in the region .
The rule of law is not some kind of luxury or idealistic goal , but the very basis on which society and the economy are to be reconstructed .
Until there is an end to the ethnic divisions , ethnic thinking and ethnic barriers which are preventing refugees from returning home , there can be no hope of any economic progress in many of the states concerned , especially the Republika Srpska , where ethnic thinking is at its height and there are still people in power who are solely bent on bleeding their country dry without any concern for their own people , and who are determined to pursue their own ethnic ideologies .
This is why it is essential that SFOR should remain .
I am pleased to see that the resolution also calls for UNTAES to remain too , although that is a little different in that it is a confidence-building measure , but with SFOR it really is a matter of life and death for the people who live there .
Everyone in these three countries is a victim : of deception by their ethnic leaders , and of the frustrations of people from other ethnic backgrounds .
Sometimes they themselves bear no guilt , as we have seen in Croatia , where enormous frustration was felt by those Croats who were driven out of Krajina .
Many Serbs were guilty there , others not , and it is a great pity that the innocent too should suffer from the frustration which has been generated . However , things are much worse in parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina , where people 's lives are actually in danger because of the rabble who are in power .
I have met people there who are supposed to be acting mayors but who do nothing to deserve the title .
The PPE Group would like to propose the setting-up of a central office in Bosnia with powers to deal with the refugees , since it is such a complex issue and so closely tied up with the return of refugees to Croatia and Slavonia that some kind of joint clearing-house is needed to organize the whole thing , otherwise there will be chaos .
While it continues to be organized separately , and on an entity basis in Bosnia-Herzegovina , there is no chance of a return taking place successfully .
People are now waiting in temporary accommodation because they might be going back or because they are living in someone else 's house .
Nothing is happening , and things are at a complete standstill .
This is why we would urgently call on the Commission to introduce an effective aid policy based on conditionality , to be implemented decentrally so that those with good intentions can still be distinguished from those with bad .
Mr President , of everything that has been said on this subject , the words of Mr Oostlander have been the clearest , most sensible and most balanced so far .
This is simply due to the fact that he has been in the country , that he has concerned himself with that country time and again from the very outset and therefore knows how things are .
He refrains from the sort of ideological utterances , based on Serbophilia or other motives , that totally distort the picture .
There is one thing we must not forget , namely that Serbia was the initial aggressor .
Not a single house in Serbia has been destroyed , whereas in Croatia - and the Krajina belongs to Croatia - many houses have been destroyed .
I am naturally in favour of everyone , including the Serbs , being able to return home , and I am in favour of our welcoming the Serbs to our Community one day , but first of all we must get things clear here , which certainly involves emphasizing that there is no place for that country as long as it is governed by extremists and mass murderers .
Before all else , that has to change !
Mr President , yet again the House is addressing itself to human rights violations in Croatia : last time following blatant curbs on the freedom of the press and information ; this time because of the failure to comply with the Dayton Agreement , which - it is worth reminding the Croatian authorities - is an essential precondition not only for the maintenance of peace throughout the former Yugoslavia , but also for the continuation of the cooperation and aid agreements with the European Union .
And yet the right of free movement is being violated , as is the right of the displaced persons and refugees to return to their homes .
The Croatian Government is impeding their return by authorizing the confiscation of Serbian property through a temporary housing law and by embarking on a programme to settle Bosnian Croats in seized homes .
This is a clear case of ethnic cleansing , which harks back to the worst traditions of these peoples .
Indeed , I would recall the persecution , the looting and the enforced exodus , after the end of the Second World War , of hundreds of thousands of Italians who had been living in that region for centuries .
Street children in Moscow
Mr President , this resolution concerns the plight of abandoned children , most of them homeless , in the city of Moscow .
The problem is assuming truly alarming proportions , to the extent that we could soon be faced , in Moscow as elsewhere , with the phenomenon of street children .
Because of the serious budgetary constraints of which we are aware , and for fear that children from other Russian cities could be encouraged to migrate to Moscow , the municipal authorities are in fact withholding any support on the grounds that these children do not have formal documents , even though their Russian nationality is beyond question .
Given the seriousness of this phenomenon , several initiatives have been taken by private individuals , purely on humanitarian grounds .
The most significant , efficient and best organized of these initiatives on the part of civil society is the one called ' Island of Hope ' , which - for reasons it is impossible to understand - is being subjected almost daily to intolerable harassment . On 15 May 1997 , it even suffered physical attacks by elements from within the police force , undoubtedly with the aim of intimidation as well as repression .
Despite having some understanding for the financial difficulties confronting the municipal authorities in Moscow , the European Parliament is bound to censure any act of violence directed at people who are acting purely out of generosity , and must likewise censure the total abandonment of this small population of street children in Moscow .
I therefore hope that this resolution will be adopted .
Mr President , Moscow is becoming an increasingly attractive city in terms of its outward appearance , and every time I go there I see that the façades of some more buildings have been renovated .
But that is the only new development .
What has remained is the old Soviet system of the propiska .
Only those who possess such a document are entitled to obtain housing in Moscow .
This means that many families who were simply not among the beneficiaries of the transformation process - single mothers were among the main losers - are being driven to destitution .
These mothers and their children have to resort to begging in the streets of Moscow .
But the Mayor of Moscow is very thorough when it comes to cleaning up façades , for the Island of Hope will also fall victim to the cleanup campaign .
The Island of Hope is the largest autonomous initiative for street children in Moscow .
It gives them a warm place to stay , feeds them and even tries to provide them with schooling .
Amidst the chaos accompanying the breakdown of law and order , this island would give the children the opportunity to join the mainstream of society and enjoy normal lives .
The closure of this facility , however , will mean the return of these children to the street gangs , the makeshift tents and the sewers .
This will create a breeding ground for crime .
The city of Moscow has no alternative to the Island of Hope .
That is why we ask that this organization be left alone to continue its work .
Mr President , the topical and urgent debate on the street children of Moscow really highlights two different problems that have accompanied the massive political and economic upheavals in Russia .
The first is the dreadful social situation of many children in Russia .
The 25 % of the population who live below the poverty line inevitably include a great many children , and the problems that occur under these circumstances have long been familiar to us here in the European Parliament from other parts of the world .
They are not typically Russian problems .
What is typically Russian , however , and further complicates the situation is that there are rules governing the transfer of a person 's residence to Moscow .
It is a relic of the old Soviet Union , a rule that is basically inconsistent with a liberalized system , but its effect is that many children have no legal right at all to reside in Moscow .
The second point is that the NGOs are still far less able to work in Russia than in other European countries or in other parts of the world .
Non-governmental organizations in Russia are still subject to high-handed acts of officialdom , while the public presence and public acceptance of such organizations is limited .
That is why I welcome our discussing this as a topical and urgent issue , but I would also urge that , in future motions of this kind , Parliament should examine whether there is really only one organization affected or whether there are others .
I should not like decisions of the European Parliament to cause difficulties for other , unnamed organizations , thereby necessitating another topical and urgent debate on the same subject .
Indonesia and East Timor
Mr President , as we expected , the elections in Indonesia went very badly .
The electoral campaign was marked by violence and numerous irregularities on polling day .
The massive victory of the Golkar Government will enable President Suharto to seek a seventh consecutive presidential term in next year 's presidential elections .
Obviously the most hard done by are young people and opponents to the regime .
We condemn the arbitrary practices of the Indonesian authorities , turning the elections into a complete farce .
The system really needs a breath of oxygen because , even if the country is doing well economically , in the future those who are not doing quite so well will have to be satisfied .
Half the population of Jakarta has no access to drinking water or basic medical facilities and the situation is only getting worse .
This is intolerable !
As for the situation in East Timor , we are also very worried about that .
A European Parliament delegation must be allowed to visit the territory at once and report back to us . Then we shall know the situation there and take the necessary measures to deal with it .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , once again this Parliament is dealing with East Timor since there is still military occupation , since there is no let up in oppression and human rights are daily trodden underfoot in that territory which is still not decolonized .
That is not all .
It takes less effort merely to go through the motions of a routine or ritual , but it must now , at this sitting , be pointed out that the so-called elections in Indonesia were not a step on the road to democratization of the regime , but rather confirmation of its dictatorial nature .
There is also a new factor which has arisen since our previous sittings - the emergence of internal resistance , although it was denied and it was claimed that the armed conflict in the interior would end and that only the diplomatic and political front could rightly claim to represent the desire for self-determination and independence , which was born of that very resistance and which would triumph over occupation , repression and genocide .
Thus , as the recent awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize has proved , it is possible to buy arms is one country of the European Union to perpetuate the military occupation of a territory and to subjugate a people .
We welcome the fact that it was possible to reach a joint compromise motion for a resolution which is to be put to the vote .
Therefore in supporting , underwriting and voting for this motion for a resolution , fruit of our initiative , we wish to stress that in our view it fails to point out the fact that resistance has not ended in East Timor and that , although there is less repression nowadays than there was , it is meted out with great violence against those suspected by the occupying force of perpetrating this resistance .
There is no statement in the motion for a resolution setting out the views of this Parliament as regards the immediate suspension of any aid , military assistance and the sale of arms to Indonesia , and we think it was essential to have one .
Mr President , in connection with these unfortunate elections it has become clear that violence is again on the increase in East Timor .
We are very worried to hear that civilians have been killed there and civilians are , as we know , in particularly great danger of being tortured .
When Mr Ramos Horta , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , was visiting this parliament in April , he showed us East Timor activists a documentary film which showed how the police and the army crucifying people in prison .
We must do everything we can to put an end to this .
The European Parliament has repeatedly called for a parliamentary delegation to be sent to East Timor .
The East Timor intergroup has recently been refounded , and this group has now set itself the main objective of ensuring that Parliament really does send a delegation .
The situation is really becoming more intolerable day by day .
Unfortunately , the elections too have increased the general repression .
Amnesty International , for example , is still alarmed at this situation , even after the elections .
Ladies and gentlemen , a month ago , when we voted for a resolution on the elections or the elections planned for the end of May in Indonesia , we had the opportunity to express our critical view on the conditions under which those elections were to be held , reaffirming our solidarity with the pro-democracy movement and condemning the fact that the Indonesian government had refused to have an independent monitoring committee and had detained a large number of students who had dared to protest against a highly controlled electoral campaign .
The events of that electoral farce unfortunately proved us right .
Despite the repression and torture , the international media were able to some extent to lift the veil on that electoral fraud .
With a resolution passed a month ago the European Parliament became the forerunner in a great series of statements by the international community horrified at the manipulation of the elections in Indonesia and condemning the repeated violations of human rights , in particular in the occupied territory of East Timor , the last of them passed by the United States House of Representatives roundly condemning violations of human rights against the people of East Timor .
The current resolution therefore forms part of a coherent framework of the European Parliament 's political views , so there is no need to make circuitous and unwarranted interpretations .
As regards the sale of arms to Indonesia , the position of this Parliament is clear , well known and was reiterated only a month ago .
The European Parliament repeated that it was necessary for the Member States of the European Union to refrain from giving any military assistance or selling arms to Indonesia .
That is this Parliament 's view and the authors of the motion for a resolution under discussion did not deem it necessary to repeat that and have not asked for it to be included again in this joint motion for a resolution on which we are to vote .
Finally , I urge the President - and I should like to take this opportunity to urge our own President of the European Parliament - to try once more to send a parliamentary delegation to East Timor and to ask the Commission to pay special attention to the point requesting it to submit a report on the situation in East Timor and on violations of human rights in Indonesia .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution under consideration on the elections in Indonesia and the consequences in East Timor bears witness to the fact once again that the Indonesian authorities are systematically denying freedom , failing to respect human rights and perpetrating moral and physical violence .
When the Maubere people of Timor , assisted by the Secretariat-General of the UN , presented proposals for a peaceful solution to the conflict , the military dictatorship in Indonesia , ignoring the United Nations resolutions and showing flagrant disrespect for human rights , responded with violence and killing .
For these objective reasons , we ask the Parliament to approve the preambles and motions for resolutions tabled .
Mr President , Indonesia is actually an archipelago of 13 000 islands , a beautiful but very complex country with 280 languages and peoples , covering an area the equivalent of that from Ireland to the Russian-Siberian border .
It is a country which is enjoying economic success and is regarded with some jealousy in the region , a country with a growing middle class and a growing financial élite which , in contrast to Latin America and Africa , invests its money in its own country .
Do not think , however , that I am blind to everything that is wrong about Indonesia .
A year ago , I visited a number of journalists in prison and the trade union leader Mr Pakpahan , and I have protested to the authorities about their captivity on a number of occasions .
But what is the point of adopting resolutions here every month when the Western European Union is still the biggest investor in Indonesia ?
We have a choice : either we should allow no further investment and pull out completely , or else we should improve our communication with Indonesia through parliamentary delegations and the human rights organization there .
We should also send a delegation to Timor , with whom our relations are rather different . We might then be able to do something about the East Timor problem , provided that all our Portuguese colleagues from across the political spectrum are 100 per cent committed to achieving this .
Mr President , the elections in Indonesia attracted a great deal of attention , not just because of the hundreds of people killed during the run-up to them , but also because of the highly organized way in which the government disabled the opposition , prevented the media from doing their job and manipulated the international media .
But Mrs van Bladel is right , of course : none of this comes as any surprise in Indonesia .
I also have to admit that the European Union has no room to talk when it says that this must not happen again in the future , since it is European investors who are making the biggest profit out of Indonesia , which was moulded by 350 years of Dutch colonial administration .
Nevertheless , one thing the Council can do is to insist on an agreement for ASEAN to have a democracy clause , as we discussed in relation to Burma .
Europe must adopt a united stance against undemocratic practices , but I really think - and here Mrs van Bladel is right again - that we need to go and talk to the Indonesians , because one thing they have learnt from the Dutch is to listen and to talk .
However , whether they will actually do what we want is another matter altogether .
Belarus
Mr President , let me begin by thanking my fellow Members for their help in putting this item on today 's agenda , for it is indeed a burning issue . Twenty per cent of the territory of Belarus is contaminated .
Since 1996 , in line with the prevailing rationale in that country , measures have been taken , pursuant to a political decision , to ignore radioactive contamination and to revitalize the contaminated areas by replanting the fields and encouraging people to resettle the land .
There will therefore be no reduction in the number of children suffering the after-effects of long-term radiation with the passage of time .
The various international initiatives and the very many private initiatives have been subject since the beginning of this year to discriminatory decrees and have been prevented from distributing aid .
Organizations in the country which maintain international contacts are being criminalized , and some of their members have already been granted asylum in Germany .
It is virtually impossible for them to continue their work .
In other words , not only has the process of democratic reform in that country been halted but so too have the charitable aid measures on which the country 's survival depends , because the Government has no money and is even curtailing its own measures of assistance .
That is why we must call for humanitarian aid to be continued in accordance with international standards for the sake of public health and welfare in Belarus .
Mr President , first of all I should like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Schroedter for her commitment to Belarus and to human rights in general .
She grew up under a Communist regime and knows exactly what she is talking about when she refers to basic values and fundamental liberties .
That is why I wish to express my very sincere thanks to her .
In Belarus today we have a regime on European soil , led by President Lukashenko , which on the one hand is a Russian puppet and on the other hand is certainly not based on a free democratic order or anything of the sort .
Government policy in Belarus is laid down by presidential decree .
And since the politicians there govern by force alone , we must not mince our words to them .
Straight talking is all they will understand !
That is why I support the demands made in the motion before us .
It is simply high time our European Union drew up a clear catalogue of fundamental freedoms and human rights , spelling out the consequences for any of our partner countries that violate them .
The same conditions must apply to all countries we deal with , be they in Europe , Africa , Asia or anywhere else .
Our future credibility depends on it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall try to be as brief as possible in my speech .
As regards the motions for resolutions on the abolition of the death penalty , I must confirm that the Commission , having been greatly impressed by the questions presented , regards it as essential to respect the guarantees embodied in the International Charter on Civil and Political Rights and on Optional Protocol No 2 seeking to abolish the death penalty and Protocol No 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights .

The Commission still thinks that the question of the abolition of the death penalty is implicitly covered by the clause which has systematically been included since 1995 in the agreements with third countries and which enshrines respect for democratic principles and human rights as an essential element .
But we must bear in mind - as , moreover , has been mentioned by some Members - that hypocrisy does exist on the international scene and that some of our main commercial and political partners in the world do still retain the death penalty .
As regards Colombia , I shall simply say , bearing in mind the worsening situation regarding human rights in that country , that this question is regarded as the priority for the allocation of resources under the budgetary heading of ' Democracy and Human Rights in Latin America ' .
The Commission was deeply distressed to learn of the recent killings of various human rights activists and , of course , we roundly condemn these acts and urge the Colombian government to make every effort to identify those responsible for these crimes .
It is in that spirit also that the Commission continues to support the local non-government organizations , which have as their objective the defence of human rights and democracy , and the Commission is currently paying for five observers to be present under the auspices of the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights in order to gain first hand detailed knowledge of the situation and to obtain specific proposals going beyond the scope of Colombia and applicable at international level .
I should also like to point out , in the same spirit , that we are still continuing to support a strengthening of the Colombian judicial institutions .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to mention that in the field of the homeless , which is a highly worrying field , Commission , through the ECO , has managed to allocate approximately ECU 5 million to make a start on tackling this problem with our collaboration .
Evidently the Commission also shares the European Parliament 's concern about the constant and generalized violations of human rights and repeated threats to the democratic movement by the Myanmar government .
We are continuing to follow the internal situation of that country closely and we would say , unfortunately , that with the exception of the freeing of Aung San Suu Kyi last July , no significant improvements have been noted to date .
The Commission fully endorses the European Union 's call for a State Law and Order Council in order to establish a productive dialogue with the other political forces with a view to reconciliation and the introduction of multi-party democracy .
I should also like to stress that , over the past decade , in Myanmar , with the exception of humanitarian actions , the Commission has had practically no financial resources for aid projects for the development of that country which could involve the government .
The Commission hopes , finally , that the accession of Myanmar as a full member of the ASEAN will help to make human rights and democratic principles more constant and more continuous .
I should also like to mention that , as regards the sanctions imposed by the United States , we cannot have a dual standard .
We cannot condemn the Helms-Burton law because it is unilateral and extra-territorial whilst at the same time supporting the same measures implemented in Myanmar .
Having said that , I should like however to stress that the Commission will not omit in its proposals for collaboration between the European Union and ASEAN to stress this as an essential point .
That is not , however , sufficient , since items for meetings have to be approved by both parties before they are entered on the agenda .
Experience has shown for example that the question of human rights in Indonesia or the question of East Timor have never been placed on the agenda for the talks between the European Union and the countries of ASEAN , since they were opposed by Indonesia .
So , ladies and gentlemen , there is no guarantee that this question of human rights and the situation of democracy in Myanmar will be included in the talks between the European Union and ASEAN .
Ladies and gentlemen , as regards the peace process in the former Yugoslavia , at the Coordination Council meeting within the scope of the Peace Implementation Council held in Sintra on 30 May , it was stated that no parts of former Yugoslavia were fully respecting their obligations as regards the possibility for refugees , particularly those from minority groups , to return to their place of origin - with Bosnia-Herzegovina presenting special difficulties .
There is also a serious lack of cooperation with the International Court .
The Commission therefore fully supports the application of a stricter conditionality clause to all parts .
As regards Croatia , it is particularly important for Serb refugees from Croatia wanting to return no longer to be exposed to serious situations where there is insecurity and persecution on legal or other grounds .
The future relations of the European Union with Croatia will depend to a large extent on the way Croatia respects the return of these minorities .
Considerable progress has been noted as regards the peaceful integration of Eastern Slovenia into Croatia .
The municipal elections on 13 April were a success and the Croatian government 's manifesto was a suitable basis for a constructive relationship with the Croatian Serbs .
Mention should also be made of an agreement concluded recently between the Croatian government , the United Nations High Commission for Refugees and the United Nations Transitional Committee for Eastern Slovenia which lays down the rules for the return of Croatian Serbs now in Slovenia and Crajina .
Unfortunately these positive intentions , expressed at the highest levels , sometimes do not get through to the local authorities , so there are still incidents at local level .
We hope that with time and perseverance these too will be eliminated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is aware of the extremely disturbing and difficult situation of children in Russia , as well as of the difficulties currently facing the various centres taking in children .
Various examples of very constructive initiatives taken by the Russian authorities could be mentioned ; however those centres are faced with an extremely difficult budgetary situation .
Consequently , the Commission has allocated part of the funds available under the TACIS LIEN instrument to help these children .
The Commission is of course still following the situation through its delegation in Moscow and is naturally at Parliament 's disposal for any more detailed work in this matter in conjunction with a visit due to be made by a parliamentary delegation to Russia very shortly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is almost a recurring theme to discuss the lack of democracy in Indonesia and the question of East Timor and we all fear that familiarity might breed contempt .
However , the recent events in the elections in Indonesia and the violations of human rights in Timor remind us once again that this is perhaps one of the key elements in the coherency of the European institutions .
I shall not go again into the views of the Council and the Commission , which are known , but shall merely stress once again the impact , the decisive importance and the courage of this Parliament in defending the people of Timor .
Well done !
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as regards cooperation with Belorus I shall simply mention that the Commission suspended last November the normal cooperation framework , that is the TACIS programme for Belorus .
However the Commission supports the Council proposal to grant aid to Belorus limited to those areas where there is constitutional reform , protection of human rights and freedom of the press .
Consequently the Commission is prepared to draw up within 1997 a considerably reduced ad hoc TACIS programme in favour of Belorus for an amount of ECU 5 million in order to help with the rehabilitation of the civilian population in accordance with the conclusions of the Council and with the views of this European Parliament .
Some speakers were not here so we have not been pressed for time .
However , I would request the political groups to put a little more thought into these matters . I very much dislike having to cut speakers off when there is not enough time for them to say what they want to say , when other Members who have been listed as speakers do not turn up .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following two motions for resolutions :
( B4-0504 / 97 ) by Mr Bertens and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Congo / Brazzaville ; - ( B4-0536 / 97 ) by Mr Hory and Mr Pradier , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the critical situation in Congo / Brazzaville .
Mr President , just a few weeks ago , before Mr Kabila was sworn in , Brazzaville was a haven of peace .
The arrival of ragged refugees and all kinds of traffickers and former soldiers on the run led to instability .
In the last few days the city has seen horrors .
Heavy arms have been used in conflicts that have already claimed thousands of victims .
The situation facing Europeans there is especially alarming and it is very difficult to repatriate them .
European women have been raped and aid workers ' houses set on fire .
On the eve of the presidential elections , everything must be done to stop these clashes turning into ethnic cleansing .
Only the regular holding of elections can guarantee the legitimacy needed by the next head of State and enable the country to recover stbility .
The spectre of 1993 is hovering .
Remember what happened .
Similar violence led to some 2000 deaths .
Let us hope that the international mediation offered by President Bongo of Gabon will succeed in bringing an end to the hostilities .
A boomerang effect towards Kinshasa cannot be ruled out .
We must stop a Balkanization into mini-regions and mini-tribes from igniting the whole country and even spreading across the whole of central Africa .
Mr President , I obviously support the compromise motion put before the European Parliament by the radicals and liberals on the Congo crisis .
I should , however , like to draw your attention to an amendment that I have tabled , asking European countries to abstain from any military intervention in Brazzaville until they receive a mandate to do so from the European Union or the United Nations , except strictly for the purpose of ensuring the safety of their nationals .
Once again , France is to blame today in Congo , as it was in the case of Rwanda , Zaire , Central Africa , Niger and , unfortunately , as it probably will be in other African countries in the future .
The discredit in which France has placed itself by its imperial neo-colonial policy is such that even its best intentions are now suspect .
In this case , it seems that a French oil company armed the Congolese militia during the first clashes in Brazzaville just after the parliamentary elections .
The same company would appear to be playing a role now among the various heads of factions .
France has nothing better to offer the Congolese authorities than to apply the so-called ' limited sovereignty ' doctrine .
According to French expatriates , the French embassy is more concerned with political influences in this crisis than the safety of its own nationals living in Brazzaville .
This must stop .
It is time for France to work out a new policy instead of this disastrous one , which has been disastrous even for its own interests .
I think that the wisest thing for my country to do would be to give up most of its bilateral cooperation and put its human , technical and financial development aid resources at the disposal of the European Union .
As for military intervention in Africa , it should only take place as part of mandates delivered by the United Nations to the European Union with the agreement of the OAU .
That is the meaning of my amendment .
Mr President , a very brief statement to stress that the Socialist group supports this motion for a resolution and the wording of the joint resolution and would draw attention to the point asking the parties to respect the implementation of the cease-fire , stressing the efforts by the President of Gabon and his proposal ; on the other hand we for our part shall not be voting for the proposal just put to us by the previous speaker , because we believe that any military intervention in this framework should be in conjunction with a United Nations mandate and we shall therefore not be voting for this amendment .
But as spokesman in this case for the Socialist group , I should like to express our overall support for the joint motion for a resolution .
Mr President , once again we have tens of thousands of deaths to lament in Congo / Brazzaville , and here we are discussing the conflict .
What I wonder is whether we could not conduct the sort of active policy that would prevent these hostilities and these deaths .
During the past six days all hell has been let loose in a country we once regarded as exemplary because its President , who himself initiated the democratization process in 1989 , was peacefully voted out of office in 1992 .
And now , ahead of the presidential elections scheduled for 27 July , new conflicts are erupting .
Would it not have made sense , given that a conflict had been brewing since 1992 and that we were aware of the existence of private armies , to have used our trade relations to exert political pressure during the intervening period so that such horrific occurrences could not have taken place ?
Once hostilities have broken out , the dispatching of troops to bring out French people and other Europeans may be important to those people but it does nothing to resolve the conflict and always happens too late .
Let us pursue peace by means of preventive nonmilitary action and provide adequate funding for that purpose instead of constantly cutting our development budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are some lessons to be learned from the dramatic situation in Congo at this moment .
If we refer to the work of a world-renowned expert , Professor Bernard Lugan , we can see just how wrong we were to neglect a vital reality , i.e. that our political regime , parliamentary democracy , may have considerable merits but it is a very serious error to try and impose it artificially on African situations and , generally speaking , on to peoples who are different in terms of culture or civilisation .
These African realities are essentially ethnic in Congo .
There are 54 main tribes , divided into three groups : the Mbochis in the north , 13 % of the population , whose current leader is the former President , Denis Sassou N 'Guesso ; the Tekés in the centre , the Kongos and Bakongos in the south , 52 % of the population , represented in their sub-groups by President Pascal Lissouba .
The latter are divided among three States : Congo , Zaire and Angola .
Each group or sub-group has a stake in the capital and their representatives will only risk going there if they are accompanied and protected by their own militia .
That is what led to the current situation .
In passing we should remember - and this is the third lesson - that the racism that we are always hearing about in the European Parliament is a reality found throughout the world .
My proof is the number of rapes , mostly affecting people involved in mixed marriages : Europeans who married Africans and Africans who married European women .
The fourth point is that independence in the framework of colonial era borders - borders seen as inviolable - the major legal and political principle that presided over decolonization - is directly in contradiction with the right of people 's self-determination .
Western countries have never accepted that contradiction and we are now seeing its dramatic effects .
How can we not mention the strange influence of the United States in this part of the world - aimed without doubt at getting rid of French influence ?
We have seen the effects in Zaire where a genuine genocide has taken place while the United Nations stood idly by - applying what is now called good universal conscience .
We also note the influence of multinationals that finance the militia .
There will be no solution or lasting peace unless we separate the fighters , which is possible in Congo .
I also hope that the arbitration of Gabon 's President Omar Bongo , one of Africa 's wise men , will bring an end to the conflict between Mr Pascal Lissouba and his adversaries .
Mr President , the tragic situation in Congo-Brazzaville is reminiscent of that in the neighbouring Congo , formerly Zaire , where the hopes for peace that were vested in Laurent Kabila by the European Community now seem to be evaporating , in view of the atrocities being perpetrated against defenceless , innocent people .
The same events will probably unfold in Brazzaville : there too , huge economic interests are at stake , which the local population is unable to exploit and which will no doubt be bought up by foreign countries .
Clearly , Africa is falling apart , because its artificial division into states and statelets , the legacy of the colonial and post-colonial period , has become untenable .
Ancient tribal identities are resurfacing , and in particular the African ruling classes are taking power to satisfy their personal ambitions , rather than for the good of the populations they are supposedly governing .
Therefore , if Europe wishes to be credible , it must seriously rethink its entire policy towards the African continent .
Mr President , the Commission shares the serious concerns expressed in the motion on the tragic events in Brazzaville and their consequences on political stability and the economic and social situation of Congo and the whole region .
It considers that only a negotiated settlement can gradually restore civil peace and enable the presidential elections to be held , so that the institutions can function normally again .
That is why we are fully supporting the mediation undertaken by the Gabonese Presdient , and the talks under the aegis of the mayor of Brazzaville , Mr Kolelas .
The head of the delegation is still in the city .
He is in permanent contact with the Union 's ambassadors in the country and I think that we are helping to ease the mediation referred to in the motion for a resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B4-0473 / 97 ) by Mr Eisma and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the conservation of the tiger and the role of the parties to CITES ; - ( B4-0478 / 97 ) by Mrs van Putten , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the resolution on CITES - implementation in the European Union ; - ( B4-0479 / 97 ) by Mrs Pollack , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the conservation of the tiger and the role of the parties to CITES ; - ( B4-0506 / 97 ) by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , on behalf of the V Group , on international trade in endangered species ; - ( B4-0516 / 97 ) by Mr Weber , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the international trade in wild species of flora and fauna ; - ( B4-0532 / 97 ) by Mrs van Bladel and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the trade in ivory ; - ( B4-0545 / 97 ) by Mrs González Alvarez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the international trade in wild species of fauna and flora ; - ( B4-0557 / 97 ) by Mr Pimenta and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the conservation of the tiger and the role of the parties to CITES .
Mr President , the absence of some Members shows how extremely difficult it is for Parliament to function in Strasbourg .
The Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species has already begun its deliberations , and so it is rather late in the day for us to seek to lay down some of Parliament 's views , but I trust that the services will ensure that our views are forwarded very speedily to the negotiating team in Harare , since they are actually working on it at the moment .
Some speakers will no doubt raise many important issues , some of which are referred to in the compromise text .
Many , such as the position of elephants and the trade in ivory , are extremely complex , and there are divided points of view amongst not only affected countries but also the NGOs and other expert groups .
Because of widespread corruption and the continuation of the illegal ivory trade , we feel it is still best to maintain the status quo for the elephant .
I wish to concentrate on tigers , because these magnificent animals are on the brink of extinction and a good number of those which remain are in India , a country with which I am connected as chairperson of the Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia .
I know that NGOs , such as WWF , work closely with the Indian Government to help with tiger conservation work .
But , clearly , the most dramatic short-term threat to the survival of the species is the illegal hunting of tigers for trade in body parts , largely for the Asian medicine market , and the low level of grassroots support for wildlife conservation in India , despite very laudable efforts by the government in its project ' Tiger ' .
It is the responsibility of all the Parties to CITES to work together to stop the illegal trade in tigers and their parts and , for that matter , parts of other endangered species as well .
First , we need the CITES parties ( and I wonder why Ireland is not a party to this ) to adopt legislation to protect parts , products , derivatives and subspecies of tigers .
Second , we need very importantly to support public information campaigns in each and every one of the CITES partner countries .
Third , we need to ensure effective implementation of legislation - and this is really the crunch about CITES .
There are some very laudable things to be done there but if we do not have implementation - much as with the rest of European Union legislation - and if there is no effective legislation , nothing happens and species and habitats continue to decline worldwide .
This is really the most crucial , basic issue in attempting to stamp out the illegal trade in parts and products of endangered species and therefore in discouraging the poaching which is so valuable to very many impoverished people in some of the countries involved .
Training of customs agents and exchanges of information so as to help them recognize illegal products is essential , and the European Union countries can all help with the technical assistance needed in less-developed countries .
Time is short , endangered species are exactly that - endangered species - and time is running out for them .
Time is running out for habitats and for the biodiversity of this planet .
Everyone must pull together in CITES , and I hope Parliament will support the compromise text .
Mr President , ever since its entry into force in 1975 , the Washington Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species has proved to be a valuable instrument , indeed the only one based on ecological rather than commercial criteria to have had a positive effect .
Nevertheless , it has to be said that there are limits to the implementation of CITES : illegal trade is still very widespread and is valued at USD 3 to 5 billion annually ; not even Europe , unfortunately , has always been beyond reproach in its implementation of the Convention .
The danger now is that the measures protecting certain endangered species will be relaxed : at the current tenth Conference of the Parties in Harare , various proposals are under discussion with a view to downlisting certain populations of disputed species .
Such a move could lead to a revival of international trade and an increase in the poaching of these species .
I would draw particular attention to the problem of the elephant population in Africa and the risk of a return to the illegal trade in ivory , as well as the problem of the white rhino and the type of trade connected with it , above all for the production of medicines in Asia . This issue ties in partly with that of tiger hunting , to which the previous speaker referred .
Other species are at risk too : the vicuña in Peru , Argentina and Bolivia ; the whale , following a proposal from Norway and Japan ; and the Caretta turtle , in view of a request from Cuba .
In general terms , therefore , there is a very real danger that the situation of some endangered species will be called into question .
It is true that in some cases , thanks to CITES , there has been an increase in the population of certain species , but it is also true that if downlisting under the Convention were to be accepted , this would inevitably give a boost to illegal trade and the situation could become untenable .
That is why the approach being proposed by France - to use confiscated specimens to safeguard the artistic or cultural heritage - must be rejected , as must Namibia 's call for a relaxation of the criteria .
All the European countries and the Union must speak with one voice at this tenth Conference .
Mr President , the subject we are discussing is so completely self-evident that there is really no need for me to speak at length about it .
Human progress is a threat to the glory of creation , and despite all the agreements on saving what is under threat , magnificent animals such as elephants and tigers are still in terrible jeopardy .
That is why I welcome the fact that , just as the Zimbabwe conference on protecting these endangered species is taking place , the European Parliament should also make it clear that we , the representatives of the nations of Europe , are determined to save the world 's fauna for our children .
My group therefore warmly supports this resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE Group supports the joint resolution .
I believe it is balanced and addresses the important issues .
I only have two comments to make .
Point 4 refers to the situation of the African elephant and proposes that acceptable action be taken to avoid an excessive degree of conflict between the interests of man and those of elephants .
I believe this certainly merits consideration , because the African States , as we know , are calling for downlisting of the African elephant , which they regard as a threat to themselves .
But we must also ensure that animals are properly protected .
That is perhaps a task for the European Union in the context of the development cooperation in which it engages with a view to providing a basis for human subsistence .
I should just like to mention very briefly that the European Parliament is saying once again that products from endangered species must not be used under any circumstances in dubious medicines of whatever description .
We also did that in the Lannoye report , and it is a message we should reaffirm .
I would request Members to get here in time so that they do not lose their place , because I cannot always be sure that I will be able to give them the floor out of turn .
I realize that Members have many things to do , but the programme of the House cannot be changed to accommodate Members ' personal timetables .
Mr President , the tiger is threatened with extinction . Three of the eight species have been eradicated over the last 50 years , while those remaining have declined alarmingly over the last five years , especially in India , where two thirds of the tigers in existence are to be found .
This very dramatic development has resulted not just from the destruction of the natural environment , but also from the illegal trade in tiger products , which is actually increasing at an alarming rate .
China in particular is the largest producer and consumer of the traditional medicines in which tiger products are used .
Almost every day , one more tiger is lost , processed into supposedly curative powders and pills .
However , this is also a highly lucrative trade and one which we need to combat .
As Mrs Pollack said , the CITES conference is being held this week in Harare , which is why this is the perfect time to raise the issue of the survival of the tiger .
I should like to take this opportunity to urge the European delegation most strongly to fight for the tiger 's survival , and I would also call on the other CITES countries to ban all trade in tiger products and to take extra measures to save the tiger from extinction in this unparalleled way .
Mr President , the entry into force on 1 June of Council Regulation No 338 / 97 , which goes beyond the scope of CITES , is a clear illustration of the Community 's efforts to that effect .
The Conference of Parties to CITES , currently being held in Harare , is attended by all Member States that are party to the Convention and the Commission is actively involved in the establishment of common positions in the spirit of the new regulation , on both precautionary and sustainable use principles .
These will be reflected in the positions on proposals with regard to the African elephant , the white rhino , tigers and whales , and many other important issues before the Conference of the Parties .
However , since the discussions in Harare have just started , the Commission is not yet in a position to provide definitive answers on the final outcome of the proposals under discussion .
We support the resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , on a point of order .
As a lover of music like myself you would have been very pleased with the entertainment which was provided this afternoon in the foyer of the Palais .
Further entertainment in the Festival of Music will be held in Orangerie Concert Hall tonight starting at 8.30 p.m.
I hope and trust that all Members and all members of staff will make every effort to attend .
Mr President , I just wanted to point out that this morning my voting card was not in my place and my neighbour 's was there instead .
I asked for a replacement card but I am not sure whether I voted with my card or my neighbour 's .
I wanted to make that public but of course the necessary checks should be made when the voting lists are available .
You were right to make it clear publicly .
These errors can happen .
We will make sure that the services check that the votes are being recorded properly .
VOTES ( continuation )
The Commission proposal to set up a voluntary service to involve young people in collective interest activities in the Union or a non-Community country possibly reflects a good intention but seems to be founded on no legal basis in the Treaty .
Article 126 , the only article mentioned in the recitals of the proposal for a decision , only concerns questions linked to education and the education system .
We have been told that this poses no problem since all the Member States support the project .
We find this practice alarming - it is a current practice in Brussels , according to which the Treaty is put in the cupboard as soon as the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament agree not to apply it .
The Treaty is the European Union 's law .
It has been ratified by its peoples .
If we do not want to apply it , we should ask them to amend it .
But in any case it is intolerable to proceed in this way .
By the way , this situation shows just how much we in Europe lack genuine controls over the respect of subsidiarity that are sufficiently strong and independent to put an end to such deviations .
Unfortunately the IGC has not made any convincing proposals on this score .
It is anecdotal that the European Parliament , at the proposal of the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , has not hesitated to deal with this apparently marginal question and to try and have several of its hobby horses adopted .
It has voted for amendments asking for a European status of young voluntary workers , with a uniform social system ; the possibility of joining the European voluntary service in national services and to give it a ' transnational dimension ' ; to open this European service up to young people from non-Community countries and , of course , to increase the budgetary credits earmarked for the project .
. ( DA ) There is a long and sound tradition in Denmark of voluntary work among people of all age groups , not just young people , although the level of activity is significantly higher in this section of the population .
Denmark is often called the ' land of organizations ' . Indeed , in a cross-section of the Danish population , every single individual is a member of one or other organization , be it a political party , a youth organization , the scouting movement or a residents ' association .
All these people work to improve the conditions of their members and others sympathetic to their cause .
But only a minority seek to promote an awareness of ' European identity ' or real ' European citizenship ' , which are referred to repeatedly in the Fontaine report .
We question whether there is such a thing as a ' European identity ' or ' European citizenship ' .
We take exception to this form of EU propaganda among young people or the population as a whole .
We also do not think that there is a need for a certificate with a ' European quality seal ' or a ' European statute ' for young volunteers .
The area of youth policy is not mentioned in the Maastricht Treaty , and that is how it should remain .
We do not think it would serve any purpose to try to create a ' European youth policy ' such as is advocated in the report .
We also think that it would be irresponsible to send young people to third countries , as is being proposed .
There are often very difficult circumstances in third countries , and we do not think young people are really up to handling such assignments .
The above considerations are the reasons why we vote against the Fontaine report on a European voluntary service for young people .
The idea of sending thousands of young Europeans into a Member State , for a sufficiently long period for it to be effective , in order to carry out a given task , to be there and be useful , turns this programme , far more than traditional youth exchanges , into a genuine tool of citizenship .
It opens up new prospects for our youth and is the proof that European construction is all the result of youth mobility , young people 's desire to be citizens , their attachment to knowledge of other people .
I pay tribute to edith Cresson who has defended this project with resolve , as she rightly thinks that it is vital for the Union and for European citizenship !
I also wish to thank Nicole Fontaine , who has become our spokesperson on this subject and has always been a leading defender of European youth , banking on young people to speed up the construction process .
No vote should be missing when we come to vote on a European voluntary service !
We are banking on youth .
Such great hopes have arisen or will arise from our young people .
Let us not disappoint them !
Let us be bold for those who will live in and improve the Europe that we are building for them today !
Finally , I wish to take this opportunity to lend my support to all requests to increase spending on the Socrates programme .
Before telling you how highly I think of Mrs Fontaine 's excellent report , I should like to remind you of the role that the European Parliament has always played in promoting all that concerns youth policies .
It has always done all it could to involve young people in Union life and increase their opportunities on offer at European level .
It is therefore quite logical that it should have supported the Cresson initiative to relaunch the idea of a European voluntary service of young people by creating , in 1996 , a new budgetary line B3-1011 designed to fund this action .
That being so , I wish to congratulate Mrs Fontaine who has produced work of high quality .
This report establishes the bases of a new participation by young people in European citizenship .
Thanks to the voluntary service , all young people aged 18-25 years - and sometimes as old as 29 - will be able to take part in public utility actions across the Union .
It is a major programme , 1998-2002 , and has aroused great enthusiasm among our young people - they should not be disappointed .
It is also a new type of programme in that it enables young people not only to be received in host countries but also to be active there and be of use .
The presence of ' personalized tutors ' in the host countries will ensure that the young person feels useful and responsible for his or her actions .
There are still many problems to be worked out ( taxation , social welfare , etc ) but the Commission and the Member States are trying to find solutions .
The structure of the programme is highly decentralized , rightly so if we are to encourage the necessary flexibility on the ground .
That is why I am asking you , like me , to vote for this report with the amendments tabled by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , especially the amendment on the credits granted for the programme .
We are asking for 80 million ECU for the period 1998-99 .
This is in keeping with the financial perspectives and it is very low in terms of the benefit for young people involved .
Let us not be stingy over an action that mobilizes young people and gives them a strong feeling of European citizenship .
The European Voluntary Service may be a valuable instrument for consolidating a more human and more competitive Europe - two dimensions which , provided they go together , will define a new Europe .
More human because of the bonds it creates between young people of different cultures and more competitive because it brings more training which means that we more active , better informed , involved and active citizens .
But it will constitute such an instrument only if it is not deflected from its objectives .
Such deflection might arise because of a poor selection process , mismatching of young people and projects , failure to follow up the voluntary experience in order to channel that experience plus the benefit it has brought to the young people and - last but not least - because of a misunderstanding on the part of national governments of the role of Voluntary Service .
I think that the Voluntary Service should be targeted on long-term projects so that the experience is sufficiently impressive and lasting .
I hope that the Member States will accept the commitment to increase this programme exponentially by a minimum of 10 % per annum in order to guarantee that in a few years ' time all young people between 18 and 25 shall have access to the Voluntary Service which will naturally turn them into European citizens .
I must congratulate Mrs Nicole Fontaine on her report on the Commission 's proposal for a European voluntary service for young people , a Community action programme .
Of course , it should be noted that this Community initiative has already enabled several hundred young Europeans to enjoy this experience , a practical act of European citizenship .
In this context , the Commission 's proposal aimed at making the programme more ambitious is an interesting one .
It was nevertheless vital , as our rapporteur rightly emphasized , to strengthen and broaden participation in the programme .
That is why I fully approve of the proposals aimed at increasing spending on the first two years of implementation of the programme and lifting obstacles to the widest possible participation by young people .
The Member States should take the necessary measures to make their national civilian service programmes compatible with this voluntary scheme .
This programme should make it possible for as many young people as possible to have an experience of general interest in another Member State or outside the European Union , undoubtedly contributing to making Europe more practical for the younger generations .
Plooij-Van Gorsel report ( A4-0153 / 97 )
The European ICT industry offers great potential for employment and for the improvement of democracy .
We therefore welcome the initiative report produced by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , in which both the European Union and the Member States are called upon to take the necessary legislative measures to strengthen free market forces as soon as possible .
The development of information and communications technology must not be held back by a lack of legal security .
Marset Campos report ( A4-0170 / 97 )
. ( DA ) It is important to bring about a sustainable development model in the European Union - both in order to increase employment and to create attractive job opportunities .
So it is all the more regrettable that we could not get a report which realistically balances the need for a solution to the Union 's internal social and environmental problems , on the one hand , with the increased demands of competition in the light of industrial globalization on the other hand .
In his report the rapporteur focuses on an excessively one-sided model and , in view of that , I am obliged to vote against the report .
Pimenta report ( A4-0187 / 97 )
Mr President , on several occasions we have debated a 1991 regulation on banning the imports of furs of animals hunted using leg-traps - 13 animal species .
Since 1 January 1996 , this ban should have been in force as it is in 80 countries .
Sixteen months have now gone by and those furs are still being imported .
An international agreement was signed with Canada and Russia - the United States refused - to set acceptable standards for trapping , i.e. organized torture .
In other words ripped tendons , ligaments and tissues are all acceptable .
This agreement even sets acceptable periods for animals to fall into a coma , 30 seconds on average , but as long as 120 seconds for martens and sable or 45 seconds for ermine , i.e. instead of banning torture , we are regulating it , as long as we trap animals in enclosures with a chronometer to measure these times .
That is all without sanctions since the agreements signed with Russia and Canada provides for no sanctions for years and leg-traps will only be banned as of 2005 .
Mr President , I end here : this unspeakable standardized barbarity is allowed in the name of the Inuits , or Indians .
But it seems that these Inuits live in sumptuous houses on the west coast or the east coast , or in Amsterdam , or in Paris , or in Tel Aviv . One of the miracles of leg-traps is that the whole planet is inhabited by Inuits .
. ( DA ) We have voted to call on the Commission and the Council to reject the proposed agreement and implement the import ban .
The leghold trap is a cruel method of trapping and should be abolished .
However , we are not as sceptical as the rapporteur with regard to the exemptions included in the agreement to safeguard the cultural heritage of indigenous peoples .
We have been worried throughout that a very general ban would hit imports of pelts from animals not caught with leghold traps , and that such a ban would deprive indigenous populations of their livelihood and leave them dependent on social security .
It is important to warn against hypocrisy in this affair , and unfortunately the report does not give any weight to this .
The EU is itself the area of the world in which most leghold traps are used .
Here we only trap rats and water voles , rather than wild animals with attractive pelts .
It is as though we are only against this method of trapping for animals whose furs we would like to wrap ourselves in , whereas we are indifferent to the suffering of animals if they are classed as vermin .
. ( DA ) Mr Carlos Pimenta is asking us to reject the international agreement on standards for humane trapping .
However , the analysis in Mr Pimenta 's report contains several factual errors which are misleading .
How can we draft regulations in Parliament based on reports that contain errors ?
I will detail some of the factual errors and general problems arising in the Pimenta report .
A quite fundamental aspect is that the rapporteur 's analysis lacks an understanding of animal protection .
1 ) The first problem is that the report does not refer to existing trapping standards in the EU or other countries .
A comparison with the international agreement would otherwise show that existing standards are considerably less restrictive than those in the proposed agreement .
2 ) A second problem is that the report neither undertakes an analysis of current trapping standards nor considers how many animals are trapped in the EU or in some of the other countries which are considering signing the agreement .
Such an analysis would show that few animals are caught in leghold traps and that most are caught in killing traps .
It would also show that , here in the Union , we trap between four and five million animals in traps for which there are no EU standards at all .
It would indeed be an improvement if standards were introduced for these traps .
3 ) And now the factual errors .
Mr Carlos Pimenta completely overlooks the introduction of the following rules in the international agreement : Training and authorization of trappers . Requirements for daily trap inspections . The question of including selectivity .
These measures already go further than the existing EU measures .
The international agreement does not give greater consideration to trade than to animal welfare .
On the contrary , it seeks to make trade subject to standards for animal welfare .
Finally , we are asked to reject the international agreement because it is ' totally inadequate and ineffective ' .
The rapporteur asks us in these terms to accept the current EU rules , even though they are much weaker than those in the international agreement .
Similarly , he asks us to reject an agreement that will not be renegotiated !
We call that ' totally inadequate and ineffective ' .
A European Parliament resolution to reject the international agreement will certainly not bring about any improvement in animal welfare .
I have supported the rapporteur 's call to reject this agreement between the EU , Canada and Russia on animal traps .
Like many of my constituents , I am opposed to the cruel use of leghold traps .
The fact that this agreement as it stands would allow for their use for at least another four years is therefore unacceptable .
Equally , it would be wrong in my view to classify some types of leghold trap as ' humane ' .
There is no requirement to inspect traps regularly , when opposition to their use centres around the cruelty of leaving animals trapped and in pain for long periods .
Crucially , the USA has not agreed to endorse any such agreement , so any minimal standards would not even apply to the many animals trapped there .
Finally , I support the report 's call for an import ban to be imposed on pelts from 13 species caught in countries which do not use internationally agreed standards of trapping .
Civilized countries should be judged by how they treat weaker species as well as by how they treat their human populations .
EU role in sport
The next item is the report ( A4-0197 / 97 ) by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the role of the European Union in the field of sport
Mr President , as you know , we had to postpone the debate until this evening , and so I hope that those people who gave their apologies for not being able to attend the sport debate this morning will be here now .
We are talking today about sport in Europe , and the main reason why this subject has arisen is that a judgment delivered last year by the European Court of Justice , namely the Bosman ruling , caused a furore within the European Union , and so we thought we should put this subject on our agenda , since sport is simply regarded as an economic activity in Europe , whereas we really believe it to be very much more than that .
There are grounds for suspecting that the European Union , while seeking through its information policy to portray itself as a Union of the people , might actually be highlighting issues that are of little interest to our citizens and disregarding the fact that sport is one of the topics which ought to be highlighted .
Sport , after all , was drawing nations together before we founded the European Union , and so we should at least recognize the great significance of sport in Community life .
We must bear in mind that sport in the European Union , besides undoubtedly being an economic activity , also plays a wider and very important role .
Hundreds of millions of Europeans take part in sport through sports clubs or as individuals .
There are tens of thousands of sports clubs , numerous associations and federations ; there are sports movements , and the entire sporting community is essentially one of the great popular movements within the European Union .
That is why sport , besides being economically significant , which we do not deny , is a major cultural and social factor too .
Sport contributes 1.5 % to the gross domestic product , which naturally makes it an economic factor , so that in the context of the economic activity of the European Union it is classed as part of the service sector and must be treated as such .
But in my opinion the very fact that a huge number of people are interested in sport must make us talk more about sport in the European Union too and accord it higher priority .
Do not get me wrong here ; the European Commission does practise this , but it is more inclined to use sport as a means to a specific end - in a campaign to promote tolerance or in the fight against drug abuse .
It also uses sport to promote public health , and I believe we should take that aspect into consideration by rectifying a long-standing omission and giving sport a legal basis in the Treaty , which is under negotiation again at the present time .
Every year the Commission comes to this Parliament with its budget , and we always find an empty line there .
Nothing is allocated to sport , because , as the Commission invariably has to tell us , there is no legal basis for it .
We should therefore like to create a legal basis , so that we no longer have to keep trying every year to bring forward new arguments for the inclusion in the budget of resources for sport .
It is , of course , a very small percentage of the budget that is ultimately spent on sport , but it is spent to good effect in the Eurathlon programme and in the programme to develop sport for the disabled under the same budget entry .
I believe the Council in Amsterdam should recognize that .
That is why sport is on today 's agenda , so that Parliament can express its wish to have sport included somewhere in the Amsterdam Treaty , the successor treaty to Maastricht , perhaps in a paragraph which could most appropriately be added to Article 128 on culture .
If that were not possible , I should be content to see it appended as a protocol .
That too would be enough to give it a legal basis .
But we also had another reason for producing this report .
We wanted to ensure that major sporting events are not televised exclusively by pay TV channels in future .
I am glad to say that this wish has been anticipated in the Directive on television without frontiers .
However , we hope and expect that the national lists of important sporting events which the Directive requires will be drawn up in collaboration with the sports governing bodies , for they are the best advisers in that domain .
We also expect the Commission to get down at last to forming a task force in which the 18 or 20 directorates-general with responsibilities in the realm of sport can pool their efforts , since this would undoubtedly be a more efficient way of operating .
When all is said and done , we do not seek to supplant the sports governing bodies or the national governments in their specific fields of activity .
We only wish to introduce an additional European dimension in areas where we can provide the sort of support that cannot be provided nationally .
I believe we are faithfully following the path of subsidiarity here , and I hope that we shall all do our best to ensure that this report carries the weight of a powerful parliamentary endorsement , not least so that our wish to have sport included in the Treaty is heard in Amsterdam .
It would send a signal to the people of our countries that the idea of ' citizens first ' is not just a slogan connected in some way to the introduction of the euro but is a general principle that can be seen in operation in the sporting domain too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although sport plays an important part in the lives of European citizens , the EU has paid it scant attention in the past .
That makes the present discussion by the European Parliament on the role of the EU in sport all the more important , and I congratulate my honourable colleague Doris Pack on her excellent report .
Since the Bosman ruling by the European Court of Justice in December 1995 , sport has been a major topic of public debate .
In today 's report , which I fully endorse and to which I have also tabled a few amendments as the shadow rapporteur , the place of sport as a responsibility of society in its entirety receives particular emphasis , for sport is a significant social phenomenon .
With its educational , democratic , cultural , social , integrative and health-promoting aspects , it has an enormous beneficial impact on our daily lives .
Sporting events and the men and women who take part in them captivate millions in stadia and on television screens and motivate people to copy their idols and engage in sport .
In my small country alone , for example , two million people - one-quarter of the entire population - are members of sports clubs , which number 14 , 000 .
It is therefore insufficient to consider the economic aspect alone without looking at sport in its totality ; such a restricted view also creates undesirable side-effects , such as a lack of incentive to nurture young players because of the abolition of transfer fees , which was an unfortunate consequence of the Bosman ruling .
I fully support Doris Pack 's three main demands : firstly , the call to the current Intergovernmental Conference to include an explicit reference to sport in Article 128 of the EU Treaty ; secondly , the appeal to the Commission to set up a task force on sport , so that the responsibilities for sport , which are currently divided among 18 directorsgeneral , I believe , can be concentrated in one body ; and thirdly , the request for the production of a Green Paper , after consultation with all the main sports organizations , with a view to the formulation of an EU action plan on sport .
I also attach importance to the universal right of citizens to receive information , which means that major sporting events must not be restricted to pay TV but should be receivable in unencrypted form by all viewers ; it is also important that the sports governing bodies should help to draw up the list of such events .
Another important feature of the report is its special emphasis on school sport , youth sport and women 's sport , reflecting the fact that everyone , and particularly those from poorer and disadvantaged sections of the population , should have the right to engage actively in sport .
One of the conditions for this is a good training system for PE teachers and sports coaches .
Finally , the organization of a European Year of Sport would underline the importance of sport to the people of Europe .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Pack for her important report .
It is hard to carry out pioneering work which patently seeks to remedy omissions in a particular area of EU legislation .
Mrs Pack has in my opinion drawn up a balanced report which I have been able to be actively involved in preparing .
The lack of an official status for sport in Union legislation is an intolerable omission .
Is it feared that sport will take away EU resources , for example from other cultural activities ?
I am disappointed that the Intergovernmental Conference which is now drawing to a close will not be making any changes to the status of sport in Union legislation .
I am surprised at the civil servants ' and ministers ' attitude .
Sport has a really significant multiplier effect - an effect on health as well as social , cultural and the economic effect .
A great deal of anti-drug work is also carried on through sport .
The economic significance of sport , for example on the single market or indeed in health care , is impossible even to estimate .
Community standards influence sporting activities in innumerable ways , but the sports world is not able to influence decisions .
This is an absurd situation , because sport 's legislative status contrasts crassly with its position in society .
All the Union 's decision-making and legislation affects sports .
It over-arches sports legislation .
However , sports organizations and sports clubs are not consulted in the preparatory stages about legislation which affects them .
Sport has to adapt to laws and guidelines drawn up by people who do not understand sport .
I do not understand this way of going about things .
Young people who practise sports are also unable to take part in any EU programme , because sport has no status .
Sport is like a dirty word for the Union .
Of course young people who practice sports are just as valuable as those who draw or play music , for example , or do they have to pretend to be students or recorder players in order to get on to national programmes promoting freedom of movement ?
Amateur sports clubs do a lot of good voluntary youth work which has a wide range of positive effects on society .
It is , however , impossible to get any significant Union support for this youth work .
Conversely , other youth organizations , which are not sports organizations but do exactly the same type of work , do receive support .
The annual budget of ECU 3 m for Eurathlon is ridiculously small .
Without the active promotion of Parliament it would have been even smaller , for which we have to thank the Budget Committee and the Culture Committee .
Sport must be given the status it deserves in the Union , in a limited way , but so that sporting organizations and clubs are involved at the preparatory stage of legislation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Giampiero Boniperti , who is unable to be present in the House today .
As we all know , sport plays a key role in the lives of our citizens .
Sport should be thought of not merely as an opportunity for healthy competition ; it also contributes towards social integration and personal development in young people , preventing them from being at a social disadvantage .
Those who have practised sport have developed a fighting spirit and a capacity for sacrifice , as well as self-respect and respect for others : all qualities which build a person 's character and help him to progress through life .
When I say that it is a good thing for a youngster to learn to kick a ball , so as then to be able to kick drugs , what I mean is this : school and sport should go hand in hand , since both are essential to a young person 's growth .
Responsible adults , administrators and politicians are duty-bound to find ways of pursuing this social aim , which is essential to our way of life .
There is also a need to train specialist educators who can help young people from primary school onwards to realize their potential and ambitions .
Employment , jobs , the single currency , racism , community life and other difficult issues are doubtless of the greatest importance .
Sport , however , must not be placed last on the school curriculum .
Countries like the United States , the United Kingdom and others have taught us what a formative effect sport can have on young people .
A youngster 's identity can be forged in national sports federations , based on the common denominator of a European treaty on sport .
Football is now taught as a school subject in the UK .
An amendment was tabled and adopted a short while ago calling for sport to be incorporated into the Maastricht Treaty , with particular reference to general education , vocational training and employment .
The national federations must therefore draw up a blueprint for a sports movement at EU level , since only by overcoming national boundaries will it be possible to achieve a single , unifying agreement .
There are various national languages in Europe , but as Mr Samaranch , President of the International Olympic Committee , puts it , only one language is truly international : that of sport .
I read in an Italian newspaper the statement made by Mrs Bouffet , the new Minister for Youth and Sport in the Jospin government .
As the mother of two children , she has taken an interest for many years in the problems of young people , especially those in troubled inner-city areas .
She recently said : ' If our young people are sick , perhaps sport , as a source of healthy competition , can help bring them out of the labyrinth of despair ' .
We each have our own political views , but as far as sport is concerned , all those views have a single common denominator .
Mr Florio , excuse me if I sound pedantic but , according to the Rules , you are not allowed to deliver anyone else 's speech in the House .
So , the opening of your speech will say that your colleague would have said something along these lines .
The record cannot show that this is a speech he would have made .
Mr President , as Parliament 's longest-standing rapporteur on sport , I am very pleased with the Pack report .
On three occasions in the past , I have drafted resolutions on behalf of the Committee on Culture in which Parliament has called for a structural approach in the form of a European action programme on sport , and Mrs Pack has now repeated this urgent call in her excellent report .
Commissioner Pinheiro , what on earth is the Commission doing ?
Has it gone to sleep ?
I know that the sport section of DG X has a few very good officials who have been working on documents for a long time now .
So is there some kind of political problem ?
Why is it that Parliament 's calls over many years for a structural approach appear to have gone unanswered ?
Mrs Pack , you have put sport back on the agenda , which is important .
And who knows , there may yet be a lastminute Kohl-Kok alliance at the IGC to have sport included in the Amsterdam Treaty , which is what Parliament has long wished to see .
Mrs Pack says ' I hope so ' , and so do I. I sincerely hope that we are given a text that will serve as a legal basis for setting up European programmes , rather than as an escape clause so that top-class sport can avoid European rules .
The Liberal Group agrees with the rapporteur 's proposals , but there is one thing to which I would urge you to give special attention , since I feel that it tends to be overlooked .
We need a structural approach to a chronic problem that causes great distress : the extremely poor relations between the world of sport and the Commission .
Sport does not recognize the European Union , and the European Union does not recognize sport .
That is the nub of the problem , and we cannot hope to make any progress with the sporting world until it is resolved .
We can declare a European year of sport , we can set up a youth fund , we can organize an annual European sports forum - all very laudable gestures , but far too superficial to bridge the gap between sport and the European Union .
Incomprehension and suspicion still prevail , and there are clashes between sports regulations and European legislation on a daily basis .
That is why we need to give constructive dialogue top priority , and Bosman must surely have taught us all a lesson .
This is where we see the effect of having no structural sports policy or approach , and the Commission 's ad hoc tinkering will certainly not solve the problem .
It is essential for the sporting world to be consulted about the impact of single market legislation on sports regulations .
It must be made crystal clear how to deal with selection procedures , sponsorship agreements , championship competitions , drugs testing procedures , sanctions and so on .
Sport and the EU must not be allowed to drift any further apart , and good agreements will always make both sides the winners .
So , Commissioner , use this Green Paper as an opportunity to consult the sporting world in detail , and let us develop a structural approach and closer cooperation in this field .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank Mrs Pack for her tireless and valuable contributions to our parliamentary work on this and many other urgent and difficult subjects .
Sport has always exercised a strong cohesive influence over young people and encouraged the development of positive values such as determination , courage , tolerance , loyalty and friendship .
Until now , the European Union has taken an interest in sport solely as an economic activity , often overlooking its cultural and social dimension .
However , it is essential to acknowledge the special and independent nature of the sports movement , and a start could be made by including an explicit reference to sport in Article 128 of the EU Treaty .
A second very important point is the rapporteur 's request that the Commission should set up a task force to look into the different aspects of sport , and draw up a green paper launching a comprehensive action plan .
We fully endorse this request .
We Greens also seek the support of Parliament for our amendment calling for the national and international federations to agree to comply with Directive 337 / 85 and its subsequent amendments concerning environmental impact assessments for major sporting events .
Mr President , in the European Union sport has more than 100 million practitioners in thousands of clubs , and yet the European institutions still neglect it .
It was therefore useful that the European Parliament should take the initiative to make proposals aimed at including sport in the new Treaty and I should like to thank Mrs Pack for her excellent report , rich in proposals which , I hope , will be taken on board by the Commission .
Sport , by means of the fulfilment and balance that it can offer individuals , is an extremely important element .
It accounts for 1.5 % of the GDP of the European Union and is a large source of jobs .
The moral values that it vehicles are a very effective means of fighting violence , racism , delinquency ; it is a school of tolerance , courage and civic awareness , and can help to integrate less favoured young people or those who have lost their way .
But we cannot mention sport without a word on the Bosman judgment , especially on the broadcasting of sports events on the TV .
We know that the ' Television without frontiers ' directive made it possible to make considerable progress in terms of universal access to major sporting events .
Through these questions , it is the often fragile border-line between professional and amateur sport that is at stake .
We should therefore help the small clubs and less media-oriented sports .
In that respect , it would be desirable to safeguard equal opportunities - which in sports competitions is called uncertainty of results - and to safeguard the financial independence of clubs - company sponsorship also has its limits .
In these conditions , sport will no longer be the big unknown quantity in the European institutions .
If we do not include a specific article in the Treaty , we might consider a clear mention of Article 128 on culture .
That would give this field a minimal legal base , a specific budget , enough to coordinate and rationalise the various one-off initiatives that we have at present .
Until then , the drafting of a Green Paper or even the setting up of a task force would also be welcome .
Mr President , over 100 million Europeans currently take part in sporting activities , organized by tens of thousands of sports clubs belonging to associations and federations .
The sports movement is one of the main forces bringing people together in the EU .
We cannot ignore the fact that sport has become such a significant recreational activity that its implications transcend the social and cultural sectors and have a truly substantial impact on the economy .
In our view , sport and culture , which have close links with each other , are two sides of the same coin and will be more highly valued if , as a result of pressure from us , an explicit and realistic reference to sport can be included in the text of the new EU Treaty .
We feel that the appropriate place would be Article 128 , relating to culture .
The sporting world in general , and more specifically that of football , suffered a severe shock over the Bosman ruling , which caused such an uproar and upheaval that there are now serious difficulties affecting relations between clubs and above all the training of young players , as well as the very survival of thousands of amateur sports clubs .
Sport , and in particular participatory sport , can be made accessible to our citizens and enabled to contribute to their well-being through an overall initiative covering all the measures to be carried out , with a single body being identified which groups together all the organizations currently devoted to sport : this would overcome the present fragmentation at European level .
We are in favour of Mrs Pack 's proposals and compliment her on her excellent work . We fully support her report .
Mr President , Mrs Pack has produced a very good report , but as you know I always like to cause trouble here in the House , and I would draw your attention to two amendments I have tabled , one of which , I am at least honest enough to admit , does not have the support of my group .
I have tabled these amendments because they are on a very topical issue .
Everyone is calling for an article on sport to be included in the Treaty , which is of course an excellent idea .
But I find it difficult to accept the reasons given by some people , who say that the Bosman ruling is making it impossible for sports clubs in Europe to promote youth sport .
Let us be quite clear about this .
Representatives of the Commission have produced research which shows that of the handsome profits made from transfer fees , from this noble form of human trade , not even 5 % goes to youth sport - not even 5 % !
Now , the logical consequence of the Bosman ruling should be to declare that state aid to professional clubs must be seen as a violation of Article 92 of the Treaty , particularly state aid to economic entities , because it cannot be justified and is simply a distortion of competition .
I have tabled two other amendments which are supported by my group and a number of other people , calling for greater attention to be given to the way in which the Bosman ruling seems to be getting out of hand , and in particular the role of clubs which are taken over by private dealers and players .
The Bosman ruling is generally bandied about and contracts are broken mid-season supposedly on the basis of it .
It used to be the major sports clubs that bought and sold people , now it is the agents .
Let us get together with the sports associations to work out rules to govern this which do not contravene Community law .
I would urge you to think again about these amendments .
I know that you are not in favour of them , Mrs Pack , but they are the logical consequence of Articles 2 , 48 and 92 of the Treaty .
Mr President , Mrs Pack not only organized an excellent hearing on the subject of sport , but she has also produced an excellent report for us to discuss today .
If the Council of Ministers and the Members of the Commission are really serious about creating the people 's Europe that they are always talking about , then they should act on the recommendations contained in Mrs Pack 's report as soon as possible .
The fact is that sport affects every aspect of people 's lives : culture , health , recreation , nutrition , integration , minorities and education .
In education , however , sport has generally fallen victim to the need for cutbacks in recent times and has disappeared from the curriculum .
What do we want ?
We actually want two things .
Firstly , legitimacy , in other words a legal basis produced by including sport in the Treaty .
And , secondly , an adequate budget for funding the most important aspects of Europe 's approach to sport .
Finally , we need to show that Parliament too takes sport seriously .
I was glad to hear that all my colleagues are in favour of Mrs Pack 's proposal , and I therefore hope that the Bureau will accede to the request it is shortly to receive for the name of the committee of which I am chairman to be changed to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
Mr President , let me first of all offer my sincere congratulations to Mrs Pack on a truly excellent report .
Allow me , as a scholar of sport and a former Austrian national coach , to make my observations on European sport from a quite specific perspective .
The importance of sport has hitherto been totally underestimated in the EU ; on the rare occasions it is ever mentioned , it is considered as a purely economic factor .
Sport has no legal basis at all in the EU ; there are no explicit references to sport in any article of the Treaties .
And yet sport has many very important functions to perform in today 's society .
There is scarcely any other domain of activity that is so capable of motivating young people to make good use of their leisure time and of reintegrating marginalized groups into society through meaningful activity .
It encourages elderly people to keep themselves physically fit .
So the importance of sport lies both in its enormous impact as an instrument of preventive medicine and above all in its great sociocultural potential .
We in the Freedom Party of Austria are therefore entirely in agreement with the rapporteur that sport should be incorporated into Article 128 without delay as tangible evidence of its significance .
Lastly , sport is also extremely important as a means of international understanding when it takes the form of fair and sporting contests with other countries , when people take pride in representing and supporting their own nations without letting that pride spill over into senseless and excessive nationalism .
Sport is an international language .
Sport binds people together !
Sport is a celebration of what we have in common , not of our differences .
Sport can therefore do more to foster mutual understanding than many an artificially conceived European project .
We should not therefore regard sport as a primarily economic activity but as an essential social and cultural contribution to international understanding , and we should do all we can to promote it within the strict bounds of the subsidiarity principle .
Mr President , I have always regarded it as one of the privileges of being a Member of this Parliament to work alongside Mrs Pack .
In English we would say she is a human dynamo .
To make an awful English pun , I would say that this report is ' packed ' full with her energy and commitment .
I totally back the call to include a reference to sport in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Maastricht recognizes the significance of culture in clause 128 but for millions of Europeans sport is more important .
Next month in Portsmouth , my constituency , I am attending the opening of the Special Olympics organized for young people from across Europe with severe learning difficulties .
They will never get to university and be able to use Socrates .
They will not be able to join the European voluntary service .
But they can participate in sport .
I am delighted they are going to get a grant but I am rather ashamed that it is so small .
As Budget Rapporteur for Culture , I know that the money allocated for sport - ECU 3m - is derisory .
But even that sum faces the annual battle that there is no legal base and the Council regularly attempts to cut it out altogether .
As a Parliament in Europe we believe in promoting good health , helping social integration and recognizing the needs of the disabled .
Is there any better way of doing that than in sport ?
This morning I asked for the youth volunteer service to be called the Mitterand Volunteers .
I will be , perhaps , slightly less francophile this afternoon when I remind Members that in England we have a saying : the Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton .
Let us build Europe on the playing fields of Europe .
Mr President , I must begin by congratulating Mrs Pack on her work - she is a very active member of the European Parliament .
Mrs Pack , like Mrs Larive and other members of the European Parliament , has always worked for the development of a European Union sports policy .
But you yourself mentioned the difficulties that we have encountered in the past and that we still encounter in this business .
That said , since in Amsterdam we are going to be debating important questions for the future of the European Union , I hope that this report can be considered by our Heads of State and Government as a useful contribution to a major debate on the European Union 's competences .
The question of sport broadly departs from the framework of sport proper .
We should take a further look at three aspects for an overall approach to sports policy in the European Union .
First of all , the sport model .
Do we think of sport as a public service ?
What do we think of the relationship between professional and amateur sport ?
What is the role of the public institutions compared with NGOs ?
How are we to conceive the organisation of European sport ?
Secondly , the relationship between TV and sport .
Their mutual independence is now enormous , virtually a question of survival in many cases .
Thirdly , as has been mentioned , the social role of sport .
Sport is an excellent instrument for creating jobs ; sport as an instrument for combating social exclusion , poverty in less favoured communities ; sport as a vehicle of integration par excellence ; sport as a means of forging links between people from different parts of the world or different walks of life .
Those are just some aspects which , in my opinion , the Commission should take seriously when looking at sport in the future .
I think that the idea of a Green Paper is an excellent one and even that of a task-force .
It should be strengthened by improved cooperation between the Commission services : education , culture , research and even external relations and DG X. I must thank you , Mrs Pack , for your report and I hope that it will be followed up .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he can assure me of the truth of what Mr Papas , the Director-General , more or less hinted at to the sports bodies , namely that the Commission is ready to set up this task force and that they will not wait until the next term but will take this action - as I urge them to do - before the end of the present term .
We are all waiting for this , and , as Mrs Larive said , we have been waiting for a long time ; at some stage we shall become impatient .
I am also speaking on behalf of Mrs Larive now when I ask whether we may expect anything more than fine words on this task force and whether specific action has been initiated .
Inasfar as I can speak on behalf of some of my colleagues , I have to say that it is the Commission 's intention to present a communication after Amsterdam .
Of course , for that we need to create the necessary conditions for presenting that communication .
The task force will have an extremely difficult role to play .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Excise duty on certain mineral oils
The next item is the report ( A4-0206 / 97 ) by Mr Cox , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Decision authorizing Member States to continue to apply to certain mineral oils , when used for specific purposes , existing reduced rates of excise duty or exemptions from excise duty , in accordance with the procedure provided in Article 8 ( 4 ) of Directive 92 / 81 / EEC ( COM ( 96 ) 0549 - C4-0071 / 97-96 / 0263 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , the unusual length of my speech tonight - and I may not use all the time - reflects the hour of the evening and the length of the actual piece of work we are dealing with , that you have just read out , which would probably require seven minutes to explain it .
The report deals with exemptions from excise duty applied to certain mineral oils .
The reason why we are dealing with it now is that it arises from a review of those exemptions which needed to be undertaken and that review was provided for in the basic legislation on excise duty agreed in 1992 .
This directive , along with the directive on VAT , was one of the principal foundations of the tax side of completing the single market .
About 80 exemptions are treated , covering all 15 Member States , and they are the ones dealt with in this report .
While the 1992 excise Directive set out a procedure for granting exemptions , in effect three procedures can be identified over the years .
A large number of exemptions were agreed back in 1992 at precisely the same time that the excise Directive was adopted .
As such , although they may conform with the exemption requirements provided for in the law , the list was agreed without direct reference to the legislation since the list of exemptions and the Directive were adopted on the same day .
A kind of political package deal was done to get the excise duty Directive over the line , as it were .
So the Council feels that on that list , agreed on that day , it got a once and for all exemption .
This is something that in principle Parliament does not accept .
There is a second package in the list of exemptions , which has been adopted over time and which more or less follows the rules set out in Article 84 of the 1992 Directive which deals with these very exemptions .
Finally , there are some more exemptions , making about 80 in total , that have got through the system by tacit agreement : a Member State indicated that it wanted an exemption , no one cried ' stop ' so the exemption came to pass .
So that is the way the exemptions have ended up for review at this stage .

In reviewing this long and complex list , Parliament has set out in Amendment No 4 to recital 8 of the Commission 's proposal its essential view in principle of what should happen , which is that no review procedure should be adopted by the Council which has as its object or effect the indefinite open-ended extension of exemptions .
This principle , of course , does not rule out extending exemptions , it simply says that we must keep them under regular and constant review and that they cannot exist indefinitely .
Furthermore , we in Parliament insist on the desirability of regular and periodical review with the possibility of renewal , subject to three conditions : that the exemptions be renewed respecting fair competition , the proper functioning of the internal market and Community policy on environmental protection .
By placing these principles in a recital , we are signalling a strong intent on Parliament 's part but nonetheless it should not create any operational difficulty for the Council in the next few weeks to sort out this exemptions question .
However , in Amendment No 5 we draw attention to the fact that all exemptions shall and must be subject to fundamental review as part of the proposal for a Council directive on a Community framework for the taxation of energy products .
This is a major review that looks at the ill-fated CO2 tax , all the exemptions , all the excise duties on mineral oils , and the energy and environmental policies .
We want that review as a matter of fundamental principle to be open-ended to such a degree that no exemption we are treating today can be presumed to be inviolate or free from review as part of this framework proposal that we shall consider in due course .
In agreeing to place these principles in the recitals and not in the articles of the proposal for decision , we are stopping just short of a showdown with Council right now .
We are stopping just short , provided the Commissioner tonight can confirm that the Commission accepts the principles we have laid down and that they will back those principles and represent those those principles at Council , specifically in relation to the framework directive on energy taxation which , as I said , we will come back to .
On the question of timing , we have a number of amendments .
This has been a slow procedure and the result is that some of the timing dates mentioned in the proposal are now out of date .
So a lot of the amendments are simply updating the document as required because of the passage of time .
The Green Group has recommended two elements on timing .
They say that the review procedure on exemptions in the future should be tied into the framework document .
I agree with that in principle .
But I have one fear and therefore as rapporteur I am not recommending the acceptance of the Green Group amendments .
We know just how difficult it is under Article 99 to get the Council of Ministers to agree anything on taxation and my fear is that if we adopt the Green Group amendments , we may not get to review the exemptions for years because - I hope it will not happen , but it could - the Council will delay the adoption of the framework document for a prolonged period of time .
I want to see dates left in and , if it is replaced by the framework document , what the Greens want to see - which I agree with in principle - will then come to pass .
But for that practical reason , I am suggesting that we stick with my original amendments and not with those of the Green Group .
Finally , I repeat that I want to hear on the record of this House tonight an engagement from the Commission to support Parliament 's principles in this exercise fully .
They are : no to indefinite open-ended excise exemptions ; yes to regular review with the possibility of renewal ; yes to fundamentally reviewing all existing mineral oil exemptions as an integral part of the proposed framework for taxation of energy problems .
Mr President , after Mr Cox there is not much else to say .
But can I start off by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Cox , in piloting this report through the committee , and hopefully through the Parliament , in a largely uncontroversial way .
There are a number of alterations to the original documents but the vast majority of them , as Mr Cox pointed out , are to do with deadlines .
The extensions which have been tabled are sensible on the whole and therefore acceptable to the Socialist Group .
The two he highlighted , the two amendments from the Greens , Nos 1 and 3 , the Socialist Group will be backing because we do believe they give a greater flexibility and we do think that maybe the Council of Ministers will come forward with a decision on them and we will be able to review the exemptions in the future .
We will also be supporting the amendment to the effect that in any future review procedure will not be on the basis of an indefinite open-ended extension of the exemptions .
The whole question of excise duty , whether it be on mineral oil , tobacco or alcohol is one which this Parliament must face up to .
For too long we have shut ourselves off from reality , we have not faced up to the problems .
The completion of the Single European Market is a goal of this Parliament , but too often protection of sacred cows , which many groups in this Parliament defend , have put obstacles in the road towards the completion of the single market .
I would be the last person to defend or to abdicate complete harmonization of indirect taxes , but where the differentials are so great that it is leading to distortions in the market and fraudulent trading then it is high time this Parliament acted .
For not to do so would be for us to condone the worst practices currently existing within the single market .
That is true for mineral oils , it is true for tobacco and it is also true for alcohol .
For the Parliament to overcome this , we must break out of our parochial views from our regional or national areas and consider the wider implications .
The reports on tobacco and alcohol will be discussed later this year .
Unfortunately I do not see the same progress being made in these areas as has been made in the area of mineral oil but one can always hope .
Looking about , this is the year of change .
For the first time in eighteen years we now have a Labour government in Britain .
I was thinking as I was listening to the previous debate that for the first time in 68 years Kilmarnock has won the Scottish Cup , so I really have to think this is the year for change .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cox has put his finger on the salient point .
It concerns the relationship of this report to Commissioner Monti 's initiative , which was designed to create a legal framework for the taxation of energy products .
Just as he , for the reasons he explained , does not wish to accept our amendments , we cannot approve his report without our amendments , for we consider it crucially important to make Mr Cox clearly aware that the Monti initiative must succeed , and then I would extend it again .
We have still more changes of government ahead of us , and once we have changed governments in Germany there will be no governments left that want to sabotage systematically the harmonization and coordination of taxes .
Then at least nobody will be able to make the excuse that some governments are seeking unfair advantages for historical or purely national reasons .
And then the Monti proposal and the Commission initiative will surely butter our parsnips .
Since that will happen in the foreseeable future , Mr Cox , our proposal on the coordination of time limits is certainly not about postponement until never-never day but an attempt to take political action in this situation , to maintain the pressure and to tackle the necessary restructuring of the entire system of indirect taxes , so that the unfair , ecologically harmful and antisocial distortions that are rooted in today 's markets for historical or national reasons can finally be weeded out .
That is an urgent task .
It is part and parcel of the completion of the single market , and we must not ease the pressure .
For these reasons we shall take the line I have described .
Mr President , we support the Commission 's proposal to abolish a considerable number of the exemptions from excise duty on fuels .
The use of mineral oils is accompanied by external effects which are often not passed on in the market price , and levying excise duty can do something to offset this .
Naturally , it must be applied as consistently as possible .
There is one incomprehensible exception which clearly flouts this rule , and that is the kerosene exemption for commercial aviation .
The Commission rightly feels that this exemption cannot form part of a sustainable policy and intends to urge the International Civil Aviation Organization to carry out a feasibility study .
However , I do not think that its approach is firm enough , and things could drag on for some years yet .
The proposed decision which is before the House abolishes all the exemptions for internal leisure aviation , and rightly so .
The next logical step is to impose a kerosene levy on all commercial aviation within the European Union , particularly where there is good alternative transport for short-distance flights .
A second step would be for the Member States of the Union , if possible with the United States and Japan , to revoke the international agreement on this matter and jointly to introduce a levy on kerosene .
How far is the Commission prepared to go along with these proposals , and what timescale would it follow ?
I think everyone agrees that we need to work towards a transport policy which is as sustainable as possible .
Exemptions for inland waterway transport are compatible with such a policy , since this mode produces far fewer external effects than road transport .
The expected increase in transport should therefore be absorbed by inland waterway transport as far as possible , not least because of the overcapacity which exists in this sector .
We need to ensure that this form of transport is made as safe as possible , and we need to combat surface water pollution .
An exemption for local public transport is a good move for improving the environment in Europe 's cities , and if it can be limited to the lighter fuels such as LPG in future , things will be all the cleaner .
I agree with the Commission that it must be possible for Member States to introduce different rules in future .
The main objective must always be to protect the environment , and exemptions must not be granted indefinitely .
The Commission welcomes the Cox report containing the opinion of Parliament as it reflects and supports the Commission 's view that there should be no open-ended derogations .
All the proposed amendments which alter the effective dates in the draft Council decision can be accepted without reservation .
The amendment to Recital 8 can also be accepted in principle , subject to detailed examination of the drafting .
On the other hand , whilst the new Recital 8a precisely describes the Commission 's intention to introduce a new procedure in its proposal for the restructuring of the system for the taxation of energy products , we cannot accept it as a new recital as it does not refer to any provisions in the body of the text and is not , therefore , legally justifiable .
In this context I should like to point out to Parliament that during discussions in the Council on the Commission proposals for the restructuring of the system for the taxation of energy products , the Commission will take the opportunity to come back again on the whole issue of the treatment of derogations and seek , through the introduction of a new procedure , a situation whereby no derogations exist for an indefinite period .
Mr President , in the principle of the matter there is no disagreement between Parliament and the Commission .
With regard to Amendment 5 , that is , Recital 8a ( new ) , which the Commissioner says cannot be accepted because it does not find a legal basis in the decision , the amendment refers to exemptions in the Council decision .
In my opinion and that of the committee it is firmly rooted in the current proposal for a decision and builds exclusively on that , but adds in the important political reference that all these exemptions should be subject to fundamental review in the framework document .
I do not dispute in any way that we are in full agreement as regards the substance of the issue .
Others will have to look at the legal aspects because I am not an expert on that .
But on the substance , we are in full agreement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , looking at the record of voting for yesterday , for some unknown reason - and I am usually pretty diligent about these matters - there are three votes where I am not recorded as having voted .
I did vote on every vote yesterday .
We have made a note of that and we shall check it .
Madam President , I refer to page 8 of the Minutes for yesterday where it says : ' The President closed the debate ' .
What it does not say is that Members were summoned to vote at noon but that the debate was still continuing .
Indeed , Commissioner Cresson was obliged to reply to the debate while Members were still coming into vote .
The President had to call upon Members to stop talking and take their seats to allow the Commissioner to finish her response .
It seems to me that we are not ordering our affairs as efficiently as we should .
Members come to Parliament to talk and if they arrive in the Chamber expecting to vote and find that a debate is still in progress , it is not unnatural that they should speak to each other .
I submit that we should organize our affairs better and either allow a certain amount of time in the morning session for those colleagues who will run over - as I am doing - or start the voting later .
That was not about the minutes , but we have made a note of it .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Madam President , on Tuesday morning , despite grave reservations , we agreed on the urgency of sending financial assistance to Macedonia and Bulgaria , even though we had not had any opportunity to discuss the matter in committee .
Because of the urgency of the situation there , however , we agreed , and in committee we were told that on Friday we would have the opportunity to hold a brief discussion on this subject .
Now I see that no such debate is planned , and I wish to protest about that , because it has never been discussed , and because it is not in line with our procedure to date .
Mr Posselt , I can only say that the committee decided on a procedure without report , and so there was no reason to hold a discussion at the part-session .
Madam President , what Mr Posselt says is correct .
We raised this point ourselves , and we asked that the issue should not be dealt with in this way since we knew that it would not be discussed in committee or in the plenary .
That was perfectly clear .
So you are right to say that not having a debate is not the proper way to go about things , but that was part of the package you voted for , and that is where the problem lies .
Thank you Mrs Aelvoet .
Votes
The recommendation is deemed adopted , since no written objections have been submitted by one tenth of the Members of Parliament .
I wish to protest most strongly against the way in which the Council has pressurized us over the financial assistance for Bulgaria and Macedonia .
There is no urgent need for this financial assistance , since it is not emergency aid for a starving population .
These are not countries where a disaster happened the day before yesterday , and where it is absolutely essential for blankets to be sent today .
In spite of this , the Council has approached Parliament at a time when it is unable , either in the appropriate committees or in the plenary session , to verify the circumstances , to discuss the issue , to draw up a report and to vote on it in full knowledge of the facts .
The Council 's disregard for Parliament once again shows up the European institutions in a very bad light , and makes it urgently necessary to have a fundamental revision .
I have a further criticism about the financial assistance itself .
In the present case , it consists in issuing non-transparent loans in order to balance the budgets of the countries concerned .
Basically , these credits are just being used to secure other credits issued by private banks in Europe .
In other words , once again public resources are being used to ensure that the banks ' private profits do not shrink Public money is being used to oil the wheels of private banks .
That is not a responsible way to use tax-payers ' money .
In addition , it keeps these ' assisted ' countries in debt .
What we have here , in fact , is nothing more or less than a lightning attack designed to perpetuate the system of dependency on the banks .
These credits are part of an overall strategy which is coordinated by the IMF .
In this way it is able , quite shamelessly , to interfere in the domestic policy of the countries concerned .
In Bulgaria , this issue has even caused a government to fall from power .
This carrot-and-stick policy is extremely problematical .
The EU can always turn off the money supply if the governments in question do not toe the line and follow precisely the sort of financial and economic policy that Washington and Brussels approve of .
In no way , however , is our group fundamentally opposed to financial assistance for Bulgaria and Macedonia .
This assistance , however , should not be used to secure bank profits . It should go to the countries and the people affected , and should be used , transparently , to help those branches of the economy that are in difficulties to get back on their feet again .
This urgent matter has gone through Parliament without a debate - either in the relevant committee or in the plenary session .
We are talking here about macro-financial assistance , which is stand-by assistance that is to be used to settle debts which these countries have entered into in order to meet the criteria set by the IMF .
The people in these countries will not derive any benefit from this money : it simply flows from bank to bank .
The Commission document shows that this money will only be paid out when the countries concerned have to a large extent paid off their debts .
Basically , this public money is being used to feed the private banking system , and to draw the countries concerned into a position of long-term indebtedness .
The Greens are demanding credible support measures which include structural aid for sustainable development projects .
The needs of democratic development in these changing countries will not be served if a large part of their national economic success is due to Western banks .
When are we finally going to be prepared to have a system of international financial relations that shows some respect for human dignity ?
I did not leave the part-session until after the vote on this point , and thus I did not take part in the subsequent procedural debate .
However , I do not believe that participation in this procedural debate is absolutely essential in order to justify my submitting a written explanation of vote , because , as I have already mentioned , I did take part in the vote , and the procedural debate did not take place until after we were called to vote on the report by Mrs Magda Aelvoet .
Cox report ( A4-206 / 97 )
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Cox report today .
The proposal for a decision relates to authorizations for Member States to apply a number excise duty reductions and exemptions until 31 December 1998 and to the abolition of a number of other excise duty reductions and exemptions with effect from 31 December 1996 .
The Danish Social Democrats would welcome an amendment of Directive 92 / 81 / EEC , which is the legal basis for this proposal , as soon as possible so that the Member States may be authorized to impose excise duties on mineral oils supplied for use as a motor fuel in especially polluting commercial vessels sailing in EU waters .
The provision in Article 8 ( 1c ) of Council Directive 92 / 81 / EEC should be deleted , so that Member States are free to impose duties on fuel for use , for example , on catamaran ferries .
Catamaran ferries are the cause of serious environmental pollution , noise nuisance and disturbance to wildlife ; they endanger other sea-going vessels and are a nuisance to beach visitors .
The Danish Social Democrats would also like to see the transport of goods and passengers switched from catamaran ferries and other fast-moving craft to more environmentally friendly vessels .
The PPE Group agrees with the rapporteur that we should not approve any kind of review procedure which leads to exemptions being extended indefinitely .
All exemptions must be reviewed at regular intervals , and the PPE Group feels that it is vital to make this clear when all the current excise duty reductions or exemptions expire .
If Member States wish to extend exemptions or reductions in the rate of duty , they must be able to provide good reasons for doing so , and these must not conflict with the principles of the single market , fair competition and a sustainable policy on the environment .
If too many exceptions are made which do not meet these three conditions , it will be impossible for the single market to operate .
This is why my group feels it is clear that the fixing of rates cannot be left entirely to the Member States ' discretion .
The Commission 's report discusses a number of relatively minor points in detail , but says nothing about the main issues , such as the special position regarding excise duty on fuel for commercial aviation and for shipping .
I understand that the Commission is to put forward a new proposal on the excise duty on mineral oils , so I wonder whether this document before us now really counts for anything .
Perhaps the Commissioner could clarify this point .
There is another point I should like to mention .
Given that at least 70 exemptions or exceptions have been granted over the years for various policy objectives , and not always the most convincing ones at that , I am amazed that the Commission is causing so many problems about granting a low VAT rate for labourintensive services , which could promote employment in sensitive sectors .
In view of the many exemptions granted on excise duty , perhaps the Commission could finally give this proposal serious consideration .
Coming back to the excise exemptions , the forthcoming ECOFIN Council is going to have to reach a unanimous decision on a new package of derogation applications , and it appears that they have all been approved apart from the two from the Netherlands .
The Netherlands wishes to increase the excise duty on fuel from 1 July 1997 , except for heavy goods vehicles , i.e. diesel .
What is more , the rate for petrol in the border regions is to be increased less than in the rest of the country , the so-called ' Zalm zone ' , and I can well imagine that there is still disagreement on this .
This Zalm zone will mean that there is not simply a difference in rates within the single market , but several at the same time within one country .
If the government is unable to put forward a more convincing argument for this application , which is what Parliament is calling for in its resolution , then I hope that the application relating to the Zalm zone will not be approved .
It would simply create yet another trade barrier , and we have enough of those already .
Pack report ( A4-197 / 97 )
We share the opinion that sport plays an important role in the development of young people and also in public health .
But that does not mean that we share the opinion that the EU should concern itself with a specific sports policy , for top class sport or for sport for young people .
The sporting activities of our citizens need very little regulation within the political sphere .
The sporting movement should bear the primary responsibility for sport , both now and in the future .
It , alone , has built up an extensive international co-operation with global and regional co-operation organisations based on local and national structures .
The sporting movement has shown itself capable , without supranational political interference , of arranging impressive international events such as the European championships , the World championships and the Olympic Games .
Such a force should be left in peace .
It is also important to underline that sport for young people is primarily a matter for parents and families , who are at the very bottom of the subsidiarity chain .
European sporting projects fall outside the framework of matters to which the Union should be devoting its energies .
Sport is one of the most widely practised of human activities .
Be it for money or pleasure , regularly or occasionally , millions of people take part in the various sporting activities on offer in the Union .
Yet , despite the Commission 's enthusiasm for sport , the humble MEP that I am fears that it is just a smokescreen to hide the lack of legal and financial resources , the scattering that confirms the lack of an overview and the weakness of the Treaties where sport is not mentioned .
It is therefore with fervour and recognition that I welcome the excellent report by our colleague Mrs Pack .
This is a very timely moment since we can hope to put pressure on our governments and on the Commission for the IGC to agree to acknowledge sport as such and not only through the budgetary chapter on ' information and communication ' .
Sport , as the 1995 Bosman judgment involuntarily revealed , is not just an economic activity to be dealt with in accordance with competition rules .
It is also and above all a field enabling the rapprochement of cultures and nationalities , helping towards the social integration of the disabled and in which spectators and players alike are equal .
Sport brings together many people in organisations and clubs , where they are committed to cultural networks and practise democratic responsibility .
It is therefore time to provide our ambitions with the necessary means .
That is why I support and applaud the Pack report .
I hope that our Assembly will do the same .
There can be no doubt about the importance of sport and the interest which the majority of the people of the EU have in it .
But I do not agree with the rapporteur that an Article in the EU Treaty is needed to cover sport .
This is an area which , I think , should be covered at national level .
I cannot support Amendment No. 3 from the Socialist group , because the amendment proposal means that giving public aid to professional sporting associations would be forbidden .
We do not distinguish between professional and non-professional sporting associations in Sweden , in fact they are often linked .
If this became an EU regulation this would remove the foundation stone of Swedish sporting activity .
On the contrary , I think it is a good thing for the public sector to give support as this gives the associations independent status .
Sport is so very important , particularly for young people , that its activities should not be dependent on whether a sponsor can be found .
Unfortunately sport has so far been forgotten in our treaties .
This formidable tool of social cohesion , education , crime prevention and job creation must now mobilize all our energy .
In the Union , sport is practised by more than 100 million Europeans , through tens of thousands of sports clubs , and there has been no overview for action to be taken at Community level .
Mrs Pack 's excellent report has the merit of making a remarkable summary of a subject covering many , many areas .
Sport is too often regarded as a playful activity and not a vital social , medical , cultural or economic factor .
A good sports policy , with an integrating , educational component , can limit social spending .
Sport is a means of individual and collective education , that also makes it possible to develop the opening up of Europe .
Sport is the first way in which a young person can find out about himself and respect his body , and will enable him later on to respect adversaries and the rules of life in society , develop his energy in a team , regardless of origin , education or language , and to forge links within the European Union .
Without going back on the principle of subsidiarity , we must support the initiatives proposed by Mrs Pack , complementing the pilot activities already under way .
Each European Member State has its special features , and often the British model is referred too .
France as a sporting nation has its advantages but also its weaknesses and , according to our friends in the Union , France is often bad at sport because so many schoolchildren do not attend sport at school , as many as 15 % , even though it is compulsory .
I hope that changes take place in the Community not only for observing experiences but also for inspiring - but not imposing - certain measures .
To conclude , i should like to see special attention paid to sporting practice in the countryside , where sports are of harder access .
In many parts of the countryside , facilities are often too remote for young people and focus on a single sport .
In villages , entertainment is rare and sport can be an excellent means of forging friendly links between people , and help them to find a job and stop them from abandoning our important rural fabric .
In increasingly deserted regions , sport is still a way of keeping people and expressing a community 's identity .
Yes , from our village to the whole of Europe , sport is a powerful vehicle of union and cohesion that we must resolutely encourage .
Over a hundred million European citizens are involved in sport themselves , and thinking of spectator sport in its wider sense we may say that sport in all its dimensions is a real popular movement .
Sport is also a significant economic factor and employer .
It is therefore curious that sport is not mentioned in any way in the EU 's founding treaty .
This has in turn led to a situation where the EU has no overall view of activities in the sports field .
Decision-making in many other sectors can influence the position of sport very considerably .
We may cite as examples the Bosman judgment on transfer fees as an obstacle to free movement and the TV Directive which has just been adopted on restricting the right to televise important events in the interest of citizens ' rights .
Sport is naturally above all a national matter and the main responsibility facilities with the sporting sector and the national authorities .
However , it must be possible to promote this sector , which is of such great interest to the citizens , at EU level .
By cooperation it is possible to enhance the positive effects of sport and reduce the problems associated with it .
In my opinion , sport does not require a separate article , but it would be natural to mention it separately in the article on culture .
In this way , the EU 's activity would naturally complement , not guide , national policy .
The Commission should draw up a green paper on the sports sector and set up a special group to define the outlines of comprehensive development in this area .
In the hearing on sport , held by the EP 's Committee on Culture , particular concern was expressed at the reduction in sporting activity among young people in the various Member States and at the harmful effect this will have on children 's and young people 's health .
This trend must be reversed .
Many recent studies reinforce the view that sport and physical activity have an irreplaceable importance for the healthy physical and mental development of children and young people .
Sports clubs and schools must undertake better and closer cooperation in the interests of young people .
Hitherto , interest at Union level has been restricted to professional sports , mainly as an economic activity .
However , in the EU 's activities , sports should be seen above all as a cultural , educational and social activity which must be supported and strengthened by budgetary funds as well as by other means .
Madam President , I have just one question .
Is it actually permitted for explanations of votes to be given by people who have not even taken part in the vote ?
At least two thirds of the people you have mentioned did not take part in the vote .
I mean , it does not really matter to me , but I think it is improper , all the same .
Thank you very much .
We shall look into it .
In the light of Mrs Pack 's statement , I agree that it is strange to give explanations of voting if you are not even here .
But as explanations of voting must be submitted before the report is fully discussed in the House , it is often the case that a written explanation of voting is submitted , if it is known , for example , that the vote is to take place at Thursday lunchtime .
This means that if the vote is then postponed for several sessions , explanations of voting from colleagues who , for some reason , are no longer here may remain .
This is not due to the Members who are no longer here but to the rules which are a little strange .
Thank you very much .
We shall look into it .
Madam President , on a point of order .
You are going to look into it but I am not sure how if you do not actually know who is here so that you can compare them with who has made an explanation of vote .
May I suggest that you have a roll-call vote and then you have a record so you can make a check .
Madam President , I do not want to prolong the discussion , but an explanation of vote means , I am explaining why I voted in such and such a way .
If I have not voted , then I cannot give an explanation - full stop !
Well , we are already running five minutes late , but I could still hold a roll-call , as Mr Tomlinson has requested .
Do you agree ?
Madam President , everyone here in the Chamber has seen people leaving who were here for the vote , so it is too late to do as you suggest .
I am sorry , but it really would not give a fair picture .
Madam President , I am somewhat astonished at this proposal .
I would like to know what Rule you are applying to carrying out this ' policing ' vote , to check on members present .
Nominal votes are intended to ensure that members vote for or against .
I did not know that the chair 's role was to carry unnecessary policing , as if we were at school .
We have had a request for a roll-call vote , to check who is present .
I am now asking you : do you want this roll-call vote ?
Of course , the roll-call will only tell us who is present at the moment .
( Parliament agreed , and the President held the roll-call vote . ) The number of those present will be recorded in the Minutes .
However , we cannot necessarily draw any conclusions from this regarding the number of people who were present ten minutes ago .
Madam President , I just want to make it clear that although I was present I did not take part in the vote , because it seems to me that this is the first time we have voted on nothing in this Parliament !
It does not seem right to me to vote on nothing .
What were we voting on ?
It is impossible to take a vote on nothing .
Thank you very much .
I have already explained this before .
We were just checking to see who was present in the Chamber at a specific time .
That was what Members wanted .
Madam President , I should like to suggest , to be on the safe side , that none of those who have submitted an explanation of vote is entitled to do so , because it has been proved that none of them was present here in the Chamber , and this was not checked at the time .
Explanations of vote cannot , therefore , be given , because under Rule 122 of our Rules of Procedure - as Mrs Pack has quite correctly pointed out - this point is crucial , and it was not checked at the time , and of course it has not been established by the so-called roll-call vote .
This vote must therefore be accepted without any personal explanations .
Thank you , Mr Nassauer .
I should just like to confirm once more that the vote that we have just held in no way affects what has gone before .
Madam President , I cannot see that there is any infringement of the Rules of Procedure .
Rule 118 says : ' The result of the vote shall be recorded ' , but it does not say how .
So if you ask for an electronic vote , as is your right , you can record the vote as you wish , with or without names .
We cannot debate this point for hours on end .
I shall invite four more Members to speak , and then we shall start voting on Mrs Alvoet 's report .
I should like to contradict what Mr Cars has said .
It is our bounden duty to be here on a Friday , just like any other day of the week .
That is what we are employed for , to work here and not to be absent .
Mr Cars , I wish you bon voyage , but you are not a Member of Parliament any more .
( Applause )
Article 366a of Lomé IV
The next item is the Interim Report ( A4-0175 / 97 ) by Mrs Magda Aelvoet , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a framework procedure for implementing Article 366a of the Fourth Lomé Convention ( COM ( 96 ) 0069 - C4-0045 / 97-96 / 0050 ( AVC ) ) .
Madam President , the Council has asked us to approve a proposal for a decision on a procedure for implementing Article 366a of the Fourth Lomé Convention .
On 15 April this year , the Committee on Development and Cooperation approved my proposal to submit an interim report pursuant to Rule 80 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The first time that a human rights clause was included in the actual body of the Lomé Convention was under Lomé IV in 1989 , and it now fits in very well with the new geopolitical order , in that since the fall of the Berlin Wall , the inclusion and implementation of human rights clauses in international treaties has become systematic .
Two years later , in 1991 , the Council adopted a detailed resolution on a human rights clause , democratic principles and development .
A further year later , during the negotiations on and adoption of the Maastricht Treaty , the political will to include a human rights clause was confirmed in Article 130u . At that time , the clause was seen as part of the general development cooperation objectives and the common foreign and security policy .
Since 1992 , respect for human rights and democratic principles has been regarded as an essential element of foreign policy , and we can see how it has progressed from initial recognition , through inclusion in the Treaty , to finally being seen as an essential policy component .
In 1995 , the Commission published a communication - COM ( 95 ) 216 - which for the first time made it possible for the EU to immediately suspend an international agreement without even opening the procedures for settling disputes , where the issues involved are particularly important or urgent .
On the actual substance of the decision before us today , the Committee on Development and Cooperation has put forward a number of amendments , in other words a number of Parliament recommendations , which differ from the Council 's own proposals .
First of all , we refer in the recitals to a series of international agreements , so that the whole concept can be applied in the widest possible sense .
Secondly , when it comes to triggering the procedure , Parliament would like to see not just the Commission or a Member State able to take the initiative , but also Parliament itself .
A further important amendment here is that the Committee on Development and Cooperation feels that the Council should decide by a qualified majority rather than unanimously , and that Parliament should also have to give its assent .
So we are calling for Parliament 's assent and a qualified majority decision .
Finally , we think that the resumption of cooperation should be discussed following an assessment report by the Commission , with the Council again deciding by a qualified majority after the European Parliament has given its assent .
These are the main points of the position of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Madam President , as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I am very pleased with the substance of this report , as Mrs Aelvoet herself , modest though she is , has already said .
It is a report of far-reaching significance for the future , in that it finally makes human rights and democracy a precondition for certain forms of cooperation .
The various committees involved have worked together to produce a report which is the first step towards a negotiating process with the Council .
By choosing the procedure under Rule 80 ( 3 ) , Parliament is now able to propose amendments to a request for its assent , whereas normally it would only be able to say yes or no , and there would be no scope for amendments .
And amendments are certainly needed , although the Commission 's proposal does represent a step forward in principle .
What we are dealing with here is a proposed procedure for determining what to do if an ACP country fails to observe the essential elements of the Lomé Convention , namely democracy , human rights and the state based on the rule of law .
Any decision to suspend cooperation must be firmly based on clear criteria , and the procedures must be transparent and agreed fairly with the ACP countries .
In principle , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy welcomes the Commission 's proposal to have a fixed procedure for applying the democracy clause .
Clarity and transparency are essential elements in any successful human rights and external policy .
Our partners - in this context , as I have already said , the ACP countries - are entitled to know what the situation is .
Consultation prior to taking any sanctions is one of the principles of partnership , as well as often being a more effective instrument .
Transparency means that the criteria for suspending cooperation also need to be clear , but the Commission proposal says nothing about this , so it is up to Parliament to fill the gap .

The need to respect human rights , democratic principles and the state based on the rule of law is something that deserves our full support , and I wonder whether , in the negotiations with the Council , I should not also add respect for the territorial inviolability of third countries as a criterion .
On the decision-making procedure itself , the Committee on Foreign Affairs welcomes the Commission 's proposal to use a qualified majority vote in the Council .
We already have far too much experience in the Union of one country or a small number of countries forcing the rest to give economic interests priority over political considerations of human rights .
The need for unanimity ties Europe 's hands , as we have seen all too often .
However , majority voting alone is not enough .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs is calling for Parliament to have a right of assent as regards the suspension of cooperation under Lomé .
We find it completely unacceptable that a cooperation agreement that was entered into with Parliament 's assent should be able to be suspended without it .
The committee demands assent for the suspension of cooperation under Lomé , alongside that for its initiation .
Another gap in the Commission 's proposal is in the procedure for ending suspension , which is not dealt with at all .
Rules for this procedure are urgently needed , since we shall not wish to make every temporary suspension permanent .
The temporary suspension should lead to corrective measures being taken , and following the same logic which I described earlier regarding the right of assent , the Committee on Foreign Affairs considers that a decision to end the suspension should be taken by a qualified majority in the Council , on a proposal from the Commission and with Parliament 's assent .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs hopes that the House will support the amendments it has tabled , which are designed to flesh out the Commission 's proposal and provide greater clarity for those concerned .
We need to abandon the current practice of allowing the Council to take ad hoc decisions without consulting the parties involved .
With a few exceptions , the Union has a good reputation when it comes to human rights , and it at least sets out with the intention of pursuing a sound policy .
It is constantly trying to find ways - not least through the many initiatives proposed by Parliament - to make its policy more efficient and transparent .
The human rights clause was a step forward , but one of the main problems with this was that it was never applied consistently , either in terms of procedure or substance .
The current proposal is the first step towards achieving the necessary clarity , and I hope that the Council will support our proposals .

Finally , I think it is very important to point out here , which is why I have kept it till last , that we feel that this suspension procedure should not just apply to the ACP countries , but should serve as a model for all agreements with all other third countries .

Every agreement should have a suspension procedure of this kind , and the longer we wait , the more we are guilty of discrimination , which is precisely what we must avoid in the application of universal human rights .
Madam President , the rapporteur described very adequately the background to this interim report , and I do not propose to go into that sort of detail - she has done an excellent job there .
I would like to speak about the ideas that were at the forefront of our minds and the recommendations we decided upon when we discussed this in the Committee on External Economic Relations .
First of all , we want the Commission to insert into the proposed procedure the various steps which should apply when considering withdrawal of Lomé trade preferences , in line with withdrawal of the trade benefits under , for example , the Scheme for Generalized Preferences .
That is very much in line with what Mr Bertens called for : that we need some degree of continuity and a measure of adherence to some general rules in order not to be accused of discriminatory treatment .
We also called specifically for the inclusion of articles dealing , in the case of withdrawal of Lomé trade preferences , with the circumstances under which Lomé trade provisions can be withdrawn : the consultation process involved , the duration and scope of the investigation by the Commission , the modalities for the final proposal by the Commission to the Council and Parliament on the suspension of Lomé trade provision for the country concerned .
We also fully support the Commission 's proposal that Council decisions on suspension under Article 366a should be decided by qualified majority , and we insist that if Council fails to agree on the principle of qualified majority under the proposed procedure , then Parliament should be reconsulted as a matter of urgency .
We also ask the Council and the Commission to ensure that the necessary transparency and consistency apply in suspension measures vis-à-vis individual ACP countries and that there is equal treatment of the ACP in comparison with the European Union 's other cooperation partners .
We call on the Commission and the Council to ensure an early involvement of the European Parliament in all cases of suspension under Article 366a .
We consider that the presence of the European Parliament during the consultation period has been crucial .
I would just like to reiterate two important points that emerged from our discussion : one was that these decisions should be taken only by qualified majority voting in the Council and , if that is not agreed , then Parliament should be reconsulted immediately ; secondly , Parliament should be involved in all cases of suspension at the earliest possible opportunity .
I would be grateful for confirmation from the Commission that would be the case .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen . The group of the European People 's Party supports this report .
We believe that the human rights clause is a very important clause in the minds of the people in the countries concerned , because it is a question of punishing not people , but governments who violate the human rights of their citizens .
Nor is it an act against the countries concerned , but rather against the governments which abuse human rights , if we suspend the Lomé Convention in this area .
It is true that the European Union is still using double standards here , and is not being quite consistent .
However , I do not share the views of those who say that the ACP countries are fundamentally worse in this respect than the others , but it is true that , unfortunately , geopolitical and economic considerations frequently play a part .
It is not a question of whether a country is an ACP country or not , but of whether a Member States has specific interests .
We really must overcome this problem .
We must pursue a consistent policy on human rights , and we must not have double standards .
Madam President , as far as I can see , Mrs Aelvoet 's report aims to promote two things : human rights in the ACP countries , and Parliament 's control and authority in that field .
Following the events of the last two years in Africa , everyone knows that suspending development aid is in many cases an extremely necessary , often unavoidable and sadly not always effective measure .
Generally speaking , however , it is true that countries which take respect for human rights seriously also tend to respect the right to development in the broader sense .
To be fair , it has to be said that the human rights clause has formed an important part of the Lomé Convention for some time now , and just because it did not find its way into agreements with other third countries until later should not mean that the ACP countries are judged more strictly .
The procedural amendments proposed by Mrs Aelvoet must be based on clear criteria , since this is what the countries concerned are entitled to expect .
It has to be better for decisions to be taken by a qualified majority in the Council , with Parliament 's assent .
This interim report by Mrs Aelvoet , a respected colleague and a determined defender of human rights , fits in very well with the current tone of the negotiations at the IGC .
Finally , I entirely agree with Mr Bertens that the approach proposed by Mrs Aelvoet should also apply to all other agreements with third countries .
My group wholeheartedly supports her proposals .
This report , Mrs Aelvoet 's , comes at just the right time for us to match our actions with our words .
Since the beginning , cooperation between the European Union and the ACP countries has in theory been based on the respect of human rights and freedoms .
But that foundation , as every day reality shows , is unfortunately only theoretical .
Many years after that cooperation began , we are being proposed measures to set conditions on aid or rather , when we already have a tradition of giving aid , to suspend our help if human rights and individual freedoms are being violated seriously in aid beneficiary countries .
I would add that what is being proposed is not excessively binding because a consultation procedure is provided for so that we can dialogue with the countries against which sanctions are being planned .
I only see advantages in the proposed arrangements , especially since they have been further improved by Mrs Aelvoet 's work and that of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
We are fully behind the spirit of the amendments which Mrs Aelvoet has proposed for this proposal .
I am thinking in particular of the amendments aimed at sharing the suspension procedure initiative with the European Parliament and applying qualified majority voting for Council decisions since , if unanimity were required , I know of cases where a single country , sometimes mine as it happens , would block the whole arrangement that we want to set up .
We did not go along with Mrs Aelvoet , however , when she proposed an exhaustive list of the human rights whose violation would lead to aid suspension , since we think that the different situations of the beneficiary countries should be taken into account .
I should also like to draw your attention to an amendment tabled by our former colleague , Bernard Kouchner , who asked us to show circumspection when resorting to embargoes or blockades , since it is the ordinary people who suffer in those cases instead of the authorities we want to sanction .
I think that the Council should listen hard to the proposals for amendments to the text , and I think that if we had applied it in the past , we might have avoided many tragedies in Africa .
I think that our examination will be complete once we have proposed applying this conditionality arrangement to bilateral cooperation by Member States of the European Union .
Madam President , I should like at this late stage to draw attention to two points .
We can see in practice that the Union 's position with regard to ACP and non-ACP countries does indeed suggest discrimination .
We are much easier on the ACP countries than non-ACP countries , with one exception : Burma .
Secondly , we tend to treat wealthy ACP countries very differently from the others , so that we are quick to take action against the Gambia and Niger , but we wait a very long time before taking action against Nigeria .
Finally , and this is my last comment , I have withdrawn those of my amendments that were not approved by the committee - although they now seem to have appeared again - so my only proposal now is the one that was agreed in the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
The fact is that even among human rights experts , the possibility of having different sanctions for violations of political and civil rights and social and economic rights is still a controversial issue .
I think it is much better to leave any political statements on this until the situation has become clearer .
I therefore withdrew my amendments before the part-session , although this has apparently not actually been carried out .
Member of the Commission . ( SV ) Madam President , the Commission has studied with great interest the interim report by Mrs Aelvoet on Article 366a of the Lomé Convention along with the opinion of the REX committee and the committee for external affairs .
The Commission shares the view that we need continuity and co-ordination in our approach to human rights , democratic principles and law and order .
So we will shortly be submitting a communication to the Council and to Parliament in which we clarify the concepts which will apply and propose a more structured suspension procedure .
The Commission 's proposal is concerned only with the decision making procedure in European institutions .
It is important to underline that this does not alter , nor can it alter the procedure which is enshrined in Article 366a of the Lomé Convention .
A number of the amendments proposed by the committee on external affairs would make the wording of Article 366a meaningless .
This applies to the proposal on the need for consent from each country as part of the procedure , particularly before the State involved has been asked for consultation and before action is taken or suspended .
The Article proposes that appropriate action is taken immediately in urgent situations , or in the case where a country refuses consultation .
It also says that such action shall , and I quote , ' be suspended as soon as the reason for its introduction no longer exists ' .
It would be impossible to apply such regulations using such a long and complicated procedure such as that proposed by the committee .
It would also be in breach of the normal procedures envisaged by the Treaty .
On the other hand , it is of course appropriate to review more closely the potential for an increased role for Parliament in the implementation of the sanction clause , otherwise referred to in the text as the non-executive clause .
The Commission is quite prepared to investigate how this could be accomplished .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution . )
Madam President , a few seconds to say that of course I voted for the position proposed by Mrs Aelvoet , but I would like to tell everyone that it is impossible to distinguish between a human rights policy vis-à-vis the ACP and the European Union 's foreign and security policy .
I think that the human rights issue is linked to our very political conception of these countries .
I would suggest to colleagues who voted for the Aelvoet proposal that qualified majority should be applied in the Council , and not unanimity , for foreign and security policy .
There have often been contradictory votes .
Yesterday , some colleagues refused to accept our position on qualified majority voting for foreign and security policy .
Yet it is necessary if we are to be coherent when defending human rights !
Marine biotoxins
The next item is the report ( A4-0177 / 97 ) by Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Decision amending Council Decision 93 / 383 / EEC of 14 June 1993 on reference laboratories for the monitoring of marine biotoxins ( COM ( 96 ) 0464 - C-0547 / 96-96 / 0234 ( CNS ) )
Madam President , I would like to pay tribute to the work which was done by a very fine reference laboratory in Torry in Aberdeen in Scotland .
Ironically and strangely , this was the responsibility not of the Scottish arm of the British Government but of the English ministry .
The record of that laboratory was a very fine one , it was recognized right across Europe .
In fact within that ministry the reference laboratory in Torry had the best record in attracting joint funding from the European Commission .
It was a laboratory of European significance .
The reward for this was to be closed down .
The reason was purely on cost grounds because the ministry under the previous government decided to concentrate activity south of the border and to close the Torry food research institute .
Naturally those involved were appalled .
There was concern expressed also by the European Commission and I am grateful for its support .
This laboratory was in the forefront of research on , for instance , salmonella , E-coli 0157 and botulism and with the concern about public health which is very real at the moment this is exactly the sort of laboratory that should have been encouraged instead of being closed down .
Those of us in the area - and I represent that constituency in Scotland - were appalled at the treatment which was meted out to it .
At the time when I tried to raise this I was told it had nothing to do with the European Parliament and I was criticized for doing so .
What is quite fascinating for connoisseurs of parliamentary procedure is that suddenly the legal base has been changed and a year later , when the laboratory has already been closed and it is too late to affect the result , we are told ' Oh yes , the Parliament should have been involved ' .
Last month I was told that there would be a change in the legal base and so it came to the Fisheries Committee on Monday of this week .
At the very last minute we were told ' Oh yes , you were quite entitled to be consulted , it is a joint responsibility for the Parliament ' .
That makes the whole issue of more relevance than perhaps the fate of one single laboratory in one part of Europe .
The laboratory has been scattered to the four winds .
Some of the researchers there have been moved down to York and some to Norwich .
They have either been exiled to England or , in some cases , lost their jobs completely .
I am glad to say that some of the work has been retained in the area after a very sustained campaign and there are five different units in the Aberdeen area which have taken over some of the laboratory 's work .
I would like to think that the spirit of Torry lives on although this is an example of how subsidiarity can be abused by Member States which simply say ' It is our decision , keep your nose out of this one ' .
I do think that this is the sort of decision which in the future Parliament should have an involvement in .
However that is now past history and I would like to finish by paying tribute to all the laboratory 's work .
The need for such work will continue in the future , not only in Scotland but right across Europe on a cooperative basis .
Madam President , this is a very technical but important report since we are dealing with the question of food safety and hygiene .
Only within the last couple of months scientists in Germany have discovered a strange strain in salmon .
There was an article in a Netherlands newspaper last month that said : not the mad cow , now the mad salmon .
They have allegedly found a strain in the brain of the salmon that is similar to that which caused the tragedy with BSE .
It is important , therefore , that we keep institutes such as the Torry Institute and that we ensure that food hygiene in fish is of the highest possible standard .
The Torry Institute is a very good one .
As Mr Macartney said , it was a victim of savage Tory cuts .
It was also a victim of privatization .
They formed a private company which looked after the fishing research aspects .
There was a tremendous hullabaloo in Scotland about this closure among parliamentarians of all political groups .
The community in the northeast of Scotland was incensed by it .
I am very glad that the Commission is now changing the legal base so that in future , the Committee on Fisheries will be involved in discussions of this nature .
Particularly when we are dealing with Member States , the Fisheries Committee will be asked for its views and opinion .
There is a problem of transparency as well .
We can only achieve more transparency by being involved .
The Socialist Group is very grateful that the legal base has been changed .
We hope to have a profitable future collaboration with the Fisheries Commissioner on issues like this .
I support this report on behalf of the Socialist Group .
Mr President , so the shadow of the BSE crisis has now fallen on the fisheries industry , albeit in a positive sense .
In February this year , Jacques Santer , the President of the Commission , assured the European Parliament , in a reaction to the BSE crisis , which had just been mentioned , that in future all veterinary-law decisions would be taken within the framework of the codecision procedure .
The Commission thus gave an undertaking to Parliament that any proposals that affect public health will be dealt with using the co-decision procedure set out in Article 101a of the Maastricht Treaty .
This procedure is now being applied , actually for the first time , in the case of the directive that covers hygiene and health provisions in the fisheries sector , and in this case , in particular , the control of marine biotoxins in the production and marketing of live mussels and fishery products .
Perhaps we are dealing with a precedent here , as a result of which the co-decision procedure will become the main decisionmaking process in the fisheries sector .
That , in any case , is our request to the Inter-Governmental Conference on the further development of the Maastricht Treaty .
In Amsterdam the 15 EU governments will certainly not be able to ignore it any longer .
As for the content of this report , the proposal contains two decisions .
In the first place , there is the implementation of the hygiene provisions for the production and marketing of the above-mentioned live mussels and fishery products .
For this purpose , every Member State has to designate a national reference laboratory which is responsible , in particular , for the control of marine biotoxins .
Great Britain has now , finally , complied with this requirement .
Secondly , the Commission is proposing to simplify the procedure for dealing with such matters .
In future , it will only inform Parliament when a Member State wants to change the address of the national reference laboratory .
I think that goes without saying .
The Committee on Fisheries has also agreed to it unanimously , provided that the basic principle is not put at risk , i.e. that laboratories of this kind in a Member States should , basically , be given prominence .
I must also add , that the action that Great Britain has opted for here is basically contrary to the procedure .
I can understand my colleagues ' disappointment , but all the same I am pleased that , after some difficult negotiations , we have found what I hope will be a good solution .
Mr President , I am glad we are debating Mr Macartney 's report today .
It raises a very important issue .
Why did the Commission not think originally of allowing Member State Governments the opportunity to change the different scientific stations that would be recognized ?
It seems extraordinary to me that , when it drew up its original proposal , there was no provision for making this kind of very minor change affecting one Member State without the need for a full consultation process .
Having said that , I recognize what Mr Macartney and Mr McMahon said about it causing a very great deal of dislocation and upset to those involved in Scotland .
I declare an interest , being chairman of part of an organization that had to take on some of the staff involved in what was the Torry Research Station .
My chief concern - and I wonder if at some stage we will get an answer from the Commission - is how the new arrangements which the President of the Commission has announced for food safety and the monitoring of food safety will relate to other parts and other agencies within the European Community ?
How will this new food agency relate to what may well be a new food standards agency in the United Kingdom ?
What control will it have over organizations such as the Torry Research Station which is now split between three or four different agencies ?
The linkage between the European Community and the Member States is going to be vital for the future and we do not yet know how this relationship is going to take place .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mandate of Advisers on Biotechnology
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0348 / 97 ) by Mr de Clercq , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on extending the mandate of the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnology .
I have received two motions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The vote will take place after the debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Gradin , we all know that biotechnology is potentially of great benefit to mankind .
However , we have now been overtaken by news which shows that this potential is linked to great risks , and brings up important ethical questions , whether it is the cloning of sheep , or the news that a British doctor in Saudi Arabia is proposing to offer couples babies that will definitely be of the male sex .
These few cases show what kind of ethical questions this technology can give rise to .
They are proof enough that it is absolutely essential for us to have an advisory group on ethical issues .
On 31 July 1997 the mandate of the group of advisers on biotechnology ethics ( GABE ) comes to an end .
For the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , this fact provided us with an opportunity to think about how we wish to proceed further . Therefore we are asking the following questions .
Does the Commission intend to extend the term of office of this group of advisers ?
If so , will the group continue to operate with its present membership , functions and structure , or does the Commission intend to change its mandate ?
I have to say that that would be desirable .
In what form and with what aim will the consideration of ethical questions be organized in future , if the Commission is planning to change the mandate ?
I would add to this another question . How quickly will this happen ?
In what form does the Commission intend to involve the European Parliament in developing a structure for considering ethical questions at European Union level ?
I eagerly await the Commissioner 's answers , and perhaps during the course of the debate I may react accordingly .
Given the importance of this subject , I do not think it is really necessary to repeat the fact that I shall fully exhaust my five minutes , in order to talk about this important issue .
Mr President , Commissioner , this morning we are examining the issue of extending the mandate of the Advisers on Biotechnology .
As we know , the field of biotechnology is a difficult one as it has an ethical , moral and religious dimension .
In addition there are very technical problems , often difficult of access for non-specialists .
We are also dealing with considerable social and industrial challenges .
I should like , on behalf of my group , to pay tribute to the work carried out by Mrs Lenoir and her colleagues in the group of advisers .
Their opinions have been precious on the subjects referred to them by the Commission .
By means of their opinions they have acquired an undeniable authority , technical and moral .
We do not always agree with their opinions , of course ; and that is normal with such a difficult subject .
The practice of individual opinions - and I am thinking of Professor Mieth 's in the case of the patentability of biotechnological inventions - has offered vital answers to this problem , as it is a matter of clarifying political decisions and not standing in for the political decision-makers .
Extending the mandate of this group is certainly welcome .
It still has work to do and I am sure that Mrs Gradin will confirm that .
But , at the same time , we should make the most of the further reflections offered by that extension to work out how it should be replaced by another body .
We want the institutional authority of this body to be recognised and reinforced .
It is difficult , we are told , to strengthen the nature of this body since biotechnology , as such , does not come within Community powers .
That is true and the Court of Justice has recognized that , but it is only partly true - and that is why the group was set up in the first place - as biotechnology affects various matters which are part of Community scope and action .
I would therefore ask Mrs Gradin and her colleague to think again about ways of giving this body , responsible for clarifying biotechnological choices , a stronger statute .
We want the European Parliament to be involved in the appointment of the members of any future body .
It is not at all in our minds to politicize this body but , on the contrary , to guarantee its independence and that of its members and , by doing so , to strengthen its authority , just as we do by appointing the members of the Court of Audit which in the past has enabled us to avoid certain over-politicized appointments .
The mandate of this body must remain strictly consultative .
It would be a mistake to transfer decisionmaking power to an independent body , regardless of its authority , given the diversity of conceptions and ethical cultures in the European Union .
There is no unified European bioethics area .
We probably need directives and references , and political responsibility must be taken in the democratic institutional framework that is ours , in a spirit of clear non-religious intervention , i.e. marked by an attachment to our values , our common values , and the rejection of intolerance and irrational behaviour which are all too frequent in this field .
Mr President , the Commission has proposed that the mandate for the advisory group on ethical aspects of biotechnology be extended to the end of this year .
The intention is that the group , working under the chairmanship of Madam Leonard , should be able to complete the work which they have started at the request of the Commission .
It is primarily a matter now of looking at the draft of the fifth framework programme for research and development .
A growing number of ethical questions are being raised as a result of progress in the field of biotechnology .
So , the Commission would quickly like to give a fresh stimulus to the group .
The new questions arising in this field affect people 's everyday lives and ought therefore to be very carefully investigated .
The Commission has therefore urged the group to put together a plan for their forthcoming work .
Based on this plan we can give the group a new mandate , which we will do at the end of the year .
This will also enable us to strengthen the role of the group , its structure and its position as an advisory and independent ethical group in the European debate .
The Commission is satisfied with the work carried out by the group so far .
At the same time , we consider that the group needs to be strengthened for the future to be able to meet the expectations held by our people which find expression in the questions asked of us here in Parliament .
Meanwhile , the Commission will also have discussions on these issues within the group of Commission Members who work on consumer health matters .
Mr President , Commissioner Gradin , the right time to answer would , of course , have been before Mr Cot gave us his opinion , rather than later , but I can make allowances for you , Mrs Gradin , if you do not listen attentively to what the other groups in this Parliament also have to say on this subject .
I should also like my remark to be noted in the minutes .
I would just like to say once again , Madam Commissioner , that the correct time was , of course , after Mrs Gebhardt 's question , but we can afford to be tolerant , provided that you will listen very attentively when the other groups are giving their opinion on this subject .
There is no dispute about the opportunities that biotechnology offers , and we must take advantage of them , and we must also be aware of our responsibilities as legislators in this field .
However , these opportunities can only be made use of if people have confidence in the technology , if they know that there are limits , based on clear , ethical grounds , beyond which no one must go , and if abuses , whatever form they take , are punished .
In this connection , it is certainly a good idea to set up an advisory group , drawing its members from various sources , both multi-disciplinary and multi-national .
The way in which this group operates , however , is unsatisfactory in the opinion of my group .
First of all , it is not transparent enough .
There is no clear structure , which lays down who says what within this working group , and as a result it depends very much on the people concerned , and in our confidence in them , and I have to say that our confidence in the persons involved , and in the chairman too , is not exactly strengthened when they give to the opinion of the European Parliament as little consideration as they have been doing in the last few weeks .
In March , we issued an unambiguous position on clones , and now we have the opinion of the group of advisers , and the difference between the two is very striking .
The European Parliament was overwhelmingly against any cloning , including at the embryo stage , and we believe that the use of the Dolly process on human beings should be made a criminal offence everywhere in the world , and at least in our Member States .
The group of advisers , however , has done some intricate manoeuvring here , and is proposing only implantation in the womb , and I believe that this is not at all what the European Parliament had in mind .
So our confidence in the group of advisers has to some extent been weakened .
This can have disastrous results , as we found , for example , in the case of gene manipulation .
The directive on the patenting of biotechnological discoveries was also a disaster because in the Conciliation Committee we agreed , by way of a compromise , to a form of words proposed by the group of advisers , which was clearly contrary to the opinion of Parliament , which has said that is against this type of manipulation , and not just for a specified time , but against it altogether .
In other words , no one took this opinion seriously .
We must be aware of the fact that the legislator has a certain amount of responsibility here , and we can only have confidence in the group of advisers if we know that they take our opinion seriously .
I wonder how the Commission can justify implementing the positions of the group of advisers in a ratio of 1 : 1 ?
Naturally these are highly qualified people , but then we have such people here in Parliament too .
In my group , for instance , we have Professor Casini , who is a lawyer who has been involved with these issues for a long time . Then there are the scientists Professor Trakatellis or Mrs Heinisch .
We also have plenty of theologians in this Parliament as well , and not only in our group .
What higher authority does Mrs Lannoye have , as a lawyer , which the lawyers here in this Parliament - who are involved with this type of work and who also derive authority from the fact that have been elected by the people - do not have ?
Therefore I would ask the Commission to take our opinions more seriously than those of the group of advisers .
The group of advisers can give advice , and it can even give advice about problems , but the decision has to be made by the legislator , and if the Commission does not base its proposals on that fact , then there will be friction .
One last point : it is always argued that in the USA things are much more liberal , and that therefore we cannot be any more stringent .
In fact , on the question of embryo protection , the USA are more stringent than the group of advisers of the European Commission , because in the USA at least there is no public money for expensive embryo research .
And that does not exclude advisory groups .
So that argument does not cut any ice here either .

Thank you , Mrs Liese , but allow me to explain and absolve Mrs Gradin of all responsibility .
In debates on oral questions the author of the question - in this case Mrs Gebhardt , deputizing for Mr de Clercq - moves the question and is followed by the Commission representative .
An administrative mistake occurred today for which I take the blame , putting Mrs Gradin at the bottom of the list .
When Mrs Gradin was unable to respond immediately to the author of the question , we did our best to put the matter right .
She did not speak out of turn but we were rectifying a mistake for which I take the blame . I apologize to Mrs Gradin .
I now give the floor to Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Green group in the European Parliament .
Mr President , Mrs Gradin , we in the Green Group do not , in any way , feel able to join in with the congratulations given to the group of advisers on ethics .
On the contrary , The group of advisers on ethics has proved itself to be a group of hired applauders of the European Commission , and its job is simply to create acceptance for gene technology and biomedicine .
In its reports and opinions to date , it merely covers the Commission 's back as far as ethical issues are concerned , and in its most recent opinion on cloning , even the embryo research that has been prohibited in Germany is declared to be ethically acceptable .
The cloning of animals is also given an ethical certificate of harmlessness .
With its opinion on cloning , the group of advisers on ethics has once again proved that as far as they are concerned , it is not a question of the ethical assessment of new technologies , but a question of gaining acceptance .
It makes no proposals at all about what steps should be taken at international level to stop the cloning of human beings .
In view of the unsatisfactory reports from the group of advisers , and its obvious role as an acceptance creator , it is completely unthinkable that the ethics advisory group should be congratulated on its work to date in the joint resolution proposed by the Christian Democrats and the Socialists .
This is a sign of political inadequacy in the European Parliament .
Mr Liese has already referred to the example of gene manipulation .
I would also remind the House that the group of advisers on ethics also declared that the Commission 's secrecy regulation concerning the novel foods regulation was ethically acceptable , etc. etc .
The ethics group also meets behind closed doors , and the opinions of Parliament , as Mr Liese has already pointed out , have not been taken into account at all in the group 's work so far .
In its work , the ethics advisory group has very much taken into account the interests of research , and has completely ignored the effects of the new technologies on society .
The ethics advisory group operates as a sedative pill for the public .
The discussion about social issues will be avoided altogether , if the public debate is delegated solely to so-called experts chosen by the Commission .
The ethics advisory group does not inform the public ; on the contrary , it tries to mollify public opinion .
It is therefore completely incomprehensible that these two major political groups should be turning themselves into the lackeys of the EU Commission and the Group of Advisers on Biotechnology Ethics .
Owing to the one-sided orientation of the group of advisers , and its role as the creator of acceptance for the EU Commission , in our opinion the mandate should not be renewed under any circumstances .
Mrs Gradin , I can understand that the EU Commission is interested in having someone who will always keep their backs covered where ethical issues are concerned , but when it comes to public debate , this ethics advisory group has made no contribution at all .
On the contrary !
We need to promote public discussion , for example , by holding consensus conferences like they do in Denmark .
Instead of having an ethics advisory group that meets behind closed doors , we need democratic participation in our dealings with the ethical issues arising form gene technology .
The human issues should not be left to experts appointed by the Commission , who meet behind closed doors ; they must be discussed by society at large .
My final point is this : the question of what is ethically permissible can only be decided on by society itself , not by competent experts acting as the guardians of that society .
Mr President , it is true that I was representing the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Mrs Gradin , thank you for your reply .
I also believe that it is right to extend the group 's mandate until the end of the year , so that work that has been started can be completed properly and in peace .
That is very important , so that we do not have to rush to have everything completed by the end of July .
It is also right that the group should be strengthened .
However , I must say that your answer did not completely satisfy me , and I would just like to say to my colleagues that this is not the time to be going into the question of the composition of this advisory group .
The debate that we have to proceed with today is a completely different one .
I myself have not always been completely happy with the replies that the group of advisers has given .
That is quite clear , but the problem is that the group has to take decisions , and that actually helps to obscure the decisions .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner , and the rest of the Commission , to think about whether the mandate of this group of advisers could not perhaps be changed in such a way as to ensure that the group identifies and sets out for the rest of us the main ethical arguments .
Because it ought to be an advisory group that gives us the tools to take the right decisions , and it should not be compelled , at the end of the day , to take a unified decision .
This would help to create transparency and would make it clear that we , the European Parliament , the European Commission , and of course the European Council , are the decision makers , rather than the advisory group .
The advisory group is there to advise , and nothing else .
And that really needs to be made quite clear .
Mr Cot has already hit the nail on the head .
It is also very important that this group should be pluralistic in its composition , and it is also very important that the European Parliament , since we want it to advise us , should be involved in the composition and mandate of this group and should also be able to talk to it .
This is very important in order to create transparency , which is something that we are demanding , and something that is so important , particularly on issues such as these , that we should be able to show the people , the citizens that we represent , exactly how we work and how we reach our decisions , particularly on such ethically difficult issues such as biotechnology in all its aspects - and you know how many of those aspects there are .
Just one final point : it is absolutely necessary that the group should be able to work completely independently .
This must be guaranteed , and it must be one of the conditions that we should examine very carefully , independently from the client , i.e. the European Parliament and the European Commission .
I have often had the impression that a certain amount of pressure was being put on the group , pushing it in a certain direction .
It may be that this impression was wrong , but it is an impression that quite simply and naturally occurred to me , as to other Members , and therefore I think we should do everything to ensure that such impressions do not arise .
Mr Commissioner , I think our debate should concentrate on the role to be played by the group of advisers on biotechnology ethics at European Union level .
The Union has a duty to regulate sectors of the economy , like biotechnology , which have a determinant influence on the fundamental rights of the human being , like the right to life , physical integrity , identity , and individuality .
By human being I also mean the human embryo immediately on conception , which is threatened by the interests of much efficiency-minded research .
Biotechnology also relates to agriculture : in fact we are constantly witnessing the production of transgenic animals and plants .
We all know that biotechnology in itself is neither good nor bad : it can offer great benefits but it can also create great risks .
From the economic point of view the Delors report demonstrated what a frontline sector biotechnology really is .
On the one hand , those who have invested money in research need to get a return through the patents system .
On the other hand it is true - as I have said - that there are risks : risks of disturbance to the human species and to biological balances .
That is why I think it is necessary to establish an authority , not at a political level , but at a professional and technical level , without the immediate preoccupation of representing people , without the immediate preoccupation of consensus , where opinions can be expressed in a strictly professional way , but only in terms of consultancy . They cannot replace the final decision by the political authority , far less become blanket opinions , as someone else has already said .
The Commission provided for this by creating a group of advisers who have given their opinions . It is not appropriate to take positions on the content of those opinions now , although I obviously have personal reservations about some of them .
As I say , the role this group assumes is important .
Now , in my opinion , it has gone beyond the function of adviser to the Commission , becoming , consciously or not , I do not know , a sort of ethics committee for the Union .
But then , if there is to be an ethics committee of the Union , it must have democratic legitimacy , and its members should not be nominated without consulting Parliament and the Council .
I think there is a duty to remove this ambiguity : do we want to create an ethics committee or extend the role and responsibilities of the group of advisers ?
In any case it must be clear that there has to be something different and new as compared with what has happened up to now .
This committee must not become a mere opportunity for certain people to be visible .
Relations between the European Parliament and the group of advisers or the ethics committee must be clearly regulated .
Parliament must become a partner of the committee on a par with the Commission , able to ask for opinions about legislation in progress .
The issues involved are so important , because the European Union is not founded on the market alone , but also on human rights , and human rights are profoundly bound up with ethics .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are seeing the typical Friday effect , as Parliament starts to break up and we are reduced to fewer and fewer Members .
Therefore I shall be very brief , especially since I have the feeling that Mr Liese or Mr Casini have already expressed , very clearly , what the opinion of our committee is .
We are in favour , in principle , of extending the mandate , but we are also quite clearly in favour of strengthening Parliament 's influence on this advisory committee , and of strengthening cooperation accordingly , because we as a Parliament also have to act as a sort of conscience within the European Union .
The results produced by the group of advisers so far do not show that the group is fulfilling this function .
We therefore have a very important task in front of us .
I just wanted to add that point .
Mr President , a couple of years ago we as a Parliament rejected the first proposal put forward by the Commission on genetic patenting , and rightly so in my view , because that proposal did not contain an ethical dimension .
I recall being in the Chamber when that vote was taken and I assumed , perhaps rather naively , that when the Commission reconsidered the whole issue of genetic patenting it would come back with a new proposal which would contain a proper ethical dimension .
Sadly , so far at least - although next week there is a vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights - we have yet to see a Commission proposal which includes an ethical dimension .
Dolly the sheep , however , changes everything .
Dolly has nothing to do with genetic patenting , I concede that , but it has concentrated our mind wonderfully on the ethical issues of biotechnology .
If it is possible to clone a sheep , it will obviously be possible eventually , whether it is this year or in ten years ' time , to clone a human being .
When we start going down that road , do we play games ?
Do we allow a human being to be created in the way that Dolly was created and decide then that we have made a mistake ?
And do we then kill that human being ?
That is the ethical dilemma .
Although I can understand why people say that there is no common ethics across the European Union because we all come from different backgrounds , there are some areas where I am confident that we can reach a common cause .
That should be the function of an ethical committee when established , because I recognize - and it is important that this be said - that biotechnology is the way forward for medicine in the future .
If it is possible now - and I am told it is - to identify the gene which gives women a propensity to breast cancer , and within five years we will see an elimination of the gene which gives men a propensity to prostate cancer , then , clearly , we must take that kind of advance forward .
We have to face it .
I have heard and seen on many radio and television programmes what I regard as naive scientists say : ' why should anyone wish to clone human beings ? '
I can only recall what happened in the dark days between 1933 and 1945 when the eugenic principle was adopted and put into cruel effect in Germany .
So we have to be very careful before we accept that there is not going to be any ethical dimension whatsoever .
I have tabled Amendment No 177 to the Rothley report .
A compromise has been put forward , which is not yet acceptable .
What I want to see is the establishment of an ethical committee which would not just meet annually and report but be in a position to spot trends .
It is important to do that to keep abreast of scientific development .
Mr President , I would also like to say thank you for this interesting and valuable debate .
As I have said , the Commission is quite prepared to extend the group 's mandate until the end of the year .
Parallel with this we intend to discuss , within the Commission group responsible for ethical matters , how we will continue this work and what the composition and nature of the mandate will be .
We ask that we may come back to you on this .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the motion by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , because it was considerably improved by the amendment proposed by Mr Liese .
I would also like to point out to Mrs Breyer , however , that this is not a motion from the Socialists and the European People 's Party , but a motion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and I would like to say that I very much agree with her assessment of the notorious recommendation No 9 , and I regret the fact that what she said , some of which was justified , was not submitted in the form of an amendment to the Legal Committee 's motion - because then we could have voted in favour of it - but was moved as a separate motion .
I would therefore ask that next time you make it possible for us to support your views by proposing an amendment .

Europe Agreement with Bulgaria
The next item is the report ( A4-0199 / 97 ) by Mrs Erika Mann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the draft Council and Commission Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States of the one part , and Bulgaria , of the other part , signed on 8 March 1993 , with regard to the adoption of the necessary rules for the implementation of Article 64 ( 1 ) ( I ) , ( II ) and ( 2 ) of the Europe Agreement ( COM ( 95 ) 528-4390 / 96 - C4-0089 / 97-95 / 0295 ( CNS ) )

Mr President , you have read out the title of the report quite correctly , and I should like to draw the attention of LL Members to the fact that a journalist , very amused , said to me , ' If you people in Europe always invent titles like that , then you should not be surprised if no one understands the content of these things , because they are much too complicated , and nobody can understand what you are talking about ! ' .
However , I can reassure all Members who are present that it is not really so complicated at all .
It is , in fact , nothing more than an adjustment to the competition rules between the European Union and the Republic of Bulgaria .
I think we should really give some thought to the question of why we invent such complicated titles .
They also have their attractions , and in any case it is a matter of setting out the framework of the implementation provisions that are necessary in order to make this adjustment .
The European Union and the Republic of Bulgaria have concluded a European Association Agreement , which came into force on 1 February 1995 .
The purpose of the agreement is to establish an association between the two partners to prepare Bulgaria for membership of the European Union .
Incidentally , Bulgaria applied for EU membership on 16 December 1995 , requesting that formal accession negotiations begin at the end of 1997 .
I should like to remind you that in July the Commission will be submitting a proposal to the European Parliament , with regard to how these accession negotiations should proceed and which countries should be involved .
To that extent , it is also essential that we should reach agreement on this question today .
I should therefore like to ask all Members of Parliament present to vote in favour of this report .
In addition - and this is also important - not until seven years after the fall of Communism did the turning point come in Bulgaria .
Only after the victory by the United Democratic Forces did Bulgaria turn openly to the West and say that it wanted to be a member of the European Union .
Even more difficult is the question of how membership of NATO might look in future .
We known that there is still intense debate on this issue , including in Bulgaria itself .
The so-called free-trade agreements also make it possible to create a free-trade zone on an asymmetrical basis .
This means that we will open up our market earlier than , and to a different extent from , what we expect from the Bulgarian side .
In order to ensure that the free-trade zone functions successfully , and to make it easier for Bulgaria to adjust to the European Union , thus making EU membership possible , the European ( and interim ) agreements , for which the European Union alone is responsible , and which have been concluded with all the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , contain detailed basic rules on competition , which are virtually identical to those contained in the EC Treaty .
The purpose of the Association Agreement is to adjust national competition law of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , to bring it into line with the Community law of the European Union .
This is the subject of the report that we shall be voting on today .
For this to be possible , a package of implementing provisions under Article 64 of the Europe Agreement will have to come into force .
This also has to be done - and I think that this is quite right - before the Association Council takes its decision , and this means that a joint position must be adopted by the European Union .
The European Parliament has to be consulted - and I should just like to mention this here - on the basis of Article 87 in conjunction with Article 228 ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) .
This consultation is , moreover , compulsory .
The implementing provisions must be completed within three years of the date on which the Europe Agreement comes into force .
These implementing provisions - and this is really something very exciting - contain all the rules , as I have already mentioned , all the competition provisions that are set out in the EC Treaty .
It is a question of adjusting Bulgarian national competition law to bring it into line with competition law in the European Union .
It is a matter of recommending , observing and developing an effective competition policy .
This is also the key that will ensure that all the CCEEs are able to create an effective market economy .
This is necessary so that they can allow effective access to their markets and , of course , so that they can gain access to our markets .
Part of this effective competition policy will consist of a legal framework , and then the implementation of competition policy , and then of course control .
The authority responsible on our side is Directorate General IV , and on the Bulgarian side it is the Competition Protection Commission .
Allow me to make a comment here . I believe that we cannot keep on loading more and more responsibilities onto Directorate General IV , without at the same time asking ourselves whether Directorate General IV should have more staff .
As we know , it already has a wide range of tasks to carry out , and it is no longer in a position to carry out these tasks in detail , and as thoroughly as it needs to .
We , as the European Parliament , will soon have to ask ourselves what recommendations we might make in order to change this situation as quickly as possible .
One of the basic principles of competition policy is notification , in other words , an indication must be given of everything that is compulsorily notifiable , in the context of competition policy , both on the Bulgarian side and also on the side of the European Union .
Another of these basic principles is the responsibility - as I have already mentioned - of a competition authority , to ensure that it is possible for information to be sought by both sides , as well as the exchange of secret and confidential information , and the range of group exemptions that are available .
Then again , there is the principle of ensuring that arrangements are made concerning the way in which less important procedures are handled , and of ensuring that the Association Council is always concerned to find acceptable solutions when there are problems .
Finally , there is also the principle whereby , in a case that does not involve both competition authorities - in other words when only one competition authority is competent , that authority keeps the other competition authority informed about the details of the case in question .
As you can see , that is the normal framework and the normal range of options that we are used to working with in the European Union .
We also know how important these have become now : we only have to look at the rows and disputes that have arisen , in the case of Boeing , for example , and in many other cases as well .
We know that we need a basis for trust , and we need a common basis for all the countries that are linked to the European Union within the framework of the Association Agreements , so as to ensure that there is a common competition policy within this framework .
On the other hand , however , we also need a satisfactory , secure package , in order to be able to protect our interests in an international context .
This is going to become even more important in future .
Naturally this includes fairness , in other words , it means that we tolerate and respect the fact that the CCEEs are in a process of political , economic and social transformation , and it means that we accept that they have other historically-determined prerequisites .
We also tolerate the difference between France , Germany and England etc .
All these things are involved in this package .
This is why the procedure for the negotiations that will be taking place in the Association Council and between the individual competition authorities is so important .
The European Parliament has an important role to play , and I am always pleased about the fact that in the Committee on External Economic Relations we are competent to fulfil that function .
Once again , may I ask you to vote in favour of its proposal , and to consult it often in future about this common competition policy .
Mr President , Mrs Gradin , ladies and gentlemen . It is better to be with one another than against one another .
The friendly adjustment of Bulgaria 's competition rules to bring them into line with the European Union is better than the possible use of trade-policy instruments against Bulgaria .
That could be the leitmotiv of Mrs Mann 's excellent report , which she has just presented to us and which we now have to come to a decision on .
The Group of the European People 's Party also emphatically supports the proposal for a joint position by the Council .
We agree that trade between the European Union and Bulgaria can be put on a fair footing by applying the proposed provisions , so that it can rapidly expand and improve .
This adjustment to existing Community law is an important step along Bulgaria 's not so easy path towards membership of the European Union .
I therefore thoroughly support Mrs Mann 's report .
However , perhaps I could just say something about the financial aid that we had do decide on this morning , without a debate , using the urgency procedure .
We believe that ECU 250 million over a running time of 10 years is an excellent starting aid for the new Bulgarian government , which is making a determined effort to reform the public budgets and to create the legal framework conditions for a social market economy .
The Prime Minister , Mr Kostov , and his Foreign Minister , in their talks with the Group of the European People 's Party in Brussels last week , convinced us that the reforming powers that have come together in the new Democratic Union will quickly set about the task of modernizing the state and the economy .
We have asked the Commission to provide the necessary assistance in a rapid and nonbureaucratic manner , and thus help the Bulgarian people to emerge quickly from a serious economic crisis and come closer to joining the European Union .
However , today , on 13 June , we really cannot see why the Commission did not consult the Committee on External Economic Relations immediately after the adoption of its submission on 22 May .
The Committee on External Economic Relations would not have had any difficulty , at its meeting in May , in drawing up a report , and submitting it today .
Such negligence on the part of the Commission will not be tolerated by Parliament in future .
May I also ask Mrs Gradin , very nicely - she is , after all , not responsible for this - to ask Mr Van den Broek and Sir Leon Brittan to consult us quickly , in future , on similar cases , and to ensure that this farce of a procedure is not repeated .
Mr President , adoption of this report , of this very precise and lucid report by Mrs Mann , presents no particular difficulty .
It covers the implementation of competition rules to prevent distortions in trade with Bulgaria .
What is important , however , Mr President , is the message which goes out to the Bulgarian authorities along with adoption of the report .
Mr Schwaiger has referred to the package that has been put together to cover the financial needs of the restructuring of the Bulgarian economy .
We should remember that the European Union is not the only body which is contributing to the restructuring of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and thus of Bulgaria , and that the concessions that the European Union has already made in the agreements that have been concluded , even though they accelerate access for those countries to the European Union , to the Community market , in the industrial products sector , constitute only a relative advantage because the overall framework of relations is shaped out in a much more general form by the GATT agreements .
Thus we ourselves are dealing with individual aspects .
What I think is of much greater importance , Mr President , is the message that must be sent to Bulgaria , and to the Bulgarian people directly , concerning the question of membership of the European Union .
As you know , eventual membership of the Union is a main policy aim of the Bulgarian Government , and it is only on the basis of such a policy and institutional resolution of the problems that these agreements can have real content .
Because if we simply conclude one separate agreement after another , to be implemented as per the case and in the absence of an overall political framework through which their proper implementation can be secured , we shall be simply be approaching matters in an ad hoc fashion rather than on an overall basis .
Since membership of the European Union is a main policy aim of nearly all of the Bulgarian democratic parties , I think that agreements of this type are definitely likely to culminate in membership negotiations and eventual membership and that that in itself serves as a guarantee of their implementation .
Mr President , we support Mrs Mann 's report , which makes it abundantly clear that the same conditions must be created for all the associated candidate countries .
I believe that this is absolutely essential , because our expansion policy and our policy towards Eastern Europe are at risk of coming up against a dead-end , as a result of our selecting , in a most extreme fashion , certain preferred candidates , thereby creating a larger group of wallflowers .
I am against this , because things are never clearly black and white , but rather various shades of grey .
We have only to look at what happened yesterday , in the Mixed Committee consisting of the Czech Parliament and the European Parliament , where they had such difficulty , in connection with the new levies that have to be paid , in getting the Czech Republic to undertake to give securities on the basis of European law and the Association Agreements currently in force , to see that even those who are first in the queue can still have problems .
On the other hand , we have hardly talked about Bulgaria at all , and I am of the opinion that we should really bring about equality of competition , and we should , above all , make it clear that the European Union , as we understand it , is not a community of laws , and that Community law , including within the framework of the Association Agreements , only has to be observed after accession , and it is simply not acceptable that Community law can be broken in the pre-accession phase .
This is why it is so important to take into consideration competition law .
This is why it is so important to create fair conditions for Bulgaria and not to give her the Cinderella treatment !
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating Mrs Mann on her report on the rules of competition under Article 64 in the European Agreement with Bulgaria .
The final decision , as has already been said , will be taken by the Association Council EU-Bulgaria .
When it is adopted , in the form of a resolution , it will mean another important step towards the European Agreement and Bulgaria 's preparations for future membership of the European Union .
The decision defines the grounds for a healthy competition policy .
It also provides a framework for cooperation between the competition authorities in Bulgaria and the Commission .
It even includes regulations for resolving potential conflicts .
The Commission shares the Honourable Member 's view that agreements are needed on how the State subsidy regulations are to be implemented .
Strictly speaking , this is not covered in this proposal as it forms part of separate legislation .
The Association countries and the Member States are currently negotiating this legislation in the Council .
Negotiations on state subsidies have proved far more complicated than the proposal which we are discussing here today .
The Commission and the Council working party have thankfully reached an agreement on the implementation of a first round of state subsidy regulations for Czechoslovakia .
So we will be able to use the Czech regulations as an illustration in the continuing negotiations .
Mr President , the rapporteur maintains that the Council and Commission 's proposal , particularly point 7 , does not include regulations on the control of company mergers , i.e. merger control .
Let me clarify the position : The first proposal did not raise this issue .
But it is present in the current document .
In October 1996 , the Commission took the decision to introduce a separate point No. 7 specifically to cover the merger of companies .
Let me conclude by once again thanking Mrs Mann for her constructive and positive report .
Mr President , I should just like to come back on the point raised by Mrs Gradin .
You are quite right : merger control is also included .
I forgot to mention it .
It is not yet included in my report .
Please excuse me .
However , I must also say that the procedure by which we all receive documents , is very difficult . What I mean is , that we ought to have obtained information about the subsequent negotiations that you conducted whilst the old report was still being discussed .
Usually , we Members of Parliament arrange things so that we go to the Commission and ask what negotiations are currently in progress .
However , as you can see , in some cases it happens like this .
I hope you will forgive us .
We had actually already corrected it in this form in the debate in committee .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the legislative resolution )
Norwegian salmon dumping
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Commission on the dumping of Norwegian salmon .
Mr President , on 1 June the Commission approved a package of measures , including a price floor , the prospect of standby dumping duties , an indicative export volume ceiling , an increased Norwegian export tax and tight enforcement procedures that will counteract the dumping and subsidization of Norwegian salmon on the European market and eliminate the damage caused to European salmon producers in the process .
Under the measures negotiated and agreed with Norway , Norwegian salmon exporters will respect a minimum price per kilo which , if broken , would automatically lead to the imposition of duties when selling to the European Union .
There would also be an indicative ceiling on the rate at which Norway could increase exports over the next five years as well as an increase in Norway 's own tax on salmon exports and a tight monitoring and enforcement regime to ensure that the terms of the agreement are upheld .
The negotiations followed an investigation which showed that Norwegian salmon was being dumped and subsidized between 1995 and 1996 , harming the interests of the European , mainly Scottish , salmon farmers .
The complainant industries in the Community have been fully informed of the context of this package and have given indications that they find it broadly satisfactory .
The Commission is holding regular meetings with the Community industry in order to discuss all the practical aspects of implementation and monitoring of these measures .
The Commission has regularly informed the salmon subcommittee of the Committee on Fisheries of the details of this case , most recently at a meeting in Brussels last week .
Throughout these investigations and subsequent negotiations with the Norwegian side , the Commission 's main preoccupation has always been to protect the Scottish and Irish salmon farmers from unfair trading practices .
The Commission is aware of the difficult situation in which salmon farmers in the Community located in rural and often depressed regions find themselves .
Having given serious consideration to the situation , the Commission considers that the package of measures on offer , which has been the object of extensive negotiations with Norway , constitutes an effective defence of the interests of the Community industry .
A five-year period of price stability and increased opportunities to compete under free and fair conditions can now be looked forward to .
Briefly , the package consists of the following measures : minimum price undertakings .
Norwegian salmon exporters will undertake to sell into the European Union market above an agreed minimum price per kilo .
This minimum price will operate for five years .
Norwegian exporters will have to show that their weighted average price over the three-month period does not fall below this price floor .
Furthermore , it cannot fall below 85 % of the minimum price on any single transaction .
There will be a review clause to take account of market changes .
As in all anti-dumping cases , each party including the Commission and the complainants retain the right to request or initiate a review .
If a Norwegian exporter does not respect the minimum price , he will be liable to pay anti-dumping and anti-subsidy duties that will be on standby .
The Commission will shortly propose the standby duties to the Council .
They will apply to all those Norwegian salmon exporters who do not sign the agreement .
Those who do not sign will get an exemption , but this will become null and void if they fail to comply with the price floor .
The Commission has already received statements from a number of Norwegian salmon exporting associations , saying they will urge their members to adhere to the minimum price .
There will be an indicative ceiling on the increase of Norwegian salmon sales over the next five years .
1997 sales may not exceed 1996 sales by more than 11 % or by 10 % for every year thereafter up until 2002 .
The salmon market has , in fact , expanded by an average of 18 % a year for the last four years .
The Norwegian authorities will increase their own export tax on Norwegian salmon from 0.75 % to 3 % .
This will rise to 6 % if the export ceiling is breached .
Monitoring and enforcement of the agreement will be tight , especially regarding the minimum price .
The Commission will have the right to examine the accounts of any Norwegian salmon exporter to make sure that prices quoted are not artificially high in relation to the real ceiling price .
Furthermore , the Commission will be empowered to check this against the accounts of related importers .
Statistics on export volumes and prices will be provided on a weekly basis and there will be regular consultation between the Commission and the Norwegian Government to examine general and specific questions arising from the salmon market and to ensure that the terms of the agreement are respected .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for that very full explanation of the problem .
The only difficulty is that it is a bit late .
What she read out to the House was contained in the press release which the Commission issued after the negotiations .
Time and time again some of us in this House , particularly in the Committee on Fisheries , are told after the event .
Under Article 90 of the Rules of Procedure of this House , the Commission is duty bound to consult with us on international agreements .
This House has the right of dissent from these agreements .
Is the Commission going to bring forward something in writing ?
Yesterday , for example , we had in Parliament a Norwegian delegation discussing this .
Those on the European side were somewhat handicapped in that they did not have before them the evidence which the Commissioner has just read before this House .
The Commissioner , Sir Leon Brittan , has behaved abominably over this issue .
He has not taken this House into his confidence , which he should have done .
We have been ignored and slighted ; we have read about what has been happening in the newspapers .
It is not good enough for the European Parliament , which was responsible for significant agreements .
Neither the Rex Committee nor the Committee on Fisheries have had a major exposition on this matter by Sir Leon Brittan whereas some other committees have had some discussion .
The Commission has to learn some lessons from this issue .
I am leaving the question of the dangers and problems created for the Scottish and Irish industries to others in this House .
I want to concentrate on the comitology aspect .
We are not happy about what has happened in this event .
I would like to make this point most forcibly , but Sir Leon Brittan is globetrotting somewhere else today and is not here to give us an explanation .
Thank you , Mr President , and thank you , Commissioner , for your statement .
I would like to congratulate Alan Macartney for his dexterity in keeping this matter before you as a Commission and making sure that we got a statement today .
Alan Macartney deserves our thanks too .
Madam Commissioner , you have just said to us that the producers in the European Union seem to be relatively happy with the outcome of the decisions that have been taken by the Commission and Norway .
Well they would be would not they ?
Anything would be better than what they have been facing in the recent past .
They were faced with bankruptcy and anything was going to be a relief to them .
I do not know that the statement that we hear from you is really going to be best for the future of salmon producers within the European Community .
A minimum price will certainly help , but it will also help the Norwegians .
They are going to know that they are going to get a satisfactory price for what they send into the Community yet they are still going to get their subsidies in Norway .
There is nothing to stop the Norwegian Government still assisting their producers and making an even more unlevel playing field .
You then say that there are going to be tight enforcement procedures .
I hope that is true .
I hope that is going to be followed through properly because what has happened in the past is that Norway has sent salmon into countries such as Denmark at the minimum price , and it was then processed and came out of those factories at a very much lower price than it originally went in .
That is where all the problems have actually arisen .
I hope that you will follow through on the tight enforcement procedures and make sure that does not happen in future .
My great concern is that Norway has had the advantage of expanding its salmon farming quite considerably in recent years .
We now recognize , as your report has done , that there was some undermining of the European market and the Norwegians were able to gain market share when our own producers did not have that opportunity .
I am now concerned for the future that those salmon producers in Norway have reached such a size and economic value that they are in a very strong position to start buying up some of the companies in the peripheral areas of the European Community .
If that were to happen it would be a travesty and the European Commission would be indicted for allowing that to happen .
Mr President , it is good to have the Commission statement , and I thank Mrs Gradin for coming and making it .
What many Members who have no direct interest in the salmon industry have asked me at the last couple of part-sessions is : how can it be that a non-member of the EU can have such a good deal at the expense of producers within the European Union ?
If you are in any doubt , ask any Norwegian who is involved in the industry for their reaction to the deal .
In the words of one correspondent who telephoned Norway immediately afterwards , they are ' cock-a-hoop ' that they have escaped punitive duties .
I hear from other sources , including the Norwegian Ambassador to the EU , that he is very happy with the agreement .
The Norwegians ' happiness must be at the expense of what should have happened , namely the automatic imposition of duties on 1 June by the Commission .
That was the alternative .
Everything that is said in this immensely complicated package has to be measured against the dissatisfaction at finding out that the Norwegians , who have been found guilty of subsidy and dumping , are getting out of gaol , so to speak , or certainly escaping a fine .
There are still one or two questions to be answered , and I am not sure whether Mrs Gradin can answer them today .
They certainly have to